Thank you very much, Secretary Ding Panganiban and congratulations! To you and Secretary Ed Pamintuan for convening this very important meeting of ours.

I am pleased that the various important leaders of the Luzon Urban Beltway are here. Here is Governor Reyes of Marinduque; here is Presidential Assistant for Central Luzon, Rene Diaz; here is our host mayor, but I will also co-host with him because Angeles City was formerly part of my father’s district, President Diosdado Macapagal. So, welcome! From Taisan Lazatin and myself, welcome to Angeles City and Clark! Here also is Libby Laus, the president of the Development Corporation; and here also is Governor Josie Dela Cruz of the province of Bulacan; and here also is Mayor Oca Rodriguez of the City of San Fernando. And to all of you, thank you to the representatives of the basic sectors, businessmen, government officials for attending here.

Thank you for the output you provided, I read it, and this output is truly in line with what we want to do for our country. Because now it’s good because we can now strengthen the fight against poverty because the dynamism of our economy is returning. Because if the economy collapses, where will we get the funds to fight poverty?

This dynamism of the economy began when we implemented the tax and treasury reforms. After that, the peso strengthened, exports strengthened, investors are returning, and the world’s confidence in the ability of our economy strengthened.

Global approval of and confidence in the Philippine track is firm. It will stay that way for as long as we keep our sights on the economy and not on political partisanship. Confidence is fueled by the unity of the people, by the spirit of enterprise and the force of regional integration. On these three counts, the Philippines is on the ball. It’s playing the game with solid teamwork and sound strategy. As we mop up the terror cells in Mindanao and usher in peace, as we consolidate open trade in ASEAN and East Asia, as we drive domestic enterprise to the grassroots and rally all Filipinos behind the fight against poverty, we will be on the way to winning the grand prize — first world status in twenty years. Every department and every agency of the national government, every local government unit, every sector and component of civil society must row in one direction of a strong Philippine democracy that can compete in all fronts.

Yesterday, many gave presentations. I also have a presentation. Because all of these can be said to have borne fruit if no one is hungry. That is the most accurate measure of poverty. But if there are hungry people, it means something is not working with these programs. So what I will do now is present to you the agreement of the cabinet, hoping that we will all agree on our anti-hunger masterplan.

So the NEDA… Oh, there it is. This is our hunger mitigation program framework. Because if we fight hunger, dole-outs are not the only thing needed. What is needed is the ability of people to eat, and also the ability of those who produce food. So here, where does hunger come from? On the left, because there is a lack of food, not a lack of production or it doesn’t reach the consumer. On the right, there is no money to buy food. So our fight against hunger must have a supply side, let’s fix the lack of food. And a demand side, let’s fix the lack of money as well.

On the supply side, what needs to be done? There are two, production and how it reaches consumers, that’s what we call efficiency of logistics and food delivery. What will we do with production? Productivity programs are important, including livestock, crops, reviving fish, and this means we need to fix the mangroves, fix the Coastal Fishery Development, and we want to have family farms, what we call ‘Gulayan ng Masa’ right in the vicinity of homes. And irrigation. And irrigation will be the responsibility of the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Natural Resources…– not just irrigation, this whole supply side — Department of Agriculture of course because these are agricultural products. Department of Environment and Natural Resources, why? Because the mangroves, they are in their care. The uplands that we want to open, we want to open two million hectares of land for agri-business in the whole Philippines, DENR also owns the uplands.

And then the NIA, of course for irrigation. But the local governments also have communal irrigation systems. So all of that needs to come together to increase the production of our food. Now, if the production of our food increases, sometimes it's too expensive to reach the consumer because of post-harvest losses, which include logistics, which means transportation and warehousing and food delivery. So what are we doing?

We have what we call a barangay food terminal. What is it? It's a drop-off point, right Ding? A drop-off point directly managed by the D.A. from the producers, brought to the drop-off point, and we already have about twenty drop-off points like this in Metro Manila. We want to bring this to all urban beltways.

Now this ‘Tindahan Natin.’ what is ‘Tindahan Natin’? It's a store, like a 7-11 specialty store, it only has two specialties, rice and noodles. Because that's what the common Filipino eats the most. And we've already put these stores in what are called 17 — 17 hotspots in Metro… How many, Seya? — 21 hotspots of Metro Manila. This means these are the squatter areas with many, many poor people. So at least they can buy their rice there… How much? 17 pesos, 18 pesos, then they can buy noodles that are also cheaper than outside, so at least they have affordable food. But we also want to bring this to the entire Luzon urban beltway.

And we need the ports because transportation by ship is expensive, so we want the roll-on/roll-off ferry where the truck itself will ride on the ship, it won't unload the food. We have a very good roll-on/roll-off ferry, for example, from Mindoro — the province of Vice President De Castro — to Batangas, we want to fix the roll-on/roll-off ferry of Marinduque to mainland Luzon as well. And the Department of Transportation and the Philippine Ports Authority, which have their own funds, will manage that.

Then to bring farm products to the market, we need farm-to-market roads, especially if we open new lands in the uplands. We need to build roads and that will be done by public works, the Department of Agriculture farm-to-market road, the DAR, and the local governments also need to be involved in the barangay roads.

Then the local transport… This is about efficient local transport because this is what some of those who transport products from one province to another say, when they pass through a province, the local government allegedly collects a tax for passing through. Actually, that’s not within the powers of local governments. So, Governor Reyes doesn’t do it and Governor Josie Dela Cruz doesn’t do it. Thank you for being model local governments, but there are others, there are others. And now the truckers have specified which local governments are doing this, because of that. So this is what we want to bring to the League of Governors so they understand that this is not part of the powers of local government. If the trucking company's headquarters is in your province, that's okay, but if they're just passing through, they shouldn't. And a lot can be reduced from the cost of transportation if all local governments understand that.

After that, delivering the food to schools. Why to schools? In the past, our main thrust was to provide milk and bread to young children. However, the cost of milk and bread for young children is 20 pesos per. For 20 pesos, we can provide a kilo of rice that can be taken home and the whole family can eat. So I really prefer that we provide food-for-school. This is a big debate we have with some senators there. They want the milk — well, sometimes the milk, it happened here in Pampanga — the milk of a senator's pork barrel spoiled, and many stomachs were upset. That's also a problem with milk, but rice doesn't spoil.

Then… Then they said because the problem with food-for-school is that there might be leakage. I said, what does leakage mean? If the leakage is that the teacher didn't give it, that's not good, it should be investigated. But if leakage means that instead of the family eating it, they sold it, that's okay, because they might already have rice. At least if they sell it, they can buy something else. So that is not a real leakage, that is helping them to afford more food or whatever else they need.

So, those implementing this are DepEd and DSWD, and we are selecting areas with a high incidence of hunger. That's why we need to conduct a survey here in the Luzon urban beltway. Because in terms of provinces, there isn't really any province where, if we talk about the entire province, people are truly hungry, but there might be hungry barangays. And that's where we will implement this food-for-school program. The Department of Education will handle the higher grades, and DSWD will handle daycare, they will be the ones distributing it.

Then we need… Because, as they say, there's leakage, we need to ensure there's no leakage, we need NGOs involved, churches. So, I hope the NGOs here can help identify the poor barangays, and once they've been selected and we're distributing, the NGOs also need to monitor to prevent the alleged leakage. But as I said, if the mother sells it, that's okay. But it should at least reach the child she's taking it home to.

Then there are the community tradable rice certificates. This is a new program of the NFA and in the coming days, the NFA will explain it because we are still formulating the program. But since this is a framework, I'm giving it all to you. So that's the supply side – increase production and make the delivery of food to those who eat more efficient and cheaper.

On the right side is the demand side, those without money to buy food. What do we need? Number one, put money in people's pockets; then secondly, we need to instill in their minds where to spend that money. It should be spent on good nutrition, and also, if there's not enough money, families should be responsible and remember that if they have children too quickly, if they have children one after another, it's difficult for the family's health, the mother's health, and the child's health.

So, how do we put more money in the pockets of the poor? Here in the Luzon urban beltway, even though most areas are urban, we still have coconut-growing areas like Marinduque. In fact, when Marinduque was hit by a typhoon, the coconut farms of Marinduque were destroyed, and the people there lost their livelihood. So, it's important that we have productivity in those coconut areas. First of all, if they're destroyed, we need to replant the coconuts.

Then… You know, when I first became president, the price of a coconut was two pesos. Now the price of a coconut is 20 pesos because we've found many uses for coconuts. So, we need to develop the number of uses for coconuts. For example, coconut coir, this coconut coir is used in… in upholstery, kapok was used before, foam was used before, now coir. Then there's virgin coconut oil, it's very good, and if we could really develop virgin coconut oil in our coconut-producing areas, it would be a very good product. So, the D.A. manages the PCA and I instructed that the funds of the CIIF shouldn't just go anywhere, they need to go where the D.A. says they should go. Is the CIIF included in our workshop? It should be. Anyway, we can tell them ourselves.

And also, microfinance, that's the most important safety net, so here are our microfinance institutions. Egay Generoso is here, from Peoples Credit and Finance corporation. The Land Bank of the Philippines also provides microfinance, and so does the DSWD, especially the DSWD, they have a large microfinance project with ‘Tindahan Natin.’ for those who want to establish a ‘Tindahan Natin,’ specialty stores for rice and noodles, they can be funded with seed capital – 20,000 pesos initial seed capital – by the DSWD. And of course, we want to create more jobs, construction and maintenance of farm-to-market roads, irrigation, roadside maintenance. So, we need to remember – is our DPWH Regional Director here and also…? Okay.

That's it, congratulations! To our new Assistant Secretary, Director Aquino, about to leave Region III for a promotion. But in the meantime, since you're going to the national level, you need to remind them that labor-intensive methods should be used, not capital-intensive, so that many people are employed. For example, what we used to call oyster and… what was it called, Danny Suarez was in charge? – ‘Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin.’ that was labor-intensive and that's the technology we should use for farm-to-market roads because farm-to-market roads aren't delicate. So that should be used. The same goes for irrigation, and roadside maintenance.

And so that people can have good livelihoods, those with high salaries, we are allocating a large fund to TESDA now, mostly for scholarships. If the poor study at training centers, and we are emphasizing seafarers, because there are many looking for them and the salaries are high. Call center agents, look at it here in Clark, two thousand call center agents in just one year. Then there was caregiving, as Governor Reyes said, there are many, especially since we had an economic partnership agreement with Japan because there are many elderly in Japan who need caregivers. And another important thing we are focusing on is welding. Just there at HanJin in Subic, 15,000 welders who were once marginal fishermen, so they were trained… And Subic will expand further and many other shipyards want to build in the Philippines. In fact, we will become the number four shipyard in the world, so let's prepare for that.

And another thing, because before, welding happened because they told me, how about those of us who don't know English, even just high school English, and we can't work at a call center. So, welding. Others said… But another thing, aside from that, believe it or not, butchering. There's a large job order for butchering whether in the Philippines or outside the Philippines. That's why we are focusing on this for TESDA. So, let's not focus on Pastillas-making yet because Pastillas-making is difficult to find buyers for. But this training really has hirers. So that's the aggressive training.

And then upland land distribution. Janet, our NCIP, her biggest job is the distribution of ancestral domain. And we really want this, we have many… Here in Porac alone, there are many, right? In Zambales there are many ancestral domain for land distribution because we want to have four… In fact, scientifically established there are four million hectares available upland and yet our goal is only two million hectares of land for agri-business, new hectares of land because we want to plant jathropa and rubber in the uplands because it will provide high income.

Now, to have money for the people, we need to teach them how to spend it on good food. That's why the DOH and the National Nutrition Council should go around with our NGOs because NGOs are members of the National Nutrition Council to teach what people should eat, what they should buy with their money. And of course, we count on local government units to be very strong in this social marketing. And we want breastfeeding, because you know we only produce one percent of our milk consumption, so if a child is breastfed up to two years old, we can avoid a lot in foreign exchange. And not only that, the health of the child and the health of the mother are better, and it is also a good family planning method. Because if you breastfeed for two years, you won't have another child for two years. So this is important, we really want to promote breastfeeding and the DOH is promoting this and we hope the local government units will also be promoting this.

Then in schools. Nutrition education should also be taught in schools. And I mentioned about responsible parenthood, breastfeeding is the most efficient way of responsible parenthood, and at the same time though, our Department of Health, our NGOs like Couples for Christ, like Lito Sandejas' group, they are promoting natural family planning, and of course the local governments are free to promote whatever kind of family planning they want to promote. So that's our program for hunger mitigation. And I expect, although the others made presentations of other programs, I said I will present this hunger framework because for me this is the most landmark project of our Anti-Poverty Program. Oh well! Mayor Boking Morales, the other host mayor of Clark. Hello! Boking, good morning.

Anyway, why are we presenting this now, because before we couldn't present it, we didn't have money, but now we can. Even before the end of last year, we made sure that we saved a lot from the reforms, we ordered that this year we increase it by twenty-two billion pesos to return to the people social services. You know why I said 22 billion for this year’s budget is proposed? Because last year when preparing the budget for this year, it was estimated that, “Hey! The peso has strengthened, our interest rate has decreased. We’re going to save 22 billion pesos, so let’s add 16 billion to education, let’s add five billion to health and let’s add one billion to DSWD.” So all the savings of interest goes to social services. But now our savings are 37 billion.

That's why we are also doing the Luzon Urban Beltway Super Region to ensure that the infrastructure needed immediately by investors and the people is accelerated. For example, I mentioned HanJin, why are they here? Why are they investing one billion dollars? Why are they hiring so far 15,000 and still counting? Because of the improvement of the Subic port, that's why they built here. So infrastructure is a big thing. The infrastructure here in Clark, Sutherland call center is here, that's what provides the first 2,000 jobs for call center agents because we have the North Expressway that travels quickly from Manila to here in Clark. But the people do not only benefit from social services and infrastructure.

Because of the continued strengthening of the peso, jeepney operators here in Region III, IV and NCR, were able to lower the fare by fifty cents. Are you feeling this? That's because the peso is strong even though the price of gasoline in the world is high, we pay less in pesos. The taxis, on the other hand, did not continue their request to increase the boundary charge.

And Meralco promised that they will no longer impose a Cera or Currency Adjustment on their electricity bills. And I mentioned this… And I mentioned this contribution of the private sector, even large companies like Meralco or small ones like taxi operators and jeepney operators because the lesson here, the message here is that collective action is needed to achieve development. So thank you for the promises. Let's continue and fight poverty.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Luzon Urban Beltway Anti-Poverty Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412152608/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1790&Itemid=38