Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, Secretary De Jesus for introducing me. Thank you also Governor Enverga for welcoming all of us: to me, to Secretary De Jesus, to all the DepEd supervisors throughout the Philippines.

Thank you also, mayor, really, for your welcome and for hosting this important convention in your city. Congratulations also Dr. Reyes. Congratulations on being able to put this convention together and I hope that indeed this convention will recharge the batteries of all our district supervisors.

Other officials of DepEd, other officials of the Philippine Schools District Supervisors Association, other officials of Quezon including the various mayors and board members who joined me today, ladies and gentlemen:

Mga supervisors, first of all, thank you for inviting me to be with you today. I’ve been avoiding speaking engagements since the elections, but as I told Dra. Reyes, kayo importante kayo sa akin. So, you are an exception. I want to take this opportunity for one thing — to thank you for the great role you played in the last elections, especially because we’ve not yet been able to automate our elections. Once again, you have to bear the burden of delivering credible elections to our people. And for your achievement and sacrifice, thank you very much and congratulations!

I hope that when I step down six years from now, the electoral process will have been completely computerized so that you the educators of our country can concentrate exclusively on education.

And I hope that when I step down six years from now, your work will be easier because everyone of school age will be in school, in an uncrowded classroom, in surroundings conducive to learning. I hope that every child can enter school, with sufficient space in the classroom, with a computer in every school, and with sufficient salaries for the teachers.

As Dr. Reyes said, the salary grade of public school district supervisors has been upgraded during my last term: from salary grade 19 to 20 last 2003, and this month, from salary grade 20 to 21. Congratulations to all you! Also, aside from that the post of public school district supervisor, which used to be co-terminus, is now a permanent position.

In order to further upgrade your salary, as well as that of all the teachers and other government employees, we'll need a law. And I shall ask Congress — that's why I said we should have invited the new congressman of Quezon here. The first district. Anyway, I will ask Congress to pass a government re-engineering law with a golden parachute to be financed on a reimbursement basis by the world bank so that early retirement will not add to the budget deficit. And then we can generate savings to increase the pay of teachers and other employees of a mean and lean bureaucracy. We will reward those who worked hard and say goodbye to those who did not work hard.

To uplift our people from poverty and to build our nation, its imperative to upgrade our standards of learning.

In the medium term, there’s a large possibility that the national economy will enter into a period of unprecendented expansion. But only if we do what we have to do. There is little time to waste. We have to quickly resolve some of the most pressing problems besetting us. We have to set ourselves to work for immediate achievement in five key areas:

The job creation and economic growth package. So earlier, when we were meeting with the governor and mayor before coming here, I told the governor, I have to open two million more hectares of agri-business. Perhaps in Quezon there are still many areas. The governor said, General Nakar is just one town. It's bigger than the entire province of Cavite. So there is much room for expansion of agri-business and expansion of jobs here in the province of Quezon.

Another key area, second key area is the anti-corruption and good governance package; the third is the social justice and basic needs package; the fourth is the energy independence and savings package; and the fifth is the education improvement and youth opportunity package.

Let me talk about this fifth package. Let me outline the agenda of action to realize this governments commitment to improving educational services and opening new opportunities for our youth.

We need to construct at least 3,000 new classrooms each year, and grant a college or VocTech scholarship for every indigent family. We will prepare our youth to be the next generation of knowledge workers. We'll upgrade math, science and English teaching in basic education. And of course, we will start with the teachers. Improve the teachers in math, improve the teachers in science, improve the teachers in English.

We will provide all public high schools with computers. And instead of requiring a fifth year in high school, we will incorporate preschool in the education ladder. We will encourage early childhood development as a requirement for elementary education. The governor said, when he mentioned the number of barangay day care centers here, I understand why it's difficult to incorporate the day care centers. Because, day care centers used to be DSWD. But now it's devolved. It's the local governments now. It's no longer national DSWD. So the principal and the local government should be connected so that the curriculum of the day care is kindergarten. And also, this is your job, right? Because curriculum is your job, that's why I'm telling you this.

And I remembered during my visits to the provinces, of course, meetings are often held in schools, that's the community's function room at the barangay level. Then they show what is needed. Then, I said we need a day care center. Then you said, let me ask, mayor, don't you have money for day care? Yes, but there's no space. I was there in the school building, there's a schoolyard — is that it? No, because DepEd owns it. You see, it shouldn't be that way. Even if one is local government and the other is DepEd there should be a close coordination between the two. If the space of the barangay is lacking, the barangay day care center and there is space in the barangay elementary school, give land so that a day care can be built there. So that physically and even substantively the day care and our grade one are close. That's what I want to happen. If we can do that, by Memorandum of Understanding with the DepEd and the local government, let's do it. If not, I will ask our legislators for a law.

I shall also ask Congress for a law strengthening the distance learning system. We have a Magna Carta for teachers that doesn’t allow the DepEd secretary to require a teacher to move from one place to another without his or her consent. Our teacher-student ratio in the Philippines is 30 to one, which is very, very good. On the aggregate, we don’t have a lack of teachers — 30 to one. The problem is that there are areas with many teachers, and areas lacking teachers. That’s why a teacher cannot be transferred from an area with a surplus to an area with a shortage because of the Magna Carta.

One option is to change it. But I don’t know if you want that. Another option is to implement distance learning for areas lacking teachers, using television as an additional teacher. So that you can have learning from the main school in the Poblacion to the barangay school through information technology. That’s why Dr. Reyes was right when he used the analogy of the cell phone. I.T. was his analogy, I.T. is the answer to the low battery of our teachers in far-flung areas where there are a shortage of teachers.

Now in the side of youth welfare, we must sustain the relentless campaign against illegal drugs and make schools also free from gambling with the help of parents and committed institutions. All these really revolves around values. You know, when I went to one of those Kalahi areas — you know, many of you know about Kalahi, right? Those areas in poor places — I was going to a Kalahi area during the canvassing period, but as many of you know, I spent that time also going to the Carmelite convents to pray with the nuns.

So, in one of the provinces during my… I was staying with the Carmelite convent but I was going to go to a Kalahi area during that day. I was telling the nuns I am going to this town to look at the completion of the Kalahi construction — there are day care centers, and so on — the nun said, oh, I know that area. It’s very poor, many island barangays. In those island barangays there is no religion, no religion they have learned. It’s very difficult for the people there. When the young girls grow up there, they become household help, but they get fired because they steal, because they have no religion. I said, yes, that’s right sister. If they are poor and stay, they enter a household and steal. If they get an education, later on they enter the government, they steal too. Because there is no basic values formation.

So the problem of drugs, the problem of gambling in high school, in school. The problem of stealing whether in a house or in a government office it revolves around the values you grew up with. When I was studying in high school, I remember, we taught religion to grade school students in public school. If we didn’t have heresy because of the book, it was boxed in. They just lacked manpower. So, I understood that it was already gone from our system during martial law under the guise of separation of church and state. I do not believe that that’s a proper separation of church and state. Separation only means, what I mean is, don’t favor one religion over another when it comes to teaching. Because any religion, if it’s a legitimate religion, the values are actually common. They only differ on whether it’s about Jesus Christ, on the blessed virgin, on statues of saints, but values are common.

And so, I’m instructing the Department of Education to allow legitimate NGOs to conduct values formation sessions in the schools para hindi kayo mahirapan. We can allow others outside to come in for values formation. Because education is not only about making our young people competitive in the global market. It is about providing Filipinos excellence to their work, and building our nation around democratic and universal values.

That is what a good education is — competitiveness and values. That is what constitutes a good education. A good education is what every parent dreams of for his or her children. This is what I want every Filipino child to have. This is what every Filipino child must enjoy.

And you and I will help make that dream come true.

Maraming salamat, good luck! Congratulations on your convention.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 4th Annual National Convention of the Philippine Schools District Supervisors Association. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133345/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5685&Itemid=38