Thank you Secretary Romulo.

And congratulations for representing the country to have the honor of presiding over the inter faith dialogue in the United Nations.

I’d like to greet the other leaders of our country who are here today. We have Deputy Speaker Raul del Mar, Governor Gwen Garcia. We have the members of the Cabinet Secretary Ace Durano of tourism; Secretary Cerge Remonde of our government media; Rene Sarmiento of the peace process; Zam Ampatuan of the National Anti-Poverty Commission. And of course, I’d like to greet the leaders of this National Summit of Religious Leaders– Bishop Gutierrez; Bishop Ledesma; Bishop Tendero; Professor Basman; Sultan Kiram; Bishop Punzalan.

Congratulations! This is the biggest gathering of religious leaders in the history of our country. And I thank you for the opportunity of allowing me to join you tonight.

This morning one of the congressmen who supported me in the recent impeachment complaint congressman Bobit Carlos of Valenzuela sent me a morning prayer to say and it said: “Lord, walk with me today. I have no idea what lies before me. Be my strength to make the most of it and use it to your glory.” God’s timing is perfect and part of what lay before me today is being here with you and I praise him for scheduling this summit today.

This moment is significant for me it is my first public appearance since yesterday.

Yesterday Congress spoke and I thank Deputy Speaker Raul del Mar for presiding over a marathon session. Congress spoke with the mighty voice of the people they represent and I thank them. Thank you, please congressman and deputy speaker to all of them. Their voice is clear — let us look for peace not conflict. Let’s get back to work — not in the streets but in our offices and industrial centers, in our farms and communities. Let us bury the conflict of the past and gather around a brighter, peaceful tomorrow.

We must transform the weariness of our people into a fresh dynamism for action, enterprise and reform. What we need is less talk unless it’s dialogue and more action on jobs, high prices especially coming from the world oil price upsurge, hunger, law and order, corruption– the very concerns you mentioned in your summaries and in your statement.

Secretary Romulo, Durano, Remonde, Ampatuan are here they and the whole Cabinet are put on notice to get down to the brass stocks and let the people feel in their bones and in their hearts and in their experience the power of honest and efficient service.

Honesty and efficiency– these are things that you a religious leaders can truly help internalize in your public servants.

My personal pain of political triumph is of no moment to the task of building this nation and putting the economy in order. I offer the olive branch of peace to all my critics and detractors for a principled partnership for the people driven by responsible governance and responsible fiscalization. Are the same good congressman sent me and a second text message he said: ‘let’s not think about the pain we went through, but the lesson it taught us not; how much we cried and hurt but how much we smiled and loved’. And that is what peace and dialogue are all about. That is what we are all about today.

Many of the things that you want require legislation. Indeed, the legislative mill brims with priorities. For one thing, we have to change the degenerated political system constitutionally with parliamentary, electoral, judicial, economic and other reforms including the federal system that has been the subject matter of so much discussion in this conference. We have to work on those things, even as we have to get the budget debate underway, enact the anti-terrorism law that will be just to the different ethnic groups and faiths and open up the door for alternative sources of energy. All these to fight poverty and uphold the rule of law.

We must strengthen the executive, legislative partnership because part of it has been wounded for the national interest; and I wish to leave for the United Nations where the last time Bert presided over the inter-faith dialogue. This time to preside over the UN Security Council, I wish to leave for the united nations with the clear message that we are working for ‘One Philippines’ just as we all have one God whatever we call his name.

Many of you were there in my State-of-the-Nation Address and if you recall, I said, we seem to live today in two countries — two Philippines even if they have the same name — one is the Philippines that is poised for economic takeoff, and the other, is the Philippines that is held back by discord spawned by a degenerating political system. And also, part of that degenerating political system is the lack of understanding among different religions, ethnic cultures and beliefs.

The energies of our people and our leaders like you must be gathered in one place not just this beautiful new hotel but that one place must be the ‘One Philippines’.

And I am grateful to you our religious leaders and to the many well-meaning Filipinos who have made a clear call of prudence, sobriety, dialogue, understanding, peace in these trying times. Because you have called for and conducted dialogue you, have tempered the onslaught of hate. You have manned the perimeters of prudence, understanding, sobriety and the rule of law.

And as I come here to join you this evening, I pray for your guidance and support to save us from this rapidly degenerating political system that breeds not only the compartmentalization of ideals not only the misunderstanding among religions, ethnicity and cultures but also compartmentalization of work — a system that foments division not only across the institutions of our national government, but also along the axis of national and local governance and also across different religions and different ethnic cultures.

Now is the time to begin to change the system. You in this dialogue in this promotion of peace are part of the changing of the system and I thank you for that. As I extend the hand of peace to my own detractors, I invite all Filipinos, my critics and supporters alike, to an earnest and sincere debate to amend our constitution because many of the things you want need to have a constitutional change, to bring power back to the people and to cast out the demons that have haunted our politics.

This National Summit of Religious Leaders towards a culture of peace transcends all politics, transcends all partisan concerns. And I thank you for your statements and I look forward to the follow up that you will be making.

I see in your recommendation that you want me to organize an inter-faith commission. Well, it was also upon the recommendation of many of our evangelical bishops that we organize the council on moral values. But it’s also been upon your recommendation that we re-examine now the nature of that council. And perhaps, I will ask Isabel Tobias who has been charge of that day-to-day affairs how we can recast that council on values to a council on interfaith and integrate them. And then, we can have different bodies after that.

I am a great believer of interfaith dialogue — if you recall many years ago, no, not many years just couple of years ago after 9/11 2001, I put out a 14-point program to fight terrorism, as a result of following the resolution of the UN Security Council, the only body in the UN which has the force of law in all member-countries. And at that time, the UN Security Council gave us a resolution that we must all fight terrorism. So, I put a program to fight terrorism 14 points and one of the 14 points was to promote inter-faith dialogue so that what others are trying to cast as religious war will instead be an opportunity for religious understanding.

How historic, how providential that at that time we were so obedient to the UN Security Council whose resolutions have the force of law and now we will go the UN Security Council with the Philippines as the President of that council. Yes, from 2001, we have shown our belief in inter-faith dialogue, and I am also a great believer in the unity of mankind for peace and the common good. And if we want to unite mankind for peace and the common good, how much more do we want to have unity in our country for peace and the common good.

Why Bert Romulo presided over that inter faith dialogue? It is because due to that belief that we articulated since 2001, it was the Philippines that spearheaded the resolution at the United Nations General Assembly last year for the adoption of inter-faith dialogue and cooperation among U.N. member-countries as a means to resolve conflicts among nations. And I am very grateful that the UN Security Council unanimously adopted the Philippine resolution. And that is why Bert Romulo presided over that dialogue.

This contribution we have made to world peace promoting inter-faith dialogue as an instrument for looking for peace is a fitting marker to celebrate our country’s current presidency of the UN Security Council. And next week, as I go to preside over that UN Security Council meeting, I shall bring the same message that we are discussing today for in a world of clashing civilizations dialogue is the paramount tool to pull together our commonalities for a more secure, safe and peaceful world.

But even as I thank you — religious leaders for what you are doing here my message to the Filipino people is that: we should not live to our religious alone the task of promoting dialogue as a way of life, we the people there flock — must gather all parties and ideologies together towards greater understanding and cooperation. Many of the things you said talked about the peace process.

And I am so grateful to the Lord, to Allah that the peace process with the MILF is at a high point. We are in the final stages of negotiation and dialogue, aren’t we Rene? The fighting has ceased on the ground. Just today, Secretary Romulo witnessed and assisted me in giving an award to the outgoing Commanding General of the International Monitoring Team for our peace on the ground in Mindanao as it turns over to a new commander. And they all are so gratified that there is peace on the ground in Mindanao.

But that is not all. The seeds of enterprise are sprouting in the areas of former conflict. For instance, there is a dam — the Malmar dam in the areas where fighting used to be. There is a bustling community in Buliok where the fighting used to be. We have restarted not only the peace process in Mindanao. We have restarted the process of development. And it is not only about Mindanao. Earlier in your statements and your report Sister Roxanne, you talked about the NDF. And I am also gratified on the report that our Chief Negotiator Nieves Confessor gave me that the negotiations have also restarted with the national democratic front.

But as you have said in your statement poverty is a cause of conflict. We need development to sustain peace just as we need peace to let development flourish. Peace and development are twins and we need both one to have the other. But to achieve both peace and development, we need to have one Philippines put up a united and determined attack not on one another but on the country’s toughest enemy and that is poverty. That is our common enemy.

And on my part, I shall continue to open all doors toward keeping our nation together, towards having peace with one another, towards achieving one Philippines. And I ask you religious leaders as I embark on this difficult task of looking for peace not only among friends, but even with enemies: please pray for me, please help me. Kailangan ko kayo.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech on National Summit of Religious Leaders towards a culture of peace. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412062851/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5171&Itemid=38