Today we raise the bar on our campaign against terrorists who kill, bomb and maim to enforce an ideology of evil.

We have the legal muscle to help end the paralysis of fear, empowered with a law that identifies terrorism and penalizes it, a law that preserves and protects freedom.

Our resolve to criminalize and penalize terrorism through this law is not an offshoot of 9/11, for we had come face to face with this scourge ahead of the rest of the world.

The first Philippine anti-terrorism bill was filed by Senator Juan Ponce Enrile in January 1996, three years after the first bombing of the World Trade Center, five years before the Rizal Day bombing in 2000, six and a half years before the tragedy of 9/11 and eight years after the bombing of Super Ferry 14.

One can imagine the possibilities had we passed this law earlier. Perhaps, the Dos Palmas incident would not have happened, and Gracia Burnham would not have lost her husband, Martin. Many Filipino lives could have been spared had the State been equipped with the legal arsenal to flush out evil before it could do harm.

We must invest in peace and order.

The next three years will see record levels of well thought out and generous funding for investments in crushing terrorism wherever it threatens, regardless of ideology; and in putting a stop to human rights abuses whatever the excuse.

We fight terrorism for it threatens our sovereign, democratic, compassionate and decent way of life.

Therefore, in the fight against lawless violence, we must uphold these values. It is never right and always wrong to fight terrorism with terror.

Crime is down in the nation because we have made investments to put more police on the street. Our military must continue on its path to reform, becoming even more professional every day at the same time they fight to eliminate the armed terrorist threats to the nation from religious extremists or communist terrorists. Whatever ideology is being pursued that undermines our stability must be defeated.

If you are armed and kill innocent civilians, you will be tracked down and prosecuted. If you are a communist terrorist, we will stop you. If you are a religious terrorist, we will stop you. If you are a rogue element of your own police or military, we will stop you.

I have the deepest respect for our military and police institutions as do most Filipinos. We want our nation safe. We trust our men and women who put their lives on the line every day to protect our nation and our communities. As high as 99% of these hard working and patriotic men and women love this nation and abide by the rule of law.

The political terrorists who reside outside the boundaries of human justice and who have marked the stability of our nation and the rule of law for extinction live by no moral code. They lack all humanity and concern for the people. Yet for our public servants in uniform, fidelity to the Constitution is a sacred duty. These public servants have a moral obligation to uphold the Constitution to protect the innocent. For this very reason, any violent crime that a member of the law enforcement or military community may commit against innocent people is even more wrong and must stop. No one is above the law.

There is a fundamental difference between those who take up arms and wish the violent overthrow of the state and those who take to the ballot box for political change. Our government will protect the political rights of any person who wishes to participate in our democracy, however, we might disagree on philosophy and approach. We cannot stand idly by, however, and let the purveyors of violence cloak their agenda behind the innocent men and women they hold hostage to their failed ideology. We will wrestle these failed terrorists to the ground and free the nation to live in peace and harmony.

However, the primary struggle for rights remains the liberation of the masses from hunger and hardship.

Economic and social development is still the best guarantee of achieving human security. Only equitable and sustainable growth can free us from want and fear. Poverty, though not the cause, abets terrorism.

We pay tribute to the fearless fourteen who sacrificed their lives in Tipo-Tipo and to their equally valiant comrades in arms. We mourn with their families. Our marines who were victims of a decades long conflict that can and will end. The tragic encounter will not deter us from our mission, which is to bring long-lasting peace to Mindanao.

Talk is cheap. It is action that counts. I ask the public to give the Human Security Act a chance.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].