Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the launching ceremony for “Proud Harvest” Vegetable-Enriched Canton Noodles

Thank you very much Secretary Remonde for your introduction and for briefly telling the background of this project of ours.

Congressman Amado Bagatsing, Mayor Alfredo Lim, congratulations to both of you! Amado said that this used to be one of the most difficult parts of Manila — Dagonoy. Our market and these commercial buildings here are now so beautiful, congratulations to the people of Dagonoy! (applause) Joey Concepcion, one of those we mentioned in the State of the Nation Address because of the help of “Go Negosyo!” to small entrepreneurs, congratulations also on this launching. (applause) President Colting, president of Benguet State University, congratulations also! (applause)

I would like to acknowledge the presence also of Special Envoy Carlos Chan (applause) because we are also expecting him to develop snacks, Oishi snacks, using vegetables from Benguet. (applause) I’d like to acknowledge the presence also of former Secretary of Trade and Industry, Joe Concepcion and Mrs. Concepcion, (applause) and congratulate the whole family on the Golden Anniversary of RFM Corporation. (applause) Joey said that their celebration of the 50th anniversary is through not raising the price of four important products bought by the common people, the price might even go down in the whole year 2008. Congratulations and thank you very much. (applause)

But now we are launching this vegetable-enriched pancit canton with the brand “Proud Harvest,” we are truly proud that this came from the research of Benguet State University. To Dr. Rogelio Colting, president of the university, and all the teachers and researchers of BSU, congratulations on your successful creation of these vegenoodles! (applause)

To Joey Concepcion and the company RFM, which is the distributor of these veggie noodles, thank you. (applause) As I said, Joey is known for leading the promotion of small businesses through the “Go Negosyo!” program. (applause) RFM will greatly help to make the public aware of the importance of these nutritious noodles in providing a solution to the problem of hunger.

And to Cerge Remonde, Director General of PMS and the whole PMS, thank you. (applause) In March, as Cerge Remonde said, during Holy Week I released ten million pesos to help the research on veggie noodles, because Cerge was with me then and because we would ask for the help of “Go Negosyo!” which is a partner of Cerge, I instructed Secretary Remonde to focus on this project. Production was very fast, within four months there are veggie noodles available in the market, congratulations! (applause)

The noodles we are serving today, as Joey said, are made from squash. This is just an initial product. In the coming months, I expect Benguet State University to release noodles made from carrots, saluyot, and other vegetables, and they will also create other food products derived from vegetables such as snacks which we expect Ambassador Carlos Chan to help release.

I took advantage of my visit to Benguet during Holy Week to order a study on the production of veggie noodles, using raw materials that can be sourced from the salad bowl of the Cordillera. And don't forget, President Colting's *pinakbet* bowl from Pangasinan – let's help them too, like in Villasis.

I said before that vegenoodles should be part of the items sold in Tindahan Natin stores. We have Tindahan Natin in poor areas, where veggie noodles can be sold. This program is allocated a large amount in the national budget this year. Veggie noodles fortified with vegetables are more nutritious, tastier, and cheaper to produce now because the price of flour is soaring, making veggie noodles more affordable. It will also increase the income of farmers and solve the storage problem because vegetables spoil easily, but when processed into veggie noodles, there will be no spoiled vegetables.

This national project will feed our children, help our farmers, and provide our consumers with more and better nutritional choices.

Next week, Proud Harvest will be available in the markets of Cordillera, Ilocos and Cagayan Valley, and hopefully here in Metro Manila, and hopefully here in the Dagonoy market. (applause)

Veggie noodles and other nutritious processed foods are part of our programs aimed at reducing hunger. We are delivering nutritious food at affordable prices to more citizens. In addition, the production of such food also helps the livelihood of vegetable farmers.

The funds we spend on these programs to ensure the people's food supply come entirely from the Value Added Tax. The VAT on oil and petroleum products is the source of eighty billion pesos that the government is now returning to the people as programs that help the poor, create jobs, and increase people's income.

Our food program is comprehensive. We follow a supply and demand strategy. In terms of supply, we are increasing production through programs like FIELDS. This includes fertilizer, irrigation, investment, seedlings, seeds and farming and harvesting equipment, and a well-organized distribution system consisting of good roads, farm-to-market roads, RO-ROs and trading posts, as well as our Tindahan Natin outlets that sell cheap rice and cheap noodles. That's the specialty of our Tindahan Natin. So this noodle will be sold in Tindahan Natin.

Our food distribution system has improved significantly since we completed the Western Nautical Highway, the RO-RO van that runs from Iloilo, Negros from Mindanao to Luzon in 2003. Transportation of food supplies has become easier. The RO-RO ports that connect our nautical highway will ensure that the price of our veggie noodles is the same here in Manila, in Mindanao, or in the vegetable-growing areas of Benguet.

On the demand side, to ensure that citizens have sufficient income to purchase food, we are doing everything to improve their standard of living and increase employment opportunities. The government also teaches proper nutrition for a balanced diet, and proper family planning through natural family planning.

That is why we need diligence and unity more than ever now. I hope we all join hands to achieve the dreams of the people of Manila as well as the Filipino nation.

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Let us patronize Proud Harvest and learn about proper nutrition.

Congratulations! Long live Dagonoy! (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of “Proud Harvest” Vegetable-Enriched Canton Noodles. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115711/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1589&Itemid=38