Thank you very much, Senator Gordon, Legislative Chairman of the Committee to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Liberation of the Philippines.

Congressman Sol Chungalao, the people of Ifugao headed today by Vice Governor Prudenciano — please convey our condolence to Governor Cappleman — the other governors who are here today in full force. thank you very much for joining us in this important celebration.

The officials of the municipal City of Kiangan headed by Mayor Albert Indunan, naimbag nga… bigat pay? Bigat yo amin, apo; Secretary Durano and the other officials who composed the committee to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the Liberation of the Philippines; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps headed by Ambassador Yamazaki whose countryman who”s General Yamashita; I”d like to greet also Ambassador Wu of China, Ambassador Senevirathna of Sri Lanka, Ambassador Guashem of Bangladesh; of course, the son of Kiangan, the Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeals Justice Brawner who on September 14 will be the next Commissioner of the Commission on Elections; all my fellow workers in government; Santiago Balaho; Board member; and the other veterans who are here today and who are not here today, thank you for liberating us this generation.

Gagayyem ken kakabsat iti kiangan ken ti intero nga Ifugao umuna kayo ug Dios ti agngina kadakayo amin ta siyempre ag suporta kayo kenyak kanayon Dios ti agngina.

Maykadua, kablawdanda kayo amin ta saan laing ti Rice Terraces ti attraction tuy Ifugao no dikit ti istorya ti kultura nangruna ti Yamashita surrender, the end of the second world war for the Philippines.

Sixty years ago in this place, a great storm ended. a war ended as the Japanese General Tomoyuki Yamashita walked into the lines of the allied forces from that home economics building that we see over here. We recall that day today even as sadly we still live in two Philippines: the Philippines poised for economic take off, and the Philippines whose take off is being dragged down by international terrorism and a degenerated political system.

We recall that great day today, the end of a war, and we remember the participants in that war. Our allies in the Asia-Pacific, the United States, Australia, New Zealand, many others. And we recall that up to today the United States and our other allies are our partners in upholding democracy and the rule of law and the security of our nation against terrorism.

We recall that great day today, and on recalling that great day today, we recognize that today Japan is our partner in our economic take off, our biggest source of official development assistance and among our major partners in trade, investment and tourism. Thank you, Mr. Ambassador.

The major players here were the Filipinos, Japanese, the Americans.

And up to today, we recognize the essential role of Japan and the United States together with China which also recently celebrated the end of the war in China in the economic and political security of our region and our country.

Today, we commemorate the end of a war and the unity and solidarity that came thereafter, a unity and solidarity that is now endangered by degenerated political system. The folly of war is very much like the scourge of a degenerated political system. It stinks the people with hunger and anguish. We must reform this political system if we will be true to the sacrifices of those that perished in bringing about the end of the second world war. We must bring about a system where political warfare — yes, there may be — but where political warfare does not drag down the war against poverty and terror.

And so on this day, as we celebrate the end of a war and the beginning of unity in the region, the Asia-Pacific region and in the world, I once again call for unity within our country. I make this call to friends and foes alike. I make this call for unity in our country and I make this call for unity in our Asia-Pacific region in the face of the steepest increase in the world price of oil in history. Two days ago or three days ago, it was 70 dollars and then it shot up to what? Is it 81 or 87? The steepest price increase. And let me take this opportunity to greet our special guest and also to condole with the United States on the devastating effects of your latest hurricane including the impact on oil supplies.

We have a major challenge that we must all be united against, not just in the Philippines but in the region and in the world, and that is the specter of the economic dislocation from the steepest oil price increase in history.

My dear brothers and sisters, let us unite because it is very difficult that the price of oil has increased only in the Philippines, not in America, not in Japan, and not in other countries as well. Let us help each other, we Filipinos and we together with our neighbors in the Asia-Pacific, together with America and Japan, and all our allies during the war, allies still today, in another war, the war against the oil crisis and the poverty that it may cause once again.

During the war, brave soldiers fought in epic battles from the Ilocos coast and Cagayan Valley, to the mountains of what is now Benguet, Ifugao, Bontoc. and we celebrate today the heroism of Santiago Balaho, probably the oldest remaining living veteran in our country today, turning 95 soon.

I will not recount the stories of the war and the end of the war because they have been recounted in chronology and in anecdotes by our previous speakers. But I join them in greeting our veterans and I would especially like to recall Lieutenant Colonel Romulo Maniquez, Major Paredes, Lieutenant Santiago Balaho who fought the first engagement right here in Kiangan. I would like also to recall Lieutenant Marcario Abarillo whose unit began the negotiations for the surrender and the final road to peace.

Just like them, consider the welfare of the nation above all else in these times. It is not lives that are being asked of us, not like before. What these times ask of us is unity, togetherness, hopefully we may unite. I hope we unite for the sake of the sacrifice of our veterans and heroes of the Second World War and for the sake of the future of the next generation.

We must go on building bridges across the seas with our allies and our former enemies, now our major ally in economic development, but we must also build bridges within the nation as we forge one Philippines, not two Philippines. One Philippines that is stable at home and respected in the world.

Today, the Philippines occupies an important role in the United Nations Security Council.

The United Nations Security Council is the only body in the United Nations whose decisions have the force of law in all member-nations of the United Nations. and this September, as we go to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the United Nations and we discuss the major reforms needed in the United Nations after 60 years of existence, the focus of that reform is the composition and function of the U.N. Security Council of which we have the honor of being the president today.

Iso nga tatta nga aldaw, I ask you to pray, kakabsat ken gagayyem, God bless the Philippines in this role, in our role in the U.N. Security Council, we are now the chief peacemaker of the world. But God bless even more our efforts to promote peace and unity within our own beloved nation.

Long live! God bless you all, sir.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 60th Victory Day Celebration of the Surrender of General Yamashita. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412061053/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5174&Itemid=38