Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Gonzalez for your kind introduction.

Other members of the Department of Justice including Chief State Prosecutor Zuño; other members of the executive branch including Secretary Ace Durano, the cabinet officer for regional development of Region VII; Congressman Raul Del Mar, thank you very much for your tireless and excellent presiding over the impeachment proceedings.

I’d like to greet also chairperson of your league, Marylin Cynthia Madamba- Luang, and the other officers and members of the prosecutors league; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today. You are important members of our society and government. Our prosecutors are working together and charting ways to further strengthen criminal justice and I am glad to join you not only today but to join you in this quest especially today that we face the challenge of putting extra-judicial killings to a full stop.

Democracy in the Philippines will not stand for senseless political killings. Every man and woman in our country is entitled to speak free from the fear that they will have to pay for their beliefs with their very lives.

And since Congressman Del Mar is here, I would like to thank the Filipino people for casting a vote of confidence in this administration through their duly elected representatives in the house. As the presidency is relieved of the heavy rush and burden of partisan politics, I’m grateful to all my supporters as I extend a sincere hand of reconciliation to my detractors based on the high principles of justice and the common welfare. The people have spoken and the message is clear, we must close ranks and face the most compelling demands of national stability and growth.

I call for a tearing down of partisan fences, a consolidation of voices, and a welding of national heart and will to fight poverty, stop conflict and heal the nation. Now is the time to act to sharpen executive focus, to sharpen in fact prosecution focus because you are indeed part of the executive branch to get the legislative mill on track and uphold the rule of law and democracy that holds together the nation and strengthen its sinews for the world of competition and the future of extreme challenges.

The nation is moving in the right direction. The economy is strong and growing, and the budget is under control for the first time in a long time.

The first phase of our economic turnaround plan was to stabilize our budget and spending and then secure increase revenue through better tax and customs collections, and through an increase in the value-added tax and other taxes. Thanks again to the good work of congress.

We achieved that goal. The nation is better for it although I have paid a political price in public opinion.

Phase two of our plan is to take advantage of our improved economic picture to finally make the long overdue investments in infrastructure, education and health care to name a few areas. The most sweeping element of this phase is to restructure our economy to bolster the natural advantages of five distinct regions of the country.

In this region, the Central Visayas, the great economy, the driver of the economy will be tourism. And our Secretary of Tourism Ace Durano will move up from cabinet officer for regional development in Region VII to the super region champion in Region VII, VIII, VI, Palawan, Romblon and Bicol, which are part of the tourism central region of our country. And to take his place as CORD for Region VII will be Secretary Cerge Remonde who is also here with us today.

Finally, phase three of our national plan is turn our sights to truly joining the ranks of first world nations. We have a vision that we have shared and talked about — that we will take our place alongside other first world nations by 2020. This phase must be marked by increase attention on our natural environment and making sure we build up not just deplete our natural resources.

That’s why this morning, we planted trees all over the archipelago. The biggest number of trees planted at one time in the history of the world. We will probably make the guinness book of records for that.

And more good news. After the tree planting ceremony, I received the news that the oil tanker that sunk off the coast of Guimaras has been located.

I’m deeply concerned over the mounting health hazards in the communities affected by the oil’s leak. And I am ordering a meticulous and rapid assessment of the situation by the health authorities followed by prompt and sustained actions. Mobile hospitals will be set up and evacuation procedures will be undertaken as necessary to ease suffering and save lives. I call upon Petron and the ship owner to immediately clean up the mess, and our Task Force Guimaras headed by Secretary Nonong Cruz, Environment Secretary Reyes, Health Secretary Duque, Transportation Secretary Mendoza and Social Welfare Secretary Cabral and Coast Guard Admiral Gosingan to attend to environmental and health issues.

There is a need for human hair and chicken feathers to absorb that oil. And as for that need, I am instructing the task force to work with the private sector including the media and the maritime industry to put up drop off centers all over the country. And ensure speedy transport and deployment in the affected area.

I am declaring the Guimaras oil spill as a national calamity that demands the cooperation and solidarity of all Filipinos. Let us do what has to be done first and deal with the blame later.

Another hallmark of a modern first world nation is justice and human rights.

At about 3:15 yesterday afternoon, a shooting incident happened inside the Tropical Hut hamburger store located along General Romulo Avenue near corner Aurora Boulevard in Cubao. When assailants armed with handguns shot Attorney Rodolfo Paglinawan in the head causing his instantaneous death.

Now, who is Attorney Paglinawan? The victim was allegedly the legal adviser of Nagkakaisang Samahan ng Purefoods Hormel in Marikina City. One of the assailants was apprehended by responding policemen and security guards of Araneta Center, Capitol Pawnshop and the Barangay traffic aides of Quezon City. The arrested suspect was identified as Jeff Rafanan Alias Louie, an alleged member of the Rogelio Laurente Command of the Partido Marxist- Leninist ng Pilipinas. Now I hope they will not blame again the military or the police for this killing. When initially investigated, the suspect claimed that the victim was just collecting money from the labor union, but nothing happened to their labor cases. Well, that’s the investigation. But at the end of the day, the prosecution and the conviction will lie in your hands.

I ask our prosecutors to be squarely behind me in the fight, in this fight against hideous elements challenging our political stability.

Last Monday, I announced that former Supreme Court Justice Melo will lead an investigative group to put political murderers behind bars and break this cycle of violence. One of the members of that five-person commission is no other than our Chief State Prosecutor Jovencio Zuño.

The work of the commission, as far as the pursuit of justice is concerned, will be investigative. It will also recommend administrative policies and legislation, but the prosecution will be left to Chief State Prosecutor Zuño and all of you wherever the crime may have happened. And therefore the fight for justice will last beyond the life of the commission.

Meanwhile, I will continue to look after the needs of our prosecutors. As Chief State Prosecutor Zuño has said, our battle cry is Republic Act 9279 that grants additional compensation in the form of special allowances for members of the national prosecution service and state counsels in the Department of Justice.

In addition to Republic Act 9279, two weeks ago, I released 50 million pesos to augment the prosecution of graft, tax evasion, smuggling cases and rebellion cases. And you might have heard about the U.S. Millennium Challenge Account of one billion pesos to help us fight graft and corruption. Again, that is for technology, for investigation and for prosecution.

You have much work to do but we are providing you with resources to be able to do that work better.

To the upcoming new set of officers, my advance congratulations! I hope that you will pursue your association’s goal with great vigor because the country needs you. Congratulations!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 18th National Convention of the National Prosecutors League of the Philippines (NPLP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212114/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2877&Itemid=38