Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremony of the 3rd China-ASEAN Expo

[Delivered at the Nanning International Conference and Exhibition Centre, Nanning, Guangxi, PROC, October 31, 2006]

His Excellency Premier Wen Jiabao, Minister of Commerce Honorable Xi Lai, Governor Lu and the other officials of Guangxi, Your Majesty, excellencies, heads of state, heads of government, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

We are here today celebrating the golden age of ASEAN-China relations.

All the leaders of ASEAN are visiting China to celebrate the 15th year of China’s Dialogue Partnership with ASEAN. As the chair of ASEAN this year, I am particularly proud of the role that ASEAN has played in helping China integrate its economy and become a powerhouse in the region and the world. The relationship between China and ASEAN has helped ASEAN as a region. Our trade is surging with China, we are seeing more Chinese investment in ASEAN. We hope to see more.

The ASEAN-China partnership remains one of the most dynamic and progressive in the East Asia region. When ASEAN and China first began relations in 1991, the focus was on cooperation in economic and trade relations. Over the past 15 years, the relationship has evolved to include cooperation on political security, development, and other regional issues. Going forward, we should continue to strengthen the ASEAN-China partnership by promoting confidence-building measures, intensifying interactions, and allocating adequate resources to steer the relations and cooperation for mutual benefit. This China-ASEAN expo is a good example of what we should be doing.

An expo such as this builds confidence. It also reminds us of strategic themes such as: “What will our ASEAN-China relationship look like 15 years from today?” This expo should strengthen our resolve to intensify the integrative trade within the ASEAN-China free trade area.

The ASEAN-China FTA enables both parties to reduce and eliminate its tariff rates for a range of products. The ASEAN region represents a market of over half a billion people for Chinese exports. It is a supplier of much-needed resources. In turn, we the ASEAN countries can reduce our dependence for our exports on western markets such as the U.S. and Europe.

It is with great enthusiasm that we participate in the China-ASEAN expo. Our businessmen are looking not only for products to bring home but also for industries where Chinese and ASEAN manufacturing can collaborate to produce for our own domestic markets and for the rest of the world.

Our businessmen have come to Nanning looking for products as candidates for integrative trade with China.

I am confident our search will bear fruit in the field of shared prosperity both for China and ASEAN

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the 3rd China-ASEAN Expo. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203647/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2996&Itemid=38