Many thanks to Secretary Lotilla, one of our many Cabinet members from Western Visayas.

Ambassador Yamazaki; the officials of PNOC-EDC headed by Paul Aquino and Tony Cailao; the officials of Negros Occidental headed by Governor Marañon; our host Congressman Charlie Cojuangco; our various congressmen who are here today like my brother-in-law Iggy Arroyo and Monico Puentevella; our Presidential Adviser for Western Visayas Lito Coscolluela, and according to Paul Aquino it is not illegal to acknowledge the future of the Philippines: Senator Migs Zubiri and Senator Mike Defensor. Migs Zubiri from Kabankalan and Bacolod City and Mike Defensor from Mina, Iloilo and Victorias, Negros Occidental; our host mayors, Mayor Janet Torres and Mayor Coscolluela; mga iban nga mga mayors and our Plant Manager Dino De La Cruz and all of the ones who are helping right here in the Bago Plant, sa inyo nga tanan maayong ugto mga kasimanwa.

First of all, congratulations! Once again to Paul Aquino and the PNOC-EDC. I say once again because we recently congratulated them for one of the most successful I.P.O.S in the history of our country and now for the corporation’s latest geothermal production field. And as Paul Aquino said, this has been long, long in the making — 30 years in the making — but finally it gathered the momentum that we’re able to complete today because during our administration aside from having a great CEO like Paul, we were able to at last complete the loan agreement with Japan that finally enabled this project to be completed.

Thus, we thank the Japanese government represented here by Ambassador Yamazaki and Floro Aviento, thank you for all that you’ve done. And ambassador, not only to thank you for this particular plant, for financing this particular plant but I want to thank once again through you Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan because during our ASEAN Summit and East-Asian Summit, when we all talked about what should be done for energy security, Japan immediately put its money where its mouth is and Prime Minister Abe promised two billion U.S. dollars to finance energy security projects all over the east-Asian region. And that is something that EDC can continue to pursue.

I welcome the people of Bago City and Murcia, and all of Negros Occidental. You now have 49 megawatts of electricity for the Visayas and you will be the first to benefit from the advantages that the plant will provide, such as royalties. And I want to tell the whole investor community, the royalties from this power plant that will go to Bago City of Mayor Torres and the town of Murcia of Mayor Coscolluela — according to the law, right Popo? — 80 percent must go to electricity. And therefore as this plant is operating and now earning revenue streams, they have to spend 80 percent and to share the experience of other areas like Valencia in Oriental Negros and Kananga in Leyte, what they do is they subsidize the electric bills of their constituents, so that the benefits of this project reach the people here. But not only that, this is our way of telling the investors if you are power- intensive, if your power cost is very high locate in Bago City and in Murcia. And after all, if you are an electronics firm and you have to speed up the delivery of your raw materials and your products, after all we have a new airport in Silay City coming up. So, you have all the infrastructure here you need to become competitive. So, come to Bago City , come to Murcia, come to Negros Occidental!

Isa pa nga dako nga benepisyo ang reforestation. Kag subong nga ginasugod na ang pag-andar sining planta, amo nga may matipid nga 15 million dollars nga langis kada tuig para sa atong pungsod. And I’m very happy that we are here in this very very modern plant, compact, as Paul said, but modern. And this is in accordance with our vision to take our place alongside other first-world nations by 2020. But to that end, no nation can aspire to become modern without thinking of our environment. I want to take this opportunity to share with you that we want to press ahead with a massive green Philippines environmental plan that is comprehensive in scope and thorough in execution. A plan that includes: number one, reforestation. And so this reforestation of this beautiful mountains is part of our green Philippines master plan; second, preservation of our reefs and waterways; and third, scrub the land and air of pollutants that endanger the health of our citizens; and finally, number four, energy independence.

Part of a bright new future for our nation is to take control over our reliance on energy to become free from dependence on foreign oil and become self-sufficient to the use of sustainable alternative forms of energy. We can harness our sun, wind and geothermal resources, as we are doing today. And we can produce our own clean fuels through biofuels. Thanks to Migs Zubiri who sponsored the biofuels law. Bata sang kabankalan kag Bacolod City, ayaw malipatan. But I also want to say that helping Migs in Congress were Monico and Iggy, who were his co-authors. So with this bill… No, law, ang layi sponsored by Migs Zubiri, we don’t have to rely on foreign suppliers anymore.

Some are asking how can biofuels, the biofuels act help our people. Well, one of the biofuels is ethanol which is produced very greatly here in Negros Occidental. And right now — correct me if O’m wrong Popo Lotilla, but isn’t it many gasoline stations are already selling ethanol blends? — but right now the ethanol is imported. But even the imported ethanol blended into gasoline is cheaper than the 100 percent gasoline. How much more when we produce our own biofuels right here in the Philippines. Salamat gid sa liwat Senator Migs Zubiri.

Our primary goals for the energy sector are to ensure an adequate supply of electricity, to make electricity affordable, and to produce clean energy from our natural resources like what we are doing here today.

The biofuels law is a big step towards our goal of increasing clean energy in our country. We are further accelerating the program to produce alternative fuels. We are working doubly hard to increase our energy capacity and doubling our efforts to keep electricity prices down, especially electricity for investors. And that’s why I repeat, investors with a big power… Electric bill, come to places like Bago City and Murcia where the local governments will subsidize your electric bill. True, mayors?

Our strong will and the full support of the people are the reason why we have completed our economic reforms. We saved 37 billion pesos last year from the reforms and now we are returning this to the people as more opportunities for education, better health services, more production for farmers, more modern transportation facilities, more opportunities to find good jobs, and more housing projects. And why have we’ve been successful in so many housing projects all over the country? Because of our first HUDCC chairman, none other than Mike Defensor of Victorias, Negros Occidental.

Our saved budget has gone to better peace and order. And although we are here in Negros Occidental, I want to congratulate our law enforcement and military operatives for all that they have been doing for fusing their intelligence and tactical resources. And I want to congratulate General Ding Luna and all his men, because they have been keeping the peace in this mountainous areas like Bago City, Murcia and Southern Negros Occidental.

Kag dira naman sa Manila, I also want to congratulate our soldiers and policemen for fusing the intelligence resources to crack a terror ring threatening the national capital metropolis and preventing evil from taking more innocent lives. We aim for the peak of readiness to secure our people — indi lang sa Manila kon indi sa kabilugang Pilipinas — from harm every minute of the day. We will never put down our guard until terror is defeated, whether homegrown or spawned beyond our shores. And so because we have just preempted an attack on the metropolis in Metro Manila, I am directing the authorities to dig deeper into this latest conspiracy, expose the conspirators and their plans, and work with our communities to obtain effectively networked and synergized public vigilance.

All of these – our expenses for education, for housing, (as what Mike Defensor has started) for developments in renewable and clean air and energy, (as what Migs Zubiri is spearheading) together with our appointive officials – our progress has begun.

Let us continue to focus our attention so that the progress of our country continues. Let us continue to unite the people. Let us continue to work together so that we can achieve our dreams.

And so, to all of you, thank you for your continuing support. And thank you, PNOC-EDC for being such an important engine of national growth.

Long live us all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Commissioning Ceremony of the PNOC-EDC 49-MW Northern Negros Geothermal Power Plant (NNGPP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151804/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1952&Itemid=38