Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Cesar Purisima.

Mayor Rudy Duterte, thank you for agreeing once again to be the Chairman of the Regional Peace and Order Council. Rudy was already declining the nomination because he said he had served many years as Chairman of the RPOC maybe there should be new blood. When I found out about it, I called up Rudy long distance, and then I said, “Rudy, are you really not accepting the RPOC chairmanship?” “ma’am, sana gusto ko nang ibigay sa iba. Pero eh kung kayo ang nagsabi sa akin wala akong choice, tatanggapin ko.” Thank you very much, Rudy.

I would like to greet also, of course, our reelected, reappointed Chairman of the Regional Development Council, Chito Ayala, senior businessman of region XI. And with my reappointment to Chito comes my commitment to continue to support the Davao integrated development plan.

I would like to greet also Noemi Saludo and all of the officers of the PCCI whether from here in Davao or from Mindanao or from the Philippines, and there are many of you here who are not from Mindanao. And our host, MBC Chairman Antonio Santos, who was introducing himself to me earlier, “ma’am, ako si Tony Santos ‘yung sa Sentosa.” I keep staying there all the time and I keep seeing… Of course, Tony I remember you because Sen is named after your wife, Anise Antonio and son is Santos. So who can ever forget that Antonio Santos and his wife are the owners of Sentosa, successful businessmen in Cotabato City.

And I thank you for submitting to me today this action agenda which I will ask Cesar Purisma as your opposite number in the government to be in- charge of taking care of with regard to the recommended actions for the government.

And now, before anything else, let me thank you. Thank you for inviting me to be here with you today once again. Thank you for your hospitality. Thank you for this very clear action agenda. And thank for your affection and confidence. Thank you for making me win in Mindanao in the last elections.

Today, we are called upon to close ranks, to stick together, to work harder, to endure more sacrifices and muster greater courage to face a rough road ahead.

We need to come to terms with our past and present obligations, and resolve to win back national stability and future growth.

I thank you for always talking about my ten points in my inaugural address. If anything, I realized that everybody remembers that. In my inaugural address last June, I outlined my legacy for national stability and future growth in ten points. And you all know there are ten points. But to remember what these ten points are as a memory aid, I use the acronym “BEAT THE ODDS” — B-E-A-T T-H-E O-doble D- S.

B is for a balanced budget. And that’s what I’ll talk about today. E is for education for all. A is for automated elections. T is for transport and digital infrastructure to connect the entire country. That’s why we have our roll on/roll off ferry system and nautical highways specifically intended to bring the products of Mindanao to Luzon. That’s B-E-A-T for “BEAT.”

Now, the T-H-E. T is for terminate the MILF and NPA conflicts — peace. And I’m glad that your agenda is for just, equitable and lasting peace. And that is the second ‘T’ of my ten-point agenda. H is for healing the wounds of EDSA. E is for electricity and water for the entire country. That’s e, T-H-E “THE.”

And finally, “ODDS.” O-doble D-S. O is for opportunities for 10 million jobs. And this ten million jobs I’m hoping that three million will come from SMEs and with the two billion Quedancor arrangement today for Mindanao, I hope a lot of those three million jobs from the SMEs and micro enterprises will come from Mindanao. The other one is agri-business and I’ll talk about that in awhile. D is for decongesting Metro Manila by developing new centers for government, business and housing in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. Ds is for the tenth, it’s for develop Subic-Clark. That’s my “BEAT THE ODDS,” my acronym, my battlecry. And I hope it will be your battlecry as well. Let’s ” BEAT THE ODDS.”

For those of you who were at Luneta and for those of you who watched TV, I think you noticed that when I talked about the ten points in my legacy agenda, I specifically mentioned Mindanao when I talked about developing new centers for government, business and housing. Though of course the SMEs, the transport infrastructure, the MILF peace process, all of those are very much related and involved in Mindanao. But let me talk about this new government centers. The center for government that I have put in Mindanao is the Department of Agriculture. And Arthur Yap is here, isn’t he? He was… Okay. He’s going to spend the nigh here because he has to sleep in Mindanao because his wife already likes Mindanao. You gotta stay here because Mindanao is going to be the center for agriculture. Why? Because Mindanao is the food basket of the country.

But we’re developing other centers as well: tourism in Cebu, land reform in IIoilo, transportation in Clark. And to integrate all of these, however, I have chosen a Mindanaoan, a Davaonon to be my Presidential Adviser for new government centers, and that’s none other than former Governor Dolfo Del Rosario. Together with him in the Cabinet is the Secretary for Mindanao Economic Development. MEDCO has been elevated to the rank of Cabinet member and that’s headed by Secretary Jess Dureza. So, we have Secretary Dolfo Del Rosario and Secretary Jess Dureza ably representing Mindanao in our Cabinet. And they both come from Davao. Davao imperialism within Mindanao. But in any case, it’s just a recognition that Davao is indeed a member of economic development in Mindanao. And even Mindanao being a food basket is most fully developed in this area. And we hope that the expertise of these two gentlemen will help spread that food basket role of Mindanao to the rest of the island.

The most recent high-profile example of Mindanao as food basket is yesterday’s tie-up between Davao’s Nenita quality food corporation and the Pampanga meat processors. For Nenita to supply at least 10 tons of boxed frozen mean cuts weekly to Pampanga meat processors. This will open up a new market for Mindanao’s hog raisers while it lessens Pampanga’s dependence on imported meat. You see, Pampanga was going to import meat because it was running out of raw materials for its processing industry. But there is a surplus in Mindanao, and this is what we mean by a transport and digital infrastructure that links the entire country. This is what we mean by Mindanao being the food basket of the rest of the country. So, to the Nenita people here, congratulations! On this exemplary achievement. By the way, being a Capampangan I’m glad about this exchange between Pampanga and Davao. But earlier this morning I witnessed another exchange between Pampanga and Davao — Cyber City. Ah, let me go to that later. Let me just say that as far as the Nenita is concerned, we need more of these highways of trade and cooperation across the archipelago.

Because Mindanao is the food basket of the country, I’d like to develop Mindanao as the agri-business center of the country. In my inauguration I said, that I want to develop two million hectares of agri-business land. And I want a lot of those two million hectares to be right here in Mindanao. As for housing, I shall rely on the private sector to respond to the housing policies that I put in place during my first term, which the housing industry says are the most housing-friendly policies in our history.

Now, to go back to what I was saying about Mindanao, Davao and Pampanga. I’m happy that earlier this morning, I inaugurated the first call center in Mindanao, right here in Davao City. That first call center is an expansion of Cyber City Corporation based in Clark. So it is another major action, commercial transaction between Pampanga and Davao. I’m especially proud that that call center has been set up here in Davao, the first in Mindanao.

Before I became President, there were less than 2,000 Filipinos employed in call centers and other business process outsourcing, which is part of the ICT industry. This year, there will be 60,000. From 2,000 to 60,000 in three and half years. That’s how much the ICT industry grew in our administration. ICT is the growth sector of the future together with other skills intensive, labor intensive service sectors like tourism. And I’m very glad, speaking of tourism, that Davao is one of the eight top tourist attractions in the Philippines.

Davao is one of the eight top tourist attractions in the Philippines because, of course, there’s the natural beauty. There are the beautiful resorts and hotels already here, so there’s carrying capacity. There’s a beautiful airport and there is peace and order. Thank you Rudy. The airport is beautiful but a beautiful airport is not enough. It’s got to be well run and well maintained. Unfortunately, for our beautiful airport here its been a losing proposition. Not to fret but there are only two income-earning airports in the whole country to begin with. Its only the Manila International Airport and the Cebu International Airport. So what I agreed with Rudy when we were discussing in the car today was that I will put the Davao international airport under the jurisdiction of the NAIA international airport so that NAIA’s surplus income can be used to finance some of the maintenance and improvement requirements of Davao International Airport. We really need to link the entire country even as we continue to work for a federal form of government.

For the economy as a whole, I’m glad that we have posted — and congratulations to Cesar Purisima — an impressive growth in investments of 493 percent over the last seven months, more or less that Cesar has been the secretary of trade and industry. And we have posted a GDP growth of 6.2 percent in the last quarter. There are very few countries in the region that grew faster than that. Maybe only India and China and Vietnam, or China, India and Vietnam in that order. Laos is just about the same or less, lower than us.

Our fiscal position in the first half of this year, like 2001 and 2003 — not 2002, that was awful — was within our targeted deficit ceiling. But we must all recognize that the situation can deteriorate as fast as we are building on our precious and hard-earned gains.

Yes, there is hope for our country. Our growth rate says so. Our investment rate says so. But it must be fueled by the fullest commitment to sacrifice.

Our gains can only be institutionalized by greater enterprise and discipline. For instance, to develop Mindanao as the food basket of the country requires productivity and efficient transport and logistics. These require huge investments in infrastructure, in electric power — some headlines today talked about an impending power crisis in Mindanao if we don’t invest in it now. And in knowledge, it requires over huge expenditures for other basic government services. And so we need funding, but the government cannot keep borrowing and borrowing to finance infrastructure and services. And Napocor in particular cannot keep borrowing and borrowing to provide the electric power needed to support our growth requirements.

Yes, we feel that access to local and foreign financial markets, and this indicate that investor confidence is still there but it doesn’t mean that we should grab all the offers of those who want to lend to us because every borrowing we make is an increase in our deficit. Every borrowing we make must still be budgetted. In other words, if you talk about a budget of a trillion pesos, of that budget, 800 billion will be financed by taxes, 200 billion will be financed by borrowing. So, it still has to be in a budget.

I say this because I was reading a column the other day saying that I presented my projects for Mindanao. But it turns out that they’re actually from ODA. But even if they’re from ODA they must be in the budget unless they’re grant. And every expenditure that’s financed by borrowing is a contribution to increasing our deficit. And we cannot grow based on borrowed funds all the time because it will catch up with us. The interest payments will catch up with us. The time will come, as it is coming, that we’re using our budget to pay interest rather than to build infrastructure — to build roads, ports, airports, and other requirements like power plants.

It’s my duty to bring forth the truth and the reality we must all face today, that our economy cannot endure for long without getting revenues, not from borrowing but from those who can most afford it.

Our external debt-to-GDP ratio at 71 percent is the third highest in Asia, while our ratio to GDP… Revenue-to-GDP at 4.1 percent is the second lowest. BIR’s collection-to-GDP ratio for 2004 was a meager 10 percent.

So, we need to bridge the gap to finance our growth requirements, so that the world will take us seriously and continue to pitch in for our future growth. Because once written off by the world — and we are not there yet, thank God! — once written off by the world, we write off our own future. So, let’s face it now and not be in denial before the world imposes the truth upon us.

We need to raise over a 180 billion pesos by prudent paring of expenditures, a better plug on financial leaks, and a more rational, equitable and effective system of collecting revenues.

We cannot tarry and we cannot postpone the pain. Better to have some pain now and feel the gain two years from now than postpone the pain now and have debt throes two years from now.

Our nation can sustain and even expand its growth, but only by the balm of national solidarity and collective responsibility. I know no traditional politician would ever state the challenge in this manner, or even dare to ask the people to sacrifice more at a time when they feel that they’re already suffering. But as President, if I’m to be an honest President, I must do so in all candor because our people deserve no less than the truth from their leader.

The worst thing I can do under the circumstances is to perpetuate complacency over an issue of national survival. On this score, I know the pain of suffering the brunt of public disappointment and displeasure. I am not a stranger to unpopularity.

But I cannot shrink from the responsibility of prescribing the bitter pill. I’m responsible for informing you, the people, of all vital matters affecting your lives.

My economic managers headed by Cesar have presented a package of measures to generate 80 billion pesos in revenues. And we are working on executive reforms to raise or save a 100 billion pesos, marking the start of our earnest journey to permanent economic stability.

New revenues are needed not to overcome not just our economic challenges — you know for growth, investment, infrastructure — but to overcome the poverty that keeps millions of Filipinos living in sub-standard conditions that shame us all, especially in Muslim Mindanao which is the poorest region in our country.

And because we must remember that we need these revenues not only for growth but for fighting poverty, I’m prepared to work with congress on a system under which identified new revenue sources can be earmarked for the most vital pro-poor programs such as health, housing and education.

The money raised through new revenue must be spent wisely, that’s why the government is working to root out waste. I’m personally leading efforts to cut government expenditures without reducing the quality and quantity of basic services. We’re making every peso of taxpayers’ money work where it counts most. You know, I’ve been spending my time reading the small print in the annexes of DPWH, DOTC, DepEd to make sure that every road, every port, every schoolbuilding is being spent on in accordance with the highest priority, not something that’s in the middle of priorities.

Fiscal discipline, austerity, rationalization — these are the bywords in the cabinet. As for the GOCC’s they are being pruned and whipped into line.

We’re sharpening collection efficiency, expanding our revenue army and moving decisively against those found cheating. The unpatriotic who engage in corporate and governmental corruption will be identified, publicized, punished. The time for avoiding taxes is over.

And as I pledged in my inaugural address and in my state of the nation address, the revenue drive will be tougher on those who have had it easy than on those who have already had it tough.

We are prepared to begin by using friendly persuasion. That’s why I’m glad congress first bill passed into the committee report is on the amnesty. On the part of the executive, our friendly persuasion will consist in inviting the top 50,000 corporate and individual taxpayers to add a million pesos more to what they are paying in a bid to have a strong start. I tell you some of those 50,000 are in this room today.

This is a time of shared goals and shared burdens. But let me take this opportunity to say that I’m proud of the Filipinos who have shown a deeper sense of community, starting from the alumni of Silliman University in Negros Oriental, who donated their jewelry during their homecoming, followed by government employees of several agencies. And I don’t want the agency heads to make their employees do it. It has to be totally voluntary.

I’m proud also and thankful to the businessmen — some of whom are here today — who contributed to what has become the “Bayanihan fund.” I’m proud of the OFWs worldwide. Like the ones in Brunei who gave me specific schools that they will build schoolbuildings for. And I must say I’m grateful to the members of congress who have offered meaningful sacrifices in the spirit of mutual determination to bite the bullet and move forward. All this indicates a groundswell of patriotic fervor and unity. And I thank everybody for that fervor. And of course, I’m grateful not only for those who’re doing it today but for those who’ve done it all these years.

I treasure the patriotism of those who through all these years with utmost diligence and constancy have paid their share of taxes. These are the taxpayers who truly live for the nation and dedicate their lives and work towards it, work for it, who cast their stone in the edifice of the republic beyond the pale of fanfare or glory.

To these honest taxpayers, I say:

My beloved countrymen, I know how much you sacrifice your time and talent for your families. Therefore, I am very grateful that you are also sacrificing for our nation.

Yes, there are still those who abuse, those who cheat, but their days are numbered. What is important is that there are people like you who love our country.

Our country needs your help now so that we can continue to stand strong.

Thank you very much for your generosity.

Our taxes are for a beautiful future for our children, for our motherland. And so, to the members of the very dynamic Davao business community, the very promising Mindanao business community, to all of you, thank you for this action agenda. Thank you for your willingness to beat the odds and build prosperity for the greatest number of Mindanaonons and Filipinos.

Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 13th Mindanao Business Conference (MINBIZCON). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133205/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5696&Itemid=38