Thank you Ric. Thank you for the introduction. And I’d like to congratulate you, I just learned this morning about your very active involvement in environmental conflict resolution. Congratulations, that’s a very good work of the BBC in what you’ve been doing.

Archbishop Lagdameo and the other bishops who are leaders and active members of the BBC, Lani Nañagas and the other lay leaders of the BBC, and I would like to mention some of them Ping Jaime, Joe Concepcion and Tito Carlos. And I would like to mention some of the other leading bishops, Bishop De Dios Pueblos and all of you who are here today.

To all of you, I would like to begin by thanking your flock and your clients in the part of the businessmen and your workers and the people in general, once again, for my new mandate as President.

I have been attending the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference every year. And I think it is very important for me to attend this gathering, because it is important that we remember that whether we are Church members or doing our work in the secular world, everything must be done according to the Divine Will.

This is what I have always tried to do both in my private life and in my public life. During the half-term that I served as President in my last administration, I believe, it was with the great support of the Church and the business community that we were able to make a strong start in fighting for change.

We turned the economy around and stabilized the mess we inherited. We made gains, unprecedented gains in housing, in health care, and we made gains in anti-corruption. Among our gains in anti-corruption in my previous tenure, the World Bank has especially acknowledge our lifestyle checks and our procurement reforms.

I would like to greet Secretary Bert Romulo and the other members of the Cabinet who are here. The Cabinet, the Business Community, the Church, helped me in covering good ground, in good legislation, not only the procurement reforms but also the anti-money laundering law. A good law which we hope to be able to implement properly to get our seal of good housekeeping by using the law to catch the big fish in corruption.

The Bureau of Customs and the Internal Revenue have chalked up steady gains in collection. Much of this, of course, is due to the increased economic activity and increased imports therefore and earnings, but some of it at least its also due to the reduction of graft. But all this was just a downpayment in my previous administration. It was not good enough I am not satisfied and more must be done.

In my inaugural address last June 30, I said that governmental numbness and corruption are immoral while the poor lack sufficient food, education, housing, and water. I also said that I will crack down on wasteful and abusive officials and influence peddlers.

In that speech, I pledged to collect taxes mandated by law even as I said I would stop extortion masquerading as tax collection. I ask you the businessmen to pay your taxes. I ask you not to pretend to be innocent when you are caught. I told you I will crack-down on tax cheats. And finally, in that speech, I ended it by challenging myself, and our government to live up to the highest standards of honesty and competence in public service.

Integrity is not only an important aid to the success of a development program. It is part of the good life that we seek for our people. In a wholesome society, there should be integrity in the government and among the people.

I received a letter from Joe Concepcion last Friday, and since he used to be my boss in the DTI, I always listen to what he has to say. In his letter he said: that the general view among the bishops is that graft and corruption is the main cause of poverty in our country.

And as I said in my speech, corruption is truly immoral while the people lack basic necessities. That is one of the sources of the people’s lack of basic needs.

Joe Concepcion also said that the anti-corruption campaign in the belief of the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference is indispensable to poverty alleviation and I agree with you.

I will work diligently in the next 6 years to fight corruption. But as I spoke plainly in my inaugural address, I would also like to speak plainly today. I have no illusions, I know that fighting corruption is an up hill battle. Grafters are not easy prey. They have accessed expert legal assistance. They maybe in cahoots with rogue elements in the criminal justice system from compromised law enforcers, prosecutors to judges and justices. That is why I need earnest partners in what could otherwise be a lonely battle against corruption. And I am glad that as we start a new beginning, I can count on your partnership to fight for unprecedented change that stamps out corruption.

I expect the Cabinet to work closely with the Bishop-Business Conference to

crack enforceable doable not motherhood anti-corruption programs. Again,along the salient points in Joe Concepcion’s letter:

One, the need for specially trained prosecutors and investigators to act on all cases of graft and corruption.

Two, the need to involve all sectors at all levels to scrutinize projects that are willfully made transparent so that the people especially the poor can actually see the benefits accruing to them from governance.

I remember in an earlier BBC meeting that I attended , you were going to form watchdog groups to look at the actual implementation of projects to see whether there were ghosts projects or not, to see whether there was cheating in the specifications or not, I think, that we should revive this.

When I was Secretary of DSWD, I deliberately put the NGOs doing social work as part of the bidding committee for whatever small purchases or big purchases the DSWD was making during my watch. I hope that we can work on that together in this new beginning.

A third item that was pointed out by Joe Concepcion is that the terms of bidding of government funded projects and all other contracts or agreements of government with the private sector should be made clear and available for public scrutiny without exception unless national security is involved. I think, that was part of the controversy of PIATCO, the terms of the original contract were never made public and I would not want that to happen in this administration.

Fourth, in general, ensuring transparency, accountability, participation and communication as a vehicle for good governance.

Today, is an important occasion for communication. Indeed, it is important that we work together for good governance. And I would not want to think that I am the one that can conceptualize everything that must be done. That is why I thank the Bishop Businessmen’s Conference, I thank Joe Concepcion for summarizing your thoughts as a body and presenting them as concrete doable proposals. And I would like my Cabinet to work with you on carrying out these proposals.

We have here Secretary Romulo who has been the model of what shall I call the personification of integrity in my administration. We have here Bobie Tiglao who as my Chief of Staff has been overseeing the much applauded by the World Bank lifestyle checks and other measures with regard to working on improving transparency in government, in fact, he heads the transparency group. And so, I am asking them to quarter back our collaboration with the Bishop Businessmen’s Conference on these four items that I summarized from the letter of Secretary Joe Concepcion.

It is important that we work together and it is important that we plod and be bold in our resolve. I recognized that graft in government can not be crushed in a single stroke, as a dragon could be killed with a swing of Saint Michael’s sword.

I realized that graft cannot be washed away in one sweep like dirty stables with Herculean douse of water. What I have learned is that graft and corruption can be addressed and cured like a fowl infected wound. It must be healed by patient, constant, steady disinfecting, scraping and cleansing. Because graft and corruption in government and in society have been a serious problem for the Philippines for a long time. It tends to aggravate as politicians and officials have increasingly converted politics and public office into a business. In fact, graft and corruption are part of the symptoms of a weak state that they want to transform into a strong Republic. The weak state that our generation of Filipinos have inherited including a large gap between rich and poor, a gap that has been exploited many times for political ends. A weak state includes a political system based on patronage and ultimately corruption to support patronage. But the greatest ally of graft is our own complacency and sense of utility, the belief that graft is undefeatable and therefore not worthy of our fullest sacrifice.

It is no longer the mere threat of corruption that bothers us but the ominous culture of corruption that has gripped our institutions. Changing a culture or eradicating it is by no means a walk in the park or a short trip. It takes time methodical persistence and collective determination to succeed.

When I was waiting for the canvassing to be over, I spent a lot of time in prayer. I spent a lot of time in many convents, but of course I also did governance work. One time in one of the trips that combined my governance work and my cloistered prayer, I mentioned to the nuns in the convent where I was, that I was going to a particular very very poor town, far away town in that province because I was going to bring a package of community development and social programs funded by the World Bank. And the sister told me, Oh! I know that town. That town has island barangays. And those island barangays have no religious instruction. And when the girls moved to the city and worked in households, because they have no religious instruction they are immoral and they steal. Well, I said sister, if they are poor they will enter a household and steal. And if they become more educated they will enter the government and they will also steal. It is part of the problem of our culture.

When I was a young girl we used to teach catechism to the students in the public schools. We were high school, they were grade school, preparing them for their first communion, they would teach catechism surely we had no heresies because the catechism was cut and dried and somehow at least there was that daily or weekly those of thinking about the divinity and therefore about morality. I understand that is been gone for the last 30 years. And I think one of the things we must revive is values formation in our basic education.

So, in that little town with a little island barangays where there is no religious instruction, I instructed one of the government corporations earning surplus money to fund a values formation, education program in the barangay days care centers that I have set up as part of that community development program. That is one set of barangays out of 45,000 barangays in our country. It is a tall order a long long lists and I hope the businessmen and the bishops could put together that values formation program that we can bring back to our youth. So that when they become members of society, whether they work in a household or in a business firm, whether they work in government they will not bring a culture of corruption, not bring a culture of immorality, but rather bring a culture of fear of God and care for the good values of our society. That I think is one of the challenges of the Bishop-Businessmen’s Conference, because we must put God back into the secular world.

The confluence of this spiritual realm and the realm of enterprise in this gathering, augurs well for your fitting team. New beginnings, new hope constant faith.

The partnership of the Church, business and government is indispensable in the fight for change. And so, now that I am here once again, but for a new beginning, I look forward to the bishops, the businessmen and our bureaucracy to fight together to change the culture of corruption. Let us make that our mission for the next six years for the good of the future generations of Filipinos.

Thank you and congratulations.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference for Human Development 28th General Assembly and Annual Meeting. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133404/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5688&Itemid=38