Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Japan Business Seminar

[Delivered at the Kaikan Tokyo Hotel, Tokyo, Japan, May 23, 2007]

Thank you. Thank you Ambassador Siazon.

Other officials of the Philippine government; Chairman (Tohru) Tsuji; Chairman of the Marubeni and Chairman of the JPECC; Chairman Laurel of PHILJECC; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, I’d like to begin by thanking and congratulating the organizers and co-organizers of this event. And to say that we are elated to see all of you in this business seminar.

Japanese-Philippine relations have never been stronger: there has been a welcome influx in Japanese tourists, an impressive upswing in Japanese direct investment, and in another notable area, Japan has made a major contribution to peace and stability in Mindanao in Southern Philippines.

The strengthening of economic ties between our two nations has been based in part on the growing strength of the Philippine economy which our two speakers have already discussed. It is providing more and better investment opportunities for Japanese companies.

The Philippines is a competitive location for all companies looking to establish or expand their operations in the Asia-Pacific region. We are right in the middle of this region. We offer a strategic location in a fast-growing region. Our workforce is well educated, productive and English speaking. Our strength lies in education and training of our people and the package of reforms that we have done.

Through hard-fought economic reform battles we have led, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose of its lethargic economic legacy. New revenues, better collection and a crackdown on tax evaders along with fiscal discipline has put the Philippines on a path to permanent economic growth and stability.

There has been a sea change in the Philippines in the past few years. We have broken the back of fiscal irresponsibility. With our revenue, fiscal and investment policies we are charting a new economic course. Our fiscal performance in the past few years is a reflection of the significant progress we have made in putting our fiscal house in order. We have lowered our budget deficit. We have raised unprecedented amounts of revenue. We demonstrated that we have the ability to keep our budget under control. We have delivered 25 consecutive quarters of economic growth. And if you will remember, some of the quarters of this years 2001 to 2007, some of our neighbors experience recession during that period but our economic growth was consistent quarter after quarter. Our commitment to make the difficult decisions to reform our economy has been a major contributor to these achievements.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in more of a decade. UBS recently said in a research report that the Philippines is one of the few countries that will experience stronger growth this year than in 2006.

To instill permanent change because we want this growth and development to be permanent, we will continue the reforms. The short answer to continuing the economic growth is summed in three words: invest, invest, invest. We are committed to raising the revenues needed to balance our budget and to invest in our country and our people. We are following up the pain of tax raising measures with the gain that come from significant investments in people and projects. We are continuing a balanced path of targeted investment and overall restraint while enhancing our revenues. That way we will truly ensure that the progress cannot be reversed.

We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in human capital like education, health care, social services and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines. This, we hope in turn, will in turn will attract more foreign investments such as yours and create more jobs, ultimately improving the lives of our people.

Our strategy for the Philippines is to improve and strengthen global competitiveness. That’s why we emphasize investment in physical infrastructure and in human capital, also in efficient access to financing, and in lower transaction flows and cost of doing business by cutting down red tape and minimizing corruption.

We have undertaken a strong and steady effort to curb graft and corruption through criminal justice, administrative controls and procedural reforms. This effort is focused on the tax and customs collection agencies, which as a result have improved their performance in recent years; also agencies that are in the frontline of day-to-day public services; and of day-to-day dealings with businessmen; and local governments. We take this issue very seriously. And we are pleased that progress is being made.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. We are proud of the fact that external debt is being prepaid. We are attempting to balance the budget in 2008, two years ahead of schedule based on our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. And we are making sure as I’ve said earlier to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs. We will not sacrifice long term gains for short term political expediency.

Chairman (Tohru) Tsuji said that about ten days ago, Filipinos demonstrated our political stability through peaceful, fair and free elections. The message of our elections was that the Philippine economy is stable and strong. And as Chairman (Tohru) Tsuji said, even as the national elections are still being canvassed, in the congressional and local elections, the results are already very clear, an overwhelming majority of candidates sympathetic to the administration has emerged victorious. Some of them are here with us today the justly elected congressman from Batangas, Congressman Mandanas; the justly elected congressman from Bicol, Congressman Lagman and in fact, the wife of our chairman of the Technical and Education Skills Development Authority who’s also here today has just been reelected in her constituency and our foreign minister has given us a new member of Congress in his son. And they are here, I suppose as a way of demonstrating, the path we have set for economic reform has not been upset by partisan politics. Politics will not undo our economic progress.

We can continue on the path we have set for putting people ahead of politics by focusing relentlessly on the economy. Our administration will focus on pro-growth, pro-trade and pro-investment strategies that help lift up our people from poverty and help the Philippines be in contention as a real investment destination. We are a good business environment getting even better.

The world is taking notice; we know that our Japanese friends and investors are. In fact, late last year, the company of Chairman Suji, Marubeni and Tokyo Electric Power purchased power plants in the Philippines for some $3.5 billion and announced another $500 million dollars expansion, the biggest single investment package by a Japanese group in the Philippines. Earlier this year, as mentioned by our chairman of PHILJEC, Mr. Francis Laurel, we attended the groundbreaking of a new Toyota transmission production facility in south of Manila.

The strong increase in investment has also recently been anchored by the announcement of an American company Texas Instruments to invest $1 billion to build a chip plant in the Philippines, which they chose over other locations including china. Korea’s Hanjin is constructing a billion dollar shipyard north of Manila similar to Tsuneishi’s $600 million shipyard in the Philippine island of Cebu. This is happening across the board in a number of industries. We are working to ensure that this will be sustained.

The Philippines has arrived. It is one of the best values for money in Asia for investors. The Marubeni-Tokyo electric investment, the Texas Instruments investment, the Hanjin investment, the Tsuneishi investment, the Toyota investment and many more across the board in a number of industries are the validation that our strategy is working.

We also like to think that the Texas Instruments investment is a validation of the quality of the Filipino worker and the quality of the infrastructure and facilities at the Clark Freeport Zone in my home province where the new plant will be located. And we worked hard to present them and other investors like you with an incentive package that is very competitive.

The Japanese businesses and the Japanese government through aid, trade and investment, have been longstanding partners of the Philippines.

Japan is indeed an important partner. And as mentioned by Chairman Suji, the Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement is a milestone in our relationship. And we have here also in our delegation the Chairman of the foreign relations committee of the Senate, Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago, who will shepherd and sponsor the ratification of the agreement in the Senate. The Japan-Philippine Economic Partnership Agreement is about bringing advantages to both nations while eliminating disadvantages. The implementation of any free trade agreement requires adjustment for both parties, but this agreement will benefit both of our economies.

The agreement will bring about liberalization of trade and services between our two countries, facilitation and greater liberalization of investment, and enhanced technical cooperation and capacity building. It will promote an increased flow of resources and help create a bigger market that will provide greater opportunities and larger economies of scale for both Philippine and Japanese businesses.

It will improve access of Philippine products and services for the Japanese market. It will immediately have a positive impact on Filipino farmers, fishermen and food processors because bananas, pineapples, crabs, shrimps, and chicken and tuna from the Philippines will have better access in Japan. Japanese industries on the other hand will be able to supply the Philippine manufacturing sector with critical inputs like Japanese specialty steel products, auto and auto parts, and electrical and electronic appliances and parts. Textiles and apparel will enjoy market access mutually in both countries, and with limited exceptions, the agreement enhances Philippine service providers’ access to the Japanese market and guarantees non-discriminatory treatment. And for the first time, a historic first, Japan will accept foreign health workers — Filipino nurses and caregivers who are in great demand all over the world. On top of this, we hope to see more trade in business outsourcing which was mentioned by Mr. Laurel, and tourism, in maritime and air transport, in banking and telecommunications.

In sum, Japan is a valued development, trade and investment partner of the Philippines. And we Filipinos would like to see a further intensification and deepening of these cooperative links. More investment, more trade and trade agreements, more cooperation on peace in Mindanao, more visits and exchanges are all welcome.

And so we urge you, participants in this business seminar and leaders of the Japanese business community to come to the Philippines and explore all that the country has to offer you and your business.

Once again we thank the organizers and participants of this event for showing your interest in our country. Hope to see you there in the Philippines.

Arigato, thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Japan Business Seminar. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150551/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2011&Itemid=38