Thank you for putting this program very quickly together with our NGO partner ‘Go Negosyo’.

Secretary Peter Favila, Secretary of Trade and Industry, and therefore the boss of the SB Corporation and all of the agencies that deal with small business enterprise. And Egay Generoso and all of the other microfinance sources from government who are here today.

To all of you government employees, government workers, belated happy Labor Day to all of you!

Yesterday, Espie Ocampo and I, the president of the Government Employees Association, were at the Folk Arts Theater because Labor Day was celebrated there. And I said yesterday that part of our Labor Day celebration – because this is a three-day celebration – the day before we had a special service for job training for workers, the accreditation, fast and free accreditation of workers who need to have certification of skills. And we also launched the electronic training of TESDA. Then yesterday was the main event or the unifying event. And today is for government workers.

Our government workers are the new pillars of the power of the people. And this is your new pillar of power ‘Go Negosyo, Go Gobyerno’. I know in the government, they say the entry point of the government and the entry point of the private sector have the same salary. In fact, public school teachers earn more than private school teachers. But as we go up the hierarchy, the private sector catches up, it takes over. So when we go already to the specialist level, division chiefs, and higher and higher, the private sector is left behind. So they said back in the day when I was studying economics, they said that there is a psychic income in the public sector, and that explains the difference. But as it expands and expands, that psychic income is no longer enough for you in serving the people. So it is natural that you expect to have a second source of income. Or maybe your spouses, your eldest children to help with the family livelihood. Livelihood is our goal to uplift the security and dignity of every Filipino.

This is the strong unity of the government and the NGO sector, the private sector to promote excellence and self-reliance. And you, government employees, can be a model and inspiration for those who want to start a business.

You are indeed an inspiration to many because microfinance funds come from you or training comes from you to create simple project studies. But you should also be among those who benefit because you are also citizens of the Philippines.

After the celebration of Labor Day yesterday, these moments are another boost for our diligent sector-citizens. You work diligently to grow the economy. You work diligently to deliver blessings to our people. There are the DAR employees who deliver blessings to our farmers. And you work diligently to further strengthen our democratic institutions. There are the NBI, there are many agencies like the DTI, NEA to grow our economy.

And here is Myrna Yao, she was the one who hosted me, us. Perhaps some of you were there, the female employees. When we celebrated Women's Month in March, I said that we would give our government personnel the opportunity to benefit from our expanding microfinance programs. And now, we proudly launch the business capital for government employees or ‘Go Negosyo, Go Gobyerno’. As Cerge Remonde said, “A promise fulfilled”. Was that what you said earlier?

In this program, you can borrow without collateral. Because microfinance really doesn't have collateral. Small and medium loans do, those who borrow from banks, but microfinance doesn't. And the loan can be paid, this is the difference between you and other micro-entrepreneurs, you are… others do it instead of the style of the collectors, every week or every month someone comes to you to collect a portion of the loan because isn't it to ensure that you are really using it for the business you borrowed it for. But it's different with the government because you have a salary, especially if you are a civil servant, it's difficult to remove you from your position unless you have a case. So the difference between you and the average microentrepreneur is that you can pay your loan through salary deduction. So that is an advantage of government employees. If you want, it depends on you. Or you can have your cooperative pay it and they will just collect from you. Or you can also create associations like ordinary microfinance, microentrepreneurs create your own associations. That's what ordinary microentrepreneurs do who borrow from microfinance. For example, five women or twenty women, their debt is the debt of everyone. That is the essence of microfinance that originated in Pakistan, Dr. Yunos who won the Nobel Prize.

So I want to instruct the Philippine Government Employees Association, Espie Ocampo, to organize these microfinance associations of five women or 20 women so that the debt of one is the debt of all. You are therefore… you are guaranteeing one another, that is the essence of microfinance. So you have a choice: get it from your salary, have the cooperative pay for you first, or create an association, a self-employment association.

And microfinance is usually small. You can borrow five thousand pesos without collateral to be paid within three to six months. That's the usual microfinance.

However, you, because you have a salary, that's like the guarantee that the microfinance will be repaid, the government can give you more. Your cooperatives and organizations may borrow up to one hundred and fifty thousand pesos. Right, is that correct? Because the difference, the distinction, you have a salary that can be used to pay. And that is recorded with the government. Other microfinance usually have no other livelihood other than that. So that's… And not only that, it's not paid in three to six months, you can pay it for up to two years. Because as I said, most of you are civil servants. So we expect that unless you have a case, which is rare among civil servants, you will still be there for two years and we can be sure you will be able to pay. So you have blessings that cannot be given to ordinary microentrepreneurs.

But you, I know that many of you have been working in offices for a long time. Now, can those who work in offices do business? That is one question. And that is what Joey Conception, Mon Lopez always preach – it's possible, it's possible as long as we teach each other. So now part of the ‘Go Negosyo’ program… You know this NGO ‘Go Negosyo’ has many famous entrepreneurs who are members, big names. For example, first of all, Joey Concepcion who owns RFM; the owner of National Bookstore; the owner of Jollibee; the owner of SM; the children of Lucio Tan. And many more who are now big started small one or two generations ago. So part of ‘Go Negosyo’ is to share, tell you their experiences so that our new entrepreneurs can also learn what they did to succeed in business.

So part of this program, our government workers will have the opportunity to learn from successful entrepreneurs to share their experiences in launching and growing a business. But not only big entrepreneurs will teach you. There are also recent entrepreneurs, maybe five years ago or two years ago, who borrowed five thousand pesos. What did they do with their five thousand pesos? They can also tell you their story.

Earlier, when I was passing through the corridor, someone asked me for an autograph on a book. And this book is actually a collection of various experiences – big companies, medium-sized companies, small companies, successful micro companies.

And I hope that with the capital available to you, and the lessons you learned from the successful sectors, you will succeed in your family's second income.

We will also have, as Cerge Remonde said, a similar launch in Cebu and Davao in the next two weeks. Perhaps in Cebu next week, then Davao the week after.

And in the microfinance sector, the power of families to uplift themselves and rise from poverty is increasing throughout the Philippines. It adds to income, puts food on the table, and allows one or two more children to be educated in addition to the others.

This is part of the payoff of the hard-fought economic battles that we have led with some courageous members of Congress. Because of these hard fought battles, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose from its historic legacy of lethargy. In fact, only now are loans from banks having low interest rates. Loans from banks, housing loans up to six percent. Before, 14 percent was already low. Now, up to six percent. The common citizen, the common businessman, truly benefits.

The reason why the interest in microfinance is higher is because the lender has expenses going to your area. Because it is almost home service, as I said, the '5-6' style, but lower than that and without collateral. Those are the reasons why the interest in microfinance is higher. Even so, we say that while the interest in microfinance needs to be market-oriented, we say benchmark it more or less to the interest charged by Quedancor, that's also the interest charged by DSWD. Because we want you to choose a business where your income can pay for the interest. So this is not a handout in that sense. It is subsidized in the sense that there is no collateral and a large amount can be loaned and the loan repayment period is long. But it is not a handout, it is meant for you to pay back with market interest so that there is dignity in your second livelihood.

Let us use Joe Concepcion's often-repeated saying as our guide in promoting this. We are here at the PICC now. I remember this was built during the time… Oh, no, PTTC, during Joe Concepcion's time. And during his time there was a big sign outside – “Yes, the Filipino can.” And this is the message of 'Go Negosyo' – “Yes, the Filipino can be a successful entrepreneur.”

So all of you, “Yes, the government worker can be a successful entrepreneur.” So all of you, government workers, you can really do this. When we say the Filipino can, the Filipino can!

Good luck to your second income. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].