Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On Global Media and the RP Story

[Delivered at Dusit Hotel Nikko, Makati City, February 21, 2006]

In the era of globalization and instantaneous communication, indeed, the foreign press is anything but foreign. In fact, I think you should be renamed the global media because you serve the global marketplace. You help with transparency and you act as an essential catalyst in propelling our recent economic reforms.

The power of the global media has never been more ascendant than today.

This is certainly true in those areas like the economy, political reform and security. These three areas represent hurdles that the Philippines must overcome if we are to join the first world within the next 20 years, which is my dream.

Speaking of the next 20 years, we are also remembering the last 20 years. For the last 20 years, at this particular season, the annual search for the spirit of EDSA is always launched.

EDSA1 has become an enduring part of our history and we must honor the struggle of EDSA by continuing to reform our political system and bringing justice, especially social justice to the people.

The world embraced EDSA 1 in 1986. The world tolerated EDSA 2 in 2001. The world will not forgive an EDSA 3 but instead would condemn the Philippines as a country whose political system is hopelessly unstable, and the Filipinos as among the finest people in the world, but who manage to shoot themselves in the foot. Under those circumstances that an EDSA 3 would bring about, who would invest money in the Philippines? How would we bring social justice to the people?

Today, we need people power of a different type.

People power, such as what we find in the muddy fields of St. Bernard, where citizens use bare hands to claw through the earth to rescue kith and kin and soldiers bivouac through the night with the people trapped in darkness so they can see the light of dawn.

People power present in the decision of businessmen in Cebu to commission a whole ship, load it with goods and let it sail in bad weather so that it can appear overnight in the shores of Leyte.

People power present in Gawad Kalinga communities, where sweat mixes with cement to form mortar that makes sturdy homes.

People power present in Moro communities, where former warriors beat cannons into plowshares.

People power in the shop of every Filipino entrepreneur j who believes that for Filipino talent not to go away, jobs must be here to stay.

There is as much gallantry in performing our civic duties without fanfare or publicity, or in owning up to the taxes we should pay, or in picking up litter on the street as in picking up one’s guns to fight off tyrants or invaders.

There is more valor in being focused and right rather than in being spectacular or popular. The economic reforms of 2005 are a case in point.

Our now improving credit ratings, our strengthened peso and therefore our lower cost of imports including oil products, our high stock market, the new investments coming in, our reduced debt service, and the best fiscal situation we’ve had in years are due in large part to our focus on the fundamentals of the economy. But beyond that and deeper than that, they are also due to tough decisions that had been unpopular and that had made me an easy target by my opponents.

But, though my survey numbers have dropped, we forged ahead. Within weeks of passing our E-VAT, the global markets took notice. And most often, it was the global news media that helped convey the message.

I am determined to continue on a path of economic reform. I also intend to pursue political reform to ensure greater stability and to diminish the political effect on the Philippine economy. Political maneuvering has become our most active industry, including people who parlayed their presence in EDSA a long time ago into a lifetime franchise of working against governments whose leaders do not curtsy before them.

I understand the challenges that remain ahead for the Philippines. We need to quicken the pace of reforms. I’ve now been investing to modernize our infrastructure and upgrade the quality of life for our citizens. I can do so now because we now have the fiscal controls and revenue to lower the debt and invest in the people.

Our contract with the taxpayers involves reimbursing them with services that will increase their productivity, secure their future and allow them to live a life of dignity. We will close the gap between the rich and the poor without widening the budget deficit.

The tipping point of fiscal surplus is near. We will use our new revenues to feed our children’s hunger for food and for knowledge. Of all the investments I make, I am most focused on improved access to education.

We will wipe out the backlog in classrooms, textbooks and teachers. And to feed the children’s hunger for food, we will feed the nation by distributing seeds to farmers and deeds to lands they till and by developing two million new hectares of land for agri-business.

Higher value-added tax collection should also result in value-added protection of those who pay them. Thus, we will put more cops on the streets and more soldiers to enforce the peace, more guns in their armories, more radios in their hands, and more vehicles for patrolling and force mobility.

An improved bottom line would mean more bottoms for the navy and more aircraft for the air force.

The economy alone, unfortunately, is not our only challenge.

Our plan for 2006 has three goals: first, sustain the growth of our economy; second, accelerate the war against terrorism and fight destabilization and bring peace to Mindanao; third, implement the long-overdue political reforms through Charter change.

On security. The world has been made aware of the destructive power of terrorism, and the Philippines in addition has seen its political system become a hindrance to progress.

We have stood shoulder to shoulder with the world in the fight against terrorism. And the world, the international community, has stood by us in our fight against political destabilization. Our relations with the U.S., Europe and the rest of Asia have never been stronger. In fact, they have been true friends in this our hour of need.

We need global engagement if we are to become modern and competitive.

I have taken my obligation to the world seriously. At the U.N. As the President of the Security Council during the summit meeting and in the region through cooperation with our allies on anti-terrorism and interfaith dialogue.

And just last week, the United States lifted the Philippines from the Intellectual Property Priority watch list because of the steps we have taken to crack down on counterfeiting.

All of these initiatives are now coming together in a perfect storm of global cooperation to help resolve especially the situation in Mindanao. I am determined to bring peace to Mindanao with help from Filipinos, our neighbors like Malaysia, Indonesia and Brunei, and our friends in the U.S., Europe and the Middle East.

Peace in Mindanao will also allow the good people there and across the nation to focus on education and job creation, not violence and destruction. And it will narrow our focus on those few hardened international terrorists who still seek refuge in some of our distant jungles.

Today, I am very hopeful that we are near the summit of peace. From that summit, I hope to look upon a nation that is reforming itself through a new economic model and a new governance system to manage its way to modernity.

To tackle fundamental political reform, I have endeavored to increase tax collection by cracking down on fraud and deceit, and I have worked to empower local governments to service their constituents more effectively. But more fundamentally, we need reform of our constitution to make our government more responsive and less a roadblock for private enterprise.

I believe the Charter change initiative, like my economic policies, will unchain our society and allow it to grow and prosper. No more need for coups or sham people power in a Parliamentary System. Charter change will create greater political certainty.

As Charter change moves ahead, I will continue to focus on the economy and its reform.

And let me also make clear: I believe I am the best person to lead this nation through this transition. I was elected to make difficult decisions, and I have made them. Not without mistakes on my part, and certainly not without significant criticism. But I have the experience of hindsight, and I aim to fulfill my term with a steady hand on the helm.

And so I thank you all today for indulging my view, you of the global media. There is much to be done and I thank you the global media for being part of the Philippine story.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].