Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Gonzales for your introduction.

General Bangit; Vice Admiral Golez; the men and women of the Navy, the Fleet and the Marines; our awardees, ladies and gentlemen.

Long live all members of the Philippine Navy and Happy Anniversary!

Congratulations to our awardees and congratulations to our Navy Flag-Officer-in- Command, who will celebrate his 56th birthday soon, Vice Admiral Ferdinand Golez. Congratulations also to all his predecessors as Philippine Navy FOIC especially those who served since 2001.

You have presided over a sea-change in the Navy which started with the revisiting of your principles as I ordered early in my first term, and which came alongside our pursuit of modernization of the Navy over the years. The reforms in the Navy and indeed in the entire AFP resulted in re-energized personnel using better weapons and facilities. I was happy to see your state of the art communication services today. I was happy to see the equipment that you have put together, some of them that you have fashioned yourselves in order to save our people from the disasters of the past and disasters yet to come because of climate change.

I am happy to see what you have done with what other countries have helped us in naval assets. And I recall with gratification how we were able to provide all kinds of needed naval assets from the cyclone, which the U.S. government gave us during my first official visit in 2001, up to the rubber boat and now your new material boats which you need not only for rescue but for your battles in that many rivers and seaways of our archipelago. I cannot forget how we were so frustrated by the fact that the enemy would have faster boats than we and it was because we were concentrating our purchases on the bigger boats and realizing the need for the smaller boats in the waterways. But we were hampered because the procedure for buying a small rubber boat of a million pesos or less was the same procedure after buying one of the big BRPs.

So, when I was acting Secretary of National Defense, I decentralized the procurement of assets of one million pesos or less to our field commanders precisely so that you can buy those smaller but faster seacraft that can defeat our enemies.

Now, we have a trimmer yet meaner Philippine Navy, Philippine Fleet and Philippine Marines capable of doing battle against enemies of the state as well as against poverty and against natural disasters which as I said will be coming in greater frequency and intensity with climate change.

Our Navy’s achievements make me proud to have been your Commander-in-Chief. You have shown that the Navy can well defend our people’s rights and liberty against all manner of modern-day threats, whether homegrown like Abu Sabaya or offshore like the poachers that try to raid our seas off the shores of Palawan.

That battle which resulted in the fall of Abu Sabaya was spectacular. In fact, it has found its way into the annals of U.S. Doctrine, so congratulations for that! But we have had many other great victories, some of them participated in by some of our awardees today in Basilan, in Mantangguli, in Palawan which some day will become one of our premiere tourist attractions, but first we need you there to rid that island of the enemies of the state. And there is your Coast Watch together with the U.S. and also your joint patrols together with our neighbors in Southeast Asia.

And because I am so proud of all these that you have done, we listened attentively to the plans and visions of Admiral Golez even as he talked about his accomplishment. And I would like to say on this your anniversary, that I am very supportive of the intention of the Navy to procure your multi-role vessels.

I am happy to say that today on your anniversary, this is a great day for the Navy, and yesterday was a great day for our nation: the votes are coming in and the election was free, fair and open. Our democracy is strengthened by the power of the ordinary Filipinos who exercised their constitutional right to vote to shape the direction of our nation.

The new electronic voting was a great leap forward for ensuring a smooth and protected vote. I would like to think that it was a fulfillment of the automation that we pushed for from the start of our presidency. Since my first State of the Nation Address in 2001, I have asked Congress to finance the full computerization of elections. In the acronym BEAT-THE-ODDs which summarizes our 10-point medium-term agenda, the ‘A’ in the BEAT-THE-ODDs stands for automating our electoral process. We made it one of the top ten goals of our agenda because it is vital to national harmony. So to all who made automation a reality and a success, congratulations!

A true hallmark of a strong, functioning democracy is a smooth transition to a new government. As Admiral Golez will transition to a new leader of the Navy, so does the entire government soon.

The people deserve to have their new leaders and old leaders put aside politics and focus on the future and the business of governing. So, I call on the Navy and everyone else in our government: let us do everything in our power to make sure the new government has the benefit, from day one, of a strong, stable government ready to continue working on behalf of the people it was elected to serve.

You of the Armed Forces have once again done your part to ensure that our elections are safe from interference and to protect the sanctity of the ballot box. For your vigilance during the election, and of course, for every day you serve to protect the freedom. Thank you and congratulations!

As we wait for COMELEC and or Congress to officially determine the election winners, let us all respect the work that the dedicated men and women of COMELEC are carrying out. No matter which candidates emerge victorious, we must all respect the outcome and work with these newly elected officials to take our country forward.

We must now turn our sights to preparing for a new president, a new congress, and a new set of local government officials. To ensure a smooth transition to a new government, I am putting our government at the disposal of the incoming leadership. To that end, I have instructed Executive Secretary Leandro Mendoza to lead our Administration’s Transition Cooperation Team and to work closely with representatives of the next president to ensure a peaceful, orderly and effective transition on the 30th of June.

Our goal is to support a process that will help the next president hit the ground running as soon as they take office. The next president and his Cabinet, they will be assuming tremendous responsibility. We all need to do what we can to support them. Part of that responsibility includes serving as Commander-in-Chief and working with all sectors of our Armed Forces to ensure peace and order and protecting our shores from external aggression.

I count on you, the men and women of the Philippine Navy, and all other sectors of our Armed Forces to give the new Commander-in-Chief the same support and cooperation you have given me during my tenure as President of the Republic of the Philippines. And I take this opportunity to thank you for that support to me.

You have honored our country with you commitment to our Constitution. And so let us proceed with the transition.

Upon my instructions to Secretary Mendoza has already begun the transition process. He has prepared an Administrative Order which I have signed creating the Presidential Transition Cooperation Team. He is preparing the first draft of the transition blueprint for our discussion at today’s Cabinet meeting right after these ceremonies.

We hand over to the next Administration a nation that has a strong momentum on a number of fronts. We have been able to provide 37 quarters of consecutive growth in the Philippine economy since we took office. There is no other economic record in our nation’s modern history to match our overall economic performance. Nine million new jobs were created; 85% of the nation is now enrolled in the Philhealth system; we have built a hundred thousand new classrooms; the Internet and computers in high schools are now part of everyday life for many of our youth.

Ours is the only administration with a stronger peso at the end of our term than in the beginning. Our reforms fended off the global economic recession of the last two years and gave us the resources to spend on stronger safety nets for the very poor. This probably explains why the latest survey indicated a tremendous drop in self-rated poverty — the lowest in 30 years — even though the global economic slump was not yet over.

We have increased the pay of the great Filipino worker, whether in the private sector or in the government, including the military, the Navy, the Fleet, the Marines. In 2001, a private in the Navy received P5,000 basic pay; today, he receives almost P11,000 and can look forward to the next round of salary increase under the Salary Standardization Law we passed in our administration to take effect in the middle of this year, and which provides for a yearly increase until 2012.

Likewise, an ensign in the Navy, who had a monthly basic pay of P12,000 in 2001, will get almost P24,000 starting the middle of this year. And that goes all across the board among different ranks. There have also been non-wage benefits, some mentioned by Admiral Golez, others more general to the Armed Forces like housing such as those in Camp Claudio in Parañaque and Sangley Point in Tanza in Cavite.

And as we leave you, our men and women of the Navy, the Fleet, the Marines, we reiterate that we are committed to doing what is required during this transition to give the next team the support they need to keep our country moving forward.

I remember the first time I joined you as president to celebrate your anniversary, I was full of praise for the Philippine Navy, and I can say nine years later, you have not disappointed me. Maraming salamat.

Today, I give you my sincere thanks for the deeds of heroism and loyalty that showed your fidelity to our Constitution and the chain of command, and your readiness to defend our freedom, our democracy and our Republic.

So brave men and women of the Navy, sail on. Continue to be victorious as you defend our seas, our 7,107 islands, and our people.

Thank you all very much.

Long live the Navy!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 112th anniversary celebration of the Philippine Navy. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080023/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27947&Itemid=38