THE BIRTH OF THE OVERSEAS FILIPINO INVESTOR

I want to greet all of you, the leaders of the various communities here in Bahrain, with an advance Merry Christmas!

You know, here in Bahrain, I feel the love of the leaders here for Filipinos and for the Philippines. Please excuse my tardiness, because Prime Minister Al Khalifa brought me to his island. And on his island, even in his hotel, there are so many Filipinos working. Many Filipinos work for them and some have been there for a long time — 10 years, 20 years — so they got to know the Philippines through the Filipinos who work for them and they came to love it. So the Prime Minister said that once, when he was in Bali, at a meeting, because there were so many Filipinos working for him, he became curious and wanted to visit the Philippines. Last minute, he went to the Philippines, and King Aguiluz was assigned to take care of him. King Aguiluz was very good at taking care of him and since then, the Prime Minister has fallen in love with our country, the Philippines. That's why he has visited the Philippines more often. They really go as tourists in the Philippines. They love the Philippines very much. In fact, officially in my administration, the Prime Minister has visited twice. It's embarrassing that I've been invited for a third time. That's also one reason why I came here, so he wouldn't be embarrassed to come again for the third time in my administration.

And this is a wonderful opportunity, I chose this time so we can say Merry Christmas to each other. You know, God really chooses the date. I was supposed to come here last month. But I had some things to take care of in the Philippines. It was a ten-day trip, I divided it into five days and postponed my trip to Bahrain to today. But look what happened yesterday upon my arrival, my visit to the Middle East was made more meaningful by the fall of Saddam Hussein.

Since day one, we were with the International Coalition for the Liberation and Reconstruction of Iraq, and this event is a major milestone in that historic effort. We had deployed our peacemakers and humanitarian workers in that country, so Ambassador Roy Cimatu is still there. Before, he was taking care of civilians, now he is taking care of our humanitarian mission.

And we shall continue to stand beside the Iraqi people in their quest for democracy and prosperity. The late Foreign Affairs Secretary Ople was one of the stalwarts of our Iraqi policy, and he led both the effort to keep our nationals in the Middle East out of harm during the crisis. Ambassador Cimatu played a big role while he was stationed in the Middle East, and also, in our effort to help the Iraqi people rise from the crisis.

The whole nation mourns the death of a great Filipino. We were awed by the vision and indomitable wit of Secretary Blas Ople. He was an architect of Philippine foreign policy in the finest tradition of enlightened and pragmatic diplomacy. A champion of peace, human rights, collective security and the Rule of Law. We will miss him and the world will miss him.

Secretary Ople was here last month, when I couldn't make it. He helped me in requesting help from Bahrain for peace in Mindanao. Previously, we expected Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Libya to help in Mindanao, but because of the Prime Minister's frequent visits to the Philippines, he became friends with Ambassador Aguiluz. And he said, what do you want Bahrain to do to help in your search for peace in Mindanao? I said, I hope Bahrain will be one of the four countries to monitor the peace. Because the ceasefire monitoring team includes Bahrain, and because of that, peace in Mindanao is within reach.

I will not be surprised by Bahrain's interest in such things, because it is very capable. Bahrain is a modern financial center in the Middle East. And Bahrain is the freest economy in the entire Arab world, the freest economy in the Arab world. And not only that, according to a United Nations report, in the entire Arab world, Bahrain has the highest human development index, which is a measure of longevity, measure of health, per capita income and also literacy rate. So, you Filipinos living here in Bahrain, of course, you will also be part of that high standard of living. So I congratulate you and you are truly fortunate to be here. Fortunate not only because you can keep up with their standard of living, but also because of their ability and love for you and they are still helping the Philippines. For example, earlier, I was talking to businessmen, talking to Prime Minister Al-Khalifa and his Cabinet, talking to their king, which is a great honor for us because when we arrived yesterday, the King himself greeted us at the airport.

It's a wonderful expression of love for the Philippines because earlier, I was telling the businessmen that since Ambassador Aguiluz has invested here, you should also invest in the Philippines. And I was telling the Prime Minister that in the Philippines… because here in Bahrain, it is a financial center and center of what is called Islamic banking, their Islamic bank lends money to our Makati-based institutions, not only to Muslim institutions. But I told them that we in the Philippines also have an Islamic bank that is small, called Al Amanah Bank. It's just a little unsuccessful, maybe because we don't know how to run an Islamic bank. But the other banks, I said, are successful. So it's not because the economy is bad that the Islamic Bank is failing, we just don't really know how to run an Islamic Bank.

And a mission will come, will go here from the Central Bank to study how to run an Islamic bank. But I said, above that, because Bahrain is a free enterprise economy, I said I hope you bankers here, Islamic bankers, why don't you also look at our Al Amanah Bank. Why don't you just buy it and rehabilitate it? Well, earlier the Prime Minister told me, who should we talk to because he has already given instructions to rehabilitate our Al Amanah Bank.

So you are fortunate to be here with the love for you and the love for the Philippines of the leaders here in Bahrain. And it's good that we also need this kind of friendship for our development.

Our country has been lagging behind neighboring countries in terms of development for a long time. Fortunately, in my administration, our growth rate is now sixth out of twenty-one economies in the Asia-Pacific Region: Our growth rate is now faster than the richer economies like Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea. One reason why, despite the Asian crisis and global slowdown of 2001, 2002 and 2003, we are still stable is because of your remittances. So, thank you very much.

You can truly be considered overseas Filipino workers. But above that, you are also overseas Filipino investors; because eight billion dollars is invested by you in the Philippines every year. The remittances you send are used for housing, education, investments of your relatives, isn't that investment? That's why we want to, I want to reciprocate your love for our country.

That is one reason why, for a long time, the Overseas Voting Law could not be passed by Congress, in my administration we forced the passage of this law. Not only that, the Anti-Money Laundering law, I also forced it to be passed, why? One reason is that if it is not passed, international bankers will add red tape when you send your remittances. So to avoid you having difficulty sending your remittances to the Philippines, I also forced the passage of this Anti-Money Laundering Law.

I also expanded the housing program. In the two and a half years of my leadership, the Philippines had the most extensive housing program in the history of our country. And one reason for this is that many Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) are buying houses. I hope you will buy one too. I encourage you to invest your savings in meaningful things like housing. Contact the embassies to find out how to get into the Pag-IBIG Fund housing program. In Saudi Arabia, Pag-IBIG is very active, many OFWs are buying houses. I hope the same happens here in Bahrain.

And thank you again for your contribution to the five classrooms for some parts of the country that lack classrooms. I also commend your Embassy for the skills development programs. For those who want to acquire new skills, especially those who are about to return, to expedite the re-integration program upon arrival in the Philippines.

I hope, my dear countrymen and friends, that you will continue the exemplary work that you are engaged in here in Bahrain. May your success and the success of our Filipino nation continue, wherever we may be.

Thank you all very much for the remittances. Thank you very much for the good reputation you give to the Philippines. Thank you very much for your tireless love for our country. And Merry Christmas, the Philippines loves you.

Thank you all very much!

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].