Thank you very much, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas for introducing me.

I would like to greet all of you — you can all sit down — I would like to greet our consular officials here in Jeddah led by Consul General Lomondot. And I would like to introduce to you, although some of you may already know them, the members of my delegation. First of all, I saw how many fans he has when he entered here, Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago; I saw earlier — ‘Lanao loves GMA — well, we have people from Lanao here on stage: Congressman Jun Macarambon, Congressman Abdullah Dimaporo, Congressman Tikbong Badelles, and Governor Angging Dimaporo; of course, we also have people from outside Lanao, our congressman from Mandaluyong, Benhur Abalos; a fellow Cabalen from Pampanga, Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc; and from Antique, Governor Sally Perez.

It’s probably time I introduce to you what I think will be our next ambassador here in Saudi Arabia if he passes the committee of Senator Santiago in the Commission on Appointments. Ambassador Tony Villamor. We also have many officials here from the Philippines, from my Cabinet and other senior officials besides Secretary Sto. Tomas. Here is our head of Trade and Industry, Peter Favila; our head of Energy, Secretary Popo Lotilla; our Press Secretary, Toting Bunye. There seem to be many from Muntinlupa here, ah; and the one who launched the NBN Saudi — does that include Jeddah? — is… Our chairman of NBN, Secretary Cerge Remonde; our other one from Lanao, Secretary of Agrarian Reform, Secretary Nasser Pangandaman; is our special envoy who takes care of you when there is danger in this region here on our stage? Special Envoy Ambassador Roy Cimatu. You all seem to know Roy very well, right? Times of danger together now, so far. Hope to God, times of peace.

And to all of you, my countrymen here in Jeddah, good morning to all of you. Adda ilocano idtoy? Naimbag a bigat yo amin; cabalen kong capampangan, mayap aba quecongan; to the people from Visayas and Mindanao, maayong buntag kaninyong tanan; to Senator Santiago’s constituents, maayong aga sa inyo nga tanan; our Muslim brothers assalamu alaikom; if there are Bicolanos, marhay nga aga sa indo gabos; and to all of you, good morning and thank you for coming here to meet with me today.

Thank you for your warm welcome to my delegation and to me. As the congressmen here in front said, your welcome is so warm. Thank you for showing your love. I would also like to convey to you the good news that the officials of Saudi Arabia received us with the same warmth when we went to Riyadh.

Indeed, I was welcomed with warmth and generous hospitality, and they only show how deeply important, what deep importance Saudi Arabia gives to the Philippines and the Filipinos. It is a great honor for me, for our delegation to receive that kind of welcome from the officials of Saudi Arabia from their greatness the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques. The kingdom has a clout in the world that shall stretch forward through the millennium and the more than one million Filipinos that you represent here in the kingdom contribute to the influence of Saudi Arabia because you are making a big contribution to their development.

In my conversation with the great king, His Majesty and other high-ranking officials and members of the royal family, I always boast about the great Filipino worker. But what is more joyful, they also always boast about the Filipino worker. The Filipino worker really plays a big role in the development of the economy and infrastructure of the kingdom. In every important task in this country — producing oil, building cities, laying roads and power lines, taking care of health — Filipinos are there.

I remember how this OFW phenomenon in Saudi Arabia started. The first petrodollar boom in 1974. Perhaps, many of you were not yet born then, during the first petrodollar boom. Many Filipino construction companies obtained contracts during that time, bringing their workers. In construction. Because of the skills shown by the Filipino worker after that, more and more arrived because the Saudi companies and agencies themselves hired many Filipino workers in various fields of livelihood and now there are more than a million of you here, the largest group of overseas Filipino workers in the world.

That’s why Saudi Arabia is very important in the foreign policy of our government. My foreign policy has eight points. But it’s too long if I tell you all eight points. I will only mention three that are closely related here in Saudi:

First, the value of O.I.C. countries like Saudi Arabia in the firm determination of our government to forge a just and lasting peace in Mindanao. They are a big help to us here.

Second, economic diplomacy which is closely related these days to finding relief from the oil crisis which has a bad effect all over the world, including the Philippines.

And third, of course, the welfare of the Filipino worker.

And regarding the problem of oil — oh, I’d like to acknowledge Ambassador Wali, the Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the Philippines — regarding oil, I’m very happy to announce that the oil minister of Saudi Arabia has conveyed his assurances to me that in an unlikely event of a disruption in the Philippines’ oil supply from other sources, Saudi Arabia is prepared to make up for the shortfalls.

Regarding you, Filipino workers, the social welfare minister told me yesterday, the social welfare minister of Saudi Arabia, that you are one of the largest groups of overseas workers, one of the four largest groups of overseas workers here in Saudi, along with those from India, Pakistan, and Egypt. But according to him also, the social welfare minister of Saudi, he added that the difference of Filipinos in Saudi Arabia from the three is that almost all Filipinos here, eighty percent are in managerial and technical positions. Furthermore, the Arab businessmen who were with us at lunch yesterday, for them, in terms of skill and kindness, Filipinos are number one.

That’s why, continuing with the new petrodollar boom that is happening now, which is bigger than the boom in 1974, as I said, in the construction of new cities, Filipinos are there, now the Saudi government will build five new cities. First of all, there’s the King Abdullah Economic City. Maybe — how far, forty miles from here — near Jeddah, four other economic zones. Each of these cities is larger than the entire country of Saudi Arabia’s neighboring countries, so large are the opportunities again. And according to the head of the Saudi Arabia general investment authority who is in charge of this, their preferred human resource in this trillion dollar investments is none other than Filipinos.

Thank you for the good name you give the Philippines through your good work. Thank you also for the remittances you send to our country. Because of you, remittances were record-breaking last year. Our peso has strengthened considerably and we even have a real estate boom because you are buying houses and apartments for your relatives.

During my meeting with the leaders of the kingdom, we always discuss how important it is to have fair treatment for you, especially those facing cases in the Saudi courts. And we want to assure those who are facing cases in Saudi courts, we want to assure them and their families of full legal support. So I instructed DOLE and OWWA, I instructed OWWA to hire a lawyer, an Arab lawyer, to defend Filipinos with cases.

Earlier, Consul General Lomondot mentioned the statement made to him by the released prisoners here, eight in Jeddah and those who will be repatriated who are at the OWWA center, the runaways. I thank the Saudi officials for their pardon. These eight are in addition to the one hundred they have pardoned over the past four months. And when I met with their great king, the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, I asked for the release of fifty more.

Last night, the response to my dinner at the Crown Prince’s house arrived. They will not release fifty, they will release 138, including the eight here in Jeddah. This does not include the 79 who will be repatriated from the welfare house. And furthermore, these 138 are not just for minor offenses, many of them are also major offenses, and for those with major offenses, blood money no longer needs to be paid. This is the best gift we can bring back to the Philippines because we are… working on the paperwork to try to get them to return with us tomorrow.

In my visit here to Saudi Arabia, one purpose stands out above all, and that is to ensure your safety and well-being here in Saudi Arabia. You can rely on our administration, Secretary Pat Santo Tomas and her colleagues in the labor department to continue to protect your welfare. Whatever plan we are considering for the comfort of the Philippines or for the benefit of our foreign policy or foreign affairs, your protection as overseas Filipino workers, as Filipinos will always be given attention and value.

That’s the least we can do, not only because you are Filipinos and that’s reason enough to serve you, but because you are such a good representative of the Philippines, you are such good citizens. You help us so much not only by helping the country in which you are staying but by sending your remittances. You are the best ambassadors of the Philippines in the world.

Thank you very much for your concern for our country. Long live the great Filipino worker in Saudi Arabia!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Jeddah. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213803/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2779&Itemid=38