Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 26 th Biennial Convention of the Federation of the Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and Industry

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, Manila City, March 30, 2007]

Well, let me begin by thanking you, thanking you Francis, thanking you the Federation for all the support. And I’d like to thank Francis’ personal support and as president of the federation extended to me as president and to our people.

Well, we had a very good audio/visual presentation of that support. You were there for us when things seemed uneasy for business and politics. And like many leaders of the federation, you brought hope and optimism when others were inclined to paint a canvas of gray skies.

We saw the many audio/visual presentations of the many projects the federation was involved in. I think more than a hundred undertakings, initiatives, programs and projects ranging from promoting trade, investments and tourism, and improving fiscal discipline to the forging of new partnerships and alliances with Filipinos and Chinese business groups. And I thank you for being optimistic about… Thank you for being optimistic about the future of the nation and the well-being of the people.

Before I came to Manila Hotel this morning, I passed by my monitor of the stock exchange and I was very happy to see that as of that time the stock market had gone up over 50 points. And that reflects also the sharp increase of the country’s ranking in Grant Thornton’s international business report. That report is a firm indication that growing political and economic security is driving investments up in an unprecedented scale. We have found our niche in the world through the faith and excellence of Filipinos all over.

Planning, productivity and good governance have combined to place the Philippines among the top ten destinations for booming economies growing at a faster rate than average, measured against turnover and employment. Business process outsourcing, high-tech initiatives and tourism potentials lead the road forward. We’re in the right place, we’re in the right time to receive supersonic investments for a supersonic journey to the ranks of the first world by the next generation.

I have no doubt that the Filipino will prevail against all odds and against the politics of tearing down and destruction. That the Filipino will prevail building on the foundations of a new economy keyed to the needs of the world and to the skills of the people as we shape a secure democratic future for peace, unity and prosperity.

As many of you know, because you have been sharing with me, you have been doing policy together with me, you have been helping me form the national agenda, the national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every Filipino.

And I thank you for sharing with me the vision for the day when all Filipinos can choose to live and work here in the Philippines, close to family and friends, owning a home with a high quality of life.

I thank you for joining me in seeing the day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

And I’d like to think that for the first time in a long time, the government is doing what mini-medium scale Filipino-Chinese businessmen do: you balance the budget, you avoid going into debt.

And through strong international alliances, we have forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments that helped create five million new jobs.

And through all these, Francis and the Federation, was there with me. In our trips – how many trips did you say? Twenty-three trips? – I remember very clearly Busan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, China where we forged millions of dollars worth of agreements and credit arrangements. And we have strengthened our military and security alliances in the region and the world. The Filipino-Chinese community, which you the federation represent, has been instrumental in the realization of these unprecedented and historic gains, you had been instrumental in these gains that have strengthened our fight against poverty, ignorance, disease and injustice; in our fight for freedom, peace and prosperity.

You have poured in civic conscience in times of crisis and need. I saw in the presentation reminders of your support for the value-added taxation when you as businessmen knew that you would have to make sacrifices.

It indeed shows that you realize that there is much to do if the nation is to work towards a more just, modern and prosperous nation. We must not only hold on tightly to our gains, but push them forward with the tools of national unity and solidarity as mandated by your theme: “Shared Responsibility to Sustain the Growth Momentum.” Shared responsibility — responsibility of the government, responsibility of the business community especially the most dynamic part of the business community, the Filipino-Chinese business community.

I seek your help for clean and peaceful elections in May.

We’re hopeful that with your support the May elections will be about the future, not the past; about new ideas, not old complaints. And it should be about fighting or a stronger nation, and not just fighting. Business and national prosperity live and thrive on bridges of unity and teamwork – that’s what shared responsibility is all about. Business does not thrive on tearing down or rending our cherished institutions.

With your continued support, I can focused on the national agenda that includes more jobs, stable prices and peace and order. And because you are there, I can leave the politicking to the candidates.

With your continued support, we will work to expand education and health care. Thank you for continuing to build school buildings. With your support, we are taking action to develop a green Philippines agenda to improve our environment and beautify our communities. Thank you Francis and the other leaders of the federation for being part of the green Philippines army.

All of these examples of carrying out shared responsibility to sustain the growth momentum show that you and I share the belief in the Philippines and its hardworking people.

Let’s continue to share responsibility. Let’s continue to work hard together to make economic prosperity, social justice and peace and security a reality for a new, modernizing Philippines.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].