Thank you very much, Mr. Tony Gomez. The Philippines can truly be proud of you. You were the one who built the beautiful airport there in Angkor Wat. Congratulations.

Earlier, Secretary Blas Ople was introduced to you. We should give him a warm greeting because he just came from Europe and those who long opposed Ambassador Gazmin when he was a general are now considered terrorists – international terrorists – thanks to Secretary Ople’s effective mission. Congratulations, Secretary Ople. Secretary Manuel Roxas, our Secretary of Trade and Industry who always defends the rights of the Philippines in our various negotiations, even in ASEAN, is also here. So, this is Secretary Mar Roxas.

And earlier you met Secretary Richard Gordon. How many will bring V-12 tourists to the Philippines? I would also like to reintroduce Press Secretary Toting Bunye. If there are people here from Muntinlupa, he was the former Congressman and Mayor of Muntinlupa; and our expert on BIMP-EAGA, a sub-grouping in ASEAN, is Secretary Paul Dominguez; it seems you are not very familiar with the head of the Presidential Management Staff, Secretary Yongyong Afable; over there is the head of the Philippine International Trading Corporation, that is Tony Abad. If any of you want to trade with the Philippines, that is a good way to do it through the PITC because its trading is developmental.

And of course, I congratulate Ambassador Volts Gazmin. Thank you for taking care of the two thousand Filipinos here in Cambodia. And also in our relationship with Cambodia. You know, Ambassador Gazmin is a perfect fit here because the leader of Cambodia is also a general and a good golfer. So, they are a good match. That's why the relationship between the Philippines and Cambodia is good. Because it is also important that the ambassador and the head of government have a good rapport. That's how it is with other countries in the Philippines. There are many instances where when a new female ambassador is sent, they really match the ambassador to the head of government.

And to all of you, not just Mr. Gomez, all of you FilCom officers and members, Filipino community, I congratulate you because you came from different parts of Cambodia to attend this event, thank you. And this, I think you are… And I also want to greet Father Ochoa. There’s also a Don Bosco here. That’s great, like the Philippines… Don Bosco away from the Philippines. And all of you, I think you are also a microcosm of our cultural diversity in the Philippines.

Do we have any Capampangans here? Let us wholeheartedly thank your presence today.

There are also Ilokanos here. Ilokanos are from the province of my mother, Pangasinan, I extend my greetings to all of you for being here today.

We have people from Mindanao here too. Ambassador Gazmin was a long-time commander there and Secretary Paul Dominguez is also from there. So, thank you very much, that’s where I grew up. Oh, you know, in Iligan City. Ambassador Gazmin also spent a long time there. So, to our colleagues there, thank you very much for coming today.

To my fellow Ilonggos, colleagues of Secretary Roxas, colleagues also of my husband, thank you very much for coming to our program today.

And to all of you, wherever you come from in the Philippines. Wherever you come from in Cambodia, I am happy for your attendance this afternoon. Your valuing of our gathering today is a true concern and love for our country, our government, and the entire Filipino people.

I am very proud that Filipinos have been worthy partners of the people of Cambodia in nation-building. I understand that this started when the first Filipinos arrived here during the early 1990s when Ambassador Gazmin was the head of the Presidential Security Group at that time. And when this country was still in turbulent times and the United Nations transitional authority came to Cambodia to supervise Cambodia’s administration and help create an atmosphere in which free elections could take place. Your contribution to democracy is important as our contribution as a country is important. You were sent here to oversee the transition to democracy because Filipinos, the Philippines, we are the most vibrant and dynamic democracy in Asia, and we are very proud of it, and we are very proud of you.

Since then, Filipinos here in Cambodia have made your mark after just one decade as managers, engineers — ayan si Tony — teachers, school administrators, entertainers, doctors, social workers, agricultural experts, members of religious organizations like father Ochoa, and many other callings. And you have been exemplars — gaya ng sabi ni ambassador — of the great Filipino worker known worldwide for discipline, talent, professionalism and a shepherding and compassionate spirit.

My administration is determined to bring government closer to our people, including our overseas Filipinos.

Even when I was a senator, together with Senator Ople then, I already felt that way. That’s why when I was a senator, and Secretary Ople was also a senator, separately we filed our overseas voting bills, but like many other overseas voting bills before and after ours, our bills did not even progress at that time beyond the committee level.

That’s why when I became president, I certified as one of my five most urgent bills the overseas voting bill.

And so now at last, for the first time after so many attempts, the overseas voting bill has passed both houses of congress. Most of you are Filipino citizens still so let’s pray that the house and the senate can iron out their conflicting provisions soon because as soon as they do so I will sign the bill into law within 24 hours.

Through this act of empowerment, we envision our overseas Filipinos like you to have greater stake in governance and the future direction of our country even if you are here. We want you to maintain your bond with your homeland and deepen further your appreciation of your national identity.

I encourage you all — because Tony said he wants to help — one way by which you can help is to be our ambassadors of goodwill and maintain our friendly relations with the Cambodian government and people.

As you know, I’m here in Cambodia for the ASEAN leaders’ meeting. I’m here for the same reason I was in Mexico at the APEC leaders’ meeting last week: to focus on the economy and the security of the Philippines. Whether it’s a fight against global terrorism or improving education which many of you are doing here in Cambodia, at the end of the day, it is always about the economy and improving the lives of our Philippine citizens.

If you remember, when I became president 21 months ago, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence.

Today, inspite of the global slowdown we have an economy that has delivered one of the highest growth rates in Asia, and we’re also taking further steps to strengthen our macroeconomic fundamentals. We will continue to be vigilant in our efforts to reduce our budget deficit and, in this regard, I believe that the revenue enhancement measures being implemented by the bureau of internal revenue as well as our strict controls on government spending that have been instituted will support our success on this front.

As we do this, we will focus on the positive indicators of the strength of our domestic driven economy. This includes such things as:

Growth, as I said earlier. One of the highest in Asia maybe in the world. This has been fueled by among other factors the continued strength of services and a strong delivery in our industrial sector;

Why have the services been so strong? The growth has been supported by continued expansion in telecommunications, trade and private services including tourism. I don’t know if dick has told you that the October figures of tourism show a growth rate of 4 percent inspite of the Bali bombing.

Well, even when the Dos Palmas incident happened, the owner of Pearl Farm even placed their regional headquarters in the Philippines, even after the Dos Palmas incident. And even though these bombings happened, Dick was there, he was still organizing a world tourism organization, anti-terrorism summit to be held in Manila at the end of this week. So our tourism continues.

The non-bank financial institutions and insurance industries have also pushed the finance sector to post the highest growth in four years; and as for the growth in the industrial sector. This has been led by manufacturing which was negative last year but now it’s a leading sector for growth particularly manufactured exports, because exports are up by 20 percent;

Private construction is on the rebound; and in the agricultural sector, fisheries and forestry have been particularly strong; inflation is at a 15-year low so with interest rates; and we have — thanks to you — increasing levels of remittances from overseas Filipinos, up 39 percent from January to June 2002. This has boosted the personal consumption of your relatives. Last year, you, the overseas Filipinos remitted 6 billion dollars. This year, for the first half year alone you have already remitted 4 billion dollars. Thank you so much for your support. But because of our budget deficit, government spending has been flat, permitting the private sector to lead the growth.

Thus, for the next six months, even as we are resolving the terrorist threats in our country, I am focused on a tightly consolidated eight-point work program to push private sector-led growth:

The first is to strengthen our small and medium enterprises. To do this, the central bank is relaxing its financial documentary requirements for loans to small and medium enterprises. And the field offices of Mar Roxas, the DTI are mandated to concentrate their services on assisting the SMEs with project proposal documents required to access bank money.

Thank you, Tony mentioned that you want to help with the livelihood of the Philippines. So when you send remittances to your relatives to start small businesses, also tell them they can seek help from the DTI so that your remittance can be used as equity and can also be leveraged and borrowed from banks because we are now encouraging them to borrow from SMEs.

The second program is to jumpstart housing. There are eight big developers in our country and they’re taking a leap of faith. They are going back into housing construction after three years that they’ve been do so. And for the first time, they’re going to do end-user financing.

Tony said you want to help with housing. Unfortunately, there is no Pag-IBIG here. So Yongyong Afable, who is my PMS so I don’t forget, I will tell Yongyong to tell Pag-IBIG to send a selling mission here so they can… So you can become members or if your relatives are already members, you can buy houses, housing for them.

The third is to reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon. The policy reforms have already been done to reduce port fees. Now, the Development Bank of the Philippines has 20 billion pesos to lend to investors on a roll-on/roll-off port and ferry system including access roads, maritime institutes, vocational and technical schools, and post-harvest facilities to put together a sustainable logistic system connecting the islands of our archipelago. Para diretso, diretso anywhere from Mindanao, anywhere to Luzon.

The fourth is to begin the infrastructure that will decongest Metro Manila. This means beginning the construction of the system that will complete the mass transit system in metro manila, also that will connect Manila to Clark-Subic by train, and Manila to Batangas port by a modern highway. We want to start this construction within the next six months.

The fifth is to mark up the contribution of the PCGG to our fiscal resources by pushing for an early decision on the Marcos deposits in the Philippine National Bank and the liquification of the government’s 27 percent share in San Miguel Corporation.

The sixth is to make Makati a specific urban tourist destination. This will cater to the most important specific tourist market segment today — the working Japanese female who likes to go on group shopping holidays.

The seventh is to stimulate private investment in agriculture. We are pushing legislation to allow farmer-beneficiaries to sell their land so it can be used as collateral.

And the eighth is to begin the complete staff work to make the reclamation area in Roxas Boulevard a tourism complex to be called ‘The Bagong Nayong Pilipino.’

Our main goal for all of these is to win the battle against poverty within the decade. But as mentioned by Tony, we must also seek permanent national stability.

Thus, I’d like to report to you that because of our aggressive drive against terrorism, despite that sometimes they desperately resort to some hit and run bombings, the domestic terrorists specially the Abu Sayyaf are on the run. We have captured the bombers of Zamboanga of October and also one of the perpetrators of the bus bombing in Manila. All saints’ day was very peaceful because of our alert law enforcers, soldiers and intelligence agents who hardened the terrorists’ target.

You know, I arrived in Manila from APEC, November 2. I left San Francisco, Manila time, about noon time, 1 o’clock pm. So I called up… before I left I called up Secretary Reyes — Defense Secretary. “How are things there?” “Everything is quite,” he said. “No untoward incidents.” so I hopped on the plane. I don’t know what happened on the other half of November 1. When I got back, I asked the Chief of Staff, General Defensor, “How was it?” “Fine, everything peaceful.” and we were even joking. I might tell you one of my jokes. The military announced that they’re gonna field so many policemen, so many soldiers, so many dogs, sniffing dogs. Ah, announced by… So many people texted General Ebdane, the Chief of the Philippine National Police because they were fielding so many dogs in the cemeteries… They texted, “Thank you for the food.” anyway, two hundred dogs… But two hundred dogs still returned. So that was just a joke.

We have crushed at least five kidnap-for-ransom gangs. And the Chinese-Filipino community, who are the favorite victims of these gangs, they say that it is peaceful in Binondo now.

These macro statistics translate into benefits for the poor. The price of rice for the poor is stable at 14 to 16 pesos depending on where you buy it. ‘Yung rice for the poor ‘yon ‘yung regular-milled rice. Pero ngayon pati raw ‘yung well-milled rice 18 pesos na lamang. And some 200,000 urban poor families have acquired the right to buy the land that they are occupying, so that they’re not squatters anymore. Schools are being built in barangays where there used to be none, about a thousand of them. And more than 3 million poor Filipinos now have health insurance. These achievements we attained during the short period of the 21 months of my administration.

But, no president can build a strong republic single-handedly. I can continue to do this and do this better only if I can count on the support of the more than 7 million Filipinos overseas.

You are part of this wellspring of support, the network of Filipinos all over the world that I’m counting on.

Therefore, I thank you for what Tony mentioned, your concern for our fellow Filipinos and our country. Let us continue our… And your good deeds, our coming together, and our unity. Because the future of our world remains difficult. That is why our own efforts and unity are even more necessary.

And so, even as you are here helping build the renewed Cambodian nation, help me too to build a strong Philippine republic.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Cambodia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210632/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8489&Itemid=38