I am happy for the Lupong Tagapamayapa Volunteers who brought honor to Cebu City in the Galing Pook Awards due to the program Strengthening the Justice System in the Grassroots.

I also welcome Mayor Tommy Osmena because he gave the credit to the volunteers, because according to him, they are the true winners, the “real and deserving winners.”

For me, you are all winners: the eight hundred volunteers who ensure that access to justice in the barangay is not hindered and who have saved the government millions that would have been spent on courts; Mayor Tommy Osmena whose giving of credit to his people shows his true leadership; and the City of Cebu which continues to progress because the people of Cebu receive good service from their officials. The fourth winner is good governance in local government units because they have a good role model in Cebu City.

Other LGUs may follow your ways here in Cebu City. It is pleasing that 72% of the cases brought to your barangays were resolved through mediation. Nationwide, you are the only barangay mediation group that has been given proper training. And the work of the volunteers is truly supported by the local government, led by Mayor Tommy Osmena who gave each volunteer an additional P 1,000 allowance per month. Hopefully, other LGUs in the country will follow the example of the volunteers here.

Many cities and municipalities hesitate to adopt what is being done here because they say they lack funds. There is a solution to this. Perhaps, those LGUs interested can ask Mayor Osmena if he can lend his forty-seven accredited trainers to extend to representatives from other LGUs, and the funds used for training will come from 20% of their IRA which should be used for development projects, especially since the IRA has been increased significantly this year.

The increased IRA and the increased national budget came from tough choices we have made on boosting revenues, cracking down on tax cheats, bringing reform to our revenue collection and modernizing our banking and financial sector.

2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in over 30 years. Economic growth was 7.3 percent; a million new jobs were created; and foreign investments have been strong. We have been cited by London as the “offshore destination of the year” and by the International Data Corporation as the top global outsourcing destination after India. The BPO industry is very strong because of the call centers located in the city of Cebu.

Just this month, the International Monetary Fund lauded our economic growth, the reduction in our budget deficit, low inflation and the improvement in investor confidence.

2008 holds real promise for a different reason. Not only do we expect continued strong growth, but as a result of our total economic overhaul, we are well-positioned to weather a global economic slowdown which, unfortunately, will affect all of us.

Our strengthened economic fortunes come none too soon, for there are clouds on the economic horizon that we must guard against. The global economy is facing significant challenges. The slowing of the economies in North American and Europe is top of mind in our calculations to protect our own economy. To that end, we have developed a program that includes: first, to ensure a surge in investments in people and infrastructure; second, to ensure that we continue to pursue anti-corruption initiatives and to cut red tape; and third, to blunt the rise in the cost of energy and rice by providing targeted relief to the poorest amongst us who suffer the most from the high global price of energy and rice.

These global forces are putting more strain on our working poor as prices for commodities like rice and fuel increase. We are a price-sensitive nation. So while our macroeconomics are strong, the benefits are still working their way down more slowly than we want to lift up our citizens who live and work payday to payday. We need a strong middle class to become a strong modern nation. We are working to soften the blow from the current global economic challenges to those working hardest to make it to the middle class.

The best thing we can do in the short term is to provide responsible, targeted relief to those most in need. The best thing we can do for the remainder of my term until I step down in 2010 is to stay focused on further economic reforms while providing peace, order and stability. My last two years will be dedicated to one objective: invest, invest and invest some more in the nation.

The City of Cebu has good leadership because your programs save funds while delivering services to the people quickly and efficiently.

Our Barangay Peacekeeping Volunteers here have done a lot to expedite the delivery of justice to the poor in the City of Cebu. Perhaps, through Mayor Tommy, you can increase this assistance to the poor if you help monitor prices. Let us ensure that the price of the most necessary goods does not exceed the price list of the DTI, and let us also ensure that there is always rice available for sale in the poor barangays here in the city.

The Barangay Peacekeeping Volunteers, together with your Mayor, are the pride of the city government of Cebu. I am confident that in the coming days you will do more to further promote the Barangay Justice System.

Thank you very much for showing a good example.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Cebu City Galing Pook Awards. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122559/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1057&Itemid=38