I was pleased to receive the tripartite declaration from Tito Carlos, Pat Sto. Tomas, and Atty. Mendoza. This will be the subject of our discussion this afternoon. Their signatures as representatives of labor, investors, and the government are a commitment that all of us here will work together to promote decent work.

The document given to me earlier contains what we want to achieve in the short term, this is the content of our employment strategy. This strategy includes five principles. First, the creation of employment. Second, the promotion of labor standards. Third, social protection, fourth social dialogue, fifth tripartism.

The challenge for all of us is to make this declaration work.

Regarding the first part of the employment strategy, the creation of employment. Let us thank the Lord that in the past year, our economy has created more than a million and a half jobs despite the many disturbances in our world. Thus, our unemployment rate fell from 11.3% to 10.3% now one year since I took office. We must have job creation through investments and also through employment facilitation. To achieve this employment facilitation, our goal will be to expand the computerized linkaging of the labor market information networks to include more employers and workers organizations, as well as government units.

Regarding the second policy of our agreement on strategy. The promotion of labor standards. We already have new rules on subcontracting to provide greater job security and in response to the issue of contractualization. So I want to clarify again to everyone, “labor-only subcontracting” is illegal.

We are also fully implementing the policy of wage simplification as you fought for in the process of increasing the minimum wage. Eleven wages were set for you by our Regional Wage and Productivity Boards regarding the petition you signed to increase wages. Last year in my SONA, I said I hoped Congress or the Wage Board would decide on the appropriate wage. That is still my belief today. When my father, Diosdado Macapagal, was still a Congressman, he set the first minimum wage law in our history. When he became President, he also signed the second minimum wage law in our history. So I believe that Congress has the power and wisdom to find what is the appropriate minimum wage in our society.

The third element of our ILO-based employment strategies is social protection. The government has offered P27 million to the state insurance fund to lend to displaced workers. Approximately 2,000 workers have already benefited from this loan. There is also a separate socio-economic assistance amounting to another P27 million to about 5,000 sugar workers and their families. Earlier, Zoila Dela Cruz received a P12 million check for struggling workers in the sugar sector. DOLE and my Social Fund have also allocated P22 million to have a Poverty Free Zone Project in each region and help small communities become progressive and have self-sufficiency. I also ask for the help of the Philippine Ports Authority and DOLE to address the needs of our port workers.

When I assumed the presidency, I recognized the situation of the informal sector. That’s why the government also launched a Social Protection Program for Workers in the Informal Sector. This program aims to include workers in the informal sector in the Social Security System.

We continue to recognize the great contribution of overseas Filipino workers to our economy. That’s why the DOH, DSWD, and DOLE will send doctors and social workers to various overseas posts starting this June. And we have P25 million to provide here to take care of our OFWs, especially in providing medical and counselling services in the countries where they work.

The fourth part of our employment strategy is social dialogue. This means that the relationship between workers and investors should not be adversarial. In my State-of-the-Nation Address, I said “to reduce excessive friction in labor and management relations, we will go the extra mile to work for industrial peace.” Perhaps our labor and employment sector listened to us because their relationship became more peaceful last year. Last year, there were only 43 strikes compared to 60 in 2000, so industrial peace has expanded.

The fifth part of our employment strategy includes tripartism which means we must continuously facilitate a regulatory function in government. For instance, all proceedings arising from the disposition of labor cases and processing of documents are administrative rather than judicial proceedings. That is why as part of the centennial observance of the Philippine labor movement, Secretary Sto. Tomas will consult with all sectors concerned, to conduct a comprehensive review of the structure and procedures of all the agencies administering labor justice undertaking registration functions. In other words, the red tape will reduce the signatures required for the various services of DOLE, POEA, OWWA, and the National Labor Relations Commission for your workers. Related to this, Secretary Sto. Tomas will study the adoption of joint inspection teams composed of representatives from labor and management to assist labor inspectors in doing their jobs to make sure the firms are following the law. As a service to our heroic OFWs, the e-link system for OFWs, a system simplify and fast-track the documentation process for overseas workers, will also be implemented.

In my State-of-the-Nation Address last year, I asked Congress to allow our OFW’s long-dreamed-of right — the right to vote. Our administration strongly proposes a law on absentee voting to give our OFWs a voice in the elections. We also support the proposed law that aims to grant dual citizenship to our overseas Filipinos.

Our announced National Provident Fund or SSS Flexifund for our OFWs will also begin. This will take the form of a social security scheme that will encourage savings and investments as well as entitle them to benefits such as multi-purpose loans and insurance coverage. If they hold this up to retirement age, the provident fund can finance the member’s old age needs in the form of monthly pensions or lump sum payments.

For our workers here in the Philippines, I know that the price of basic goods is important to be affordable for workers. That’s why the NFA will add more rolling stores circulating in various places to bring affordable goods closer to you, such as rice at P14 and half the price of medicine. Right now, more than 1,000 NFA stores are circulating. We will still add more to serve the Filipino worker. I also welcome the initiative of the united Filipino workers, Employes Confederation of the Philippines, and Metro Manila Development Authority who signed a memorandum of agreement today for the establishment of stores for basic necessities at affordable prices and the designation of MMDA rolling stores to medium-sized enterprises where workers can buy their affordable needs. At the same time, the essential drugs and medicines, specifically frequently used by the poor, are now available to you at 50 percent of last year’s price at government hospitals and at NFA rolling stores. Now, 73 hospitals have it. By September, half-priced medicines will reach 600 hospitals covered by local governments and 800 pharmacies in barangays across the country for the sake of the poor Filipino worker.

More than three million have already been covered by the Indigent Program of our National Health Insurance which will pay for the hospital bills of poor beneficiaries. For the housing of workers, I am tasking HUDCC to make available to the homeless workers the foreclosed properties of government financial institutions like PAG-IBIG, NHA, NHFMC, SSS, and other agencies on a rent-to-own basis. So, you will pay this in 25 years. For this year, I want 20,000 units to be made available to our workers. This is where P10 billion for workers’ housing is going.

We must also provide assistance to displaced workers. The DOLE will aggressively implement the Quick Response Team Operation Balik Trabaho to provide an immediate and integrated package of assistance to displaced workers including their dependents. Included in the delivery of employment services are profiling, job matching, referrals, guidance, skills retraining, livelihood, and entrepreneurship development. It will also give assistance to workers in obtaining their separation benefits and in making informed choices on re-employment options that should be pursued because I learned that workers have difficulty in getting their separation benefits.

We must also set up our safety nets for sectors affected by globalization.

Let’s talk about electricity. I have instructed Secretary Vince Perez to study the Purchase Power Adjustment or PPA. I am also urging the Energy Regulatory Commission to carefully examine and expedite the review of the monthly PPA filings and to listen closely to the voice of the people.

It is time to audit the PPAs filed by the electric companies. On top of this is a proposal by the DoE that PPA charges can also be significantly reduced through financial reengineering in addition to the audit and the review.

The proposal, if implemented, can bring the cost of NAPOCOR power by as much as 85 centavos per kw hour. Let’s pass a bill that would give power to bring down the PPA through re-financing and I hope that in the near future this can be included in our priority legislation in Congress.

I thank the great support of the legitimate and responsible labor movement to our administration. It is pleasing to think that our celebration of 100 years of the labor movement is very appropriate. We should rekindle the fire lit by our first labor leaders. Let us push again, with progressive thinking and action, our factories so that we can begin another meaningful chapter in the history of our country. There is only one superstar of our country and that is the great Filipino worker.

Thank you very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.