Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the awarding ceremony by the Concerned Women of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, October 27, 2003]

Thank you very much.

Our new Justices, our new Ambassadors, our new Generals, our new Judges, our new Cabinet officials, the new inductees in the various outstanding and prestigious organizations of the Philippines. And of course, the Concerned Women of the Philippines who have given me this award.

In behalf of all of the awardees, I would like to thank all of the inductees today for joining the government and also for your active participation in civic activities in our country. And I would like to thank the Concerned Women of the Philippines for this very important and valuable award.

This morning, some of us were together at the Supreme Court, to hear mass. On my part I prayed that all ends well in the Davide impeachment controversy, and that God give us the wisdom to be constructive, fair and ever loyal to the flag. I believe that there must be peace among our great institutions if there is to be peace in our democratic society.

Without going into the merits of the impeachment case, over the weekend, since the controversy broke out, I consulted with the chief justice, the speaker of the house and Mr. Eduardo Cojuangco about the controversy. Again, without going into the legal merits of the issue, I have been trying to seek a principled solution in the national interest.

I had earlier said, last Thursday, that this being an issue involving co-equal branches of government, I deemed it proper for the executive to stand aside and allow constitutional processes to take their course. However, a political threshold has been reached in which the presidency is called upon for the extraordinary duty to mediate a controversy that may invite opportunistic destabilization attempts perpetrated by parties outside the dispute.

Indeed, it was not my intention until now to interfere in the substance of the constitutional process put in motion in the legislature, or much less to intervene in behalf of any parties involved. But what I want is for our people to be freed from the anxieties that could adversely affect their work and livelihood, and for our economic and political stability to be secure in the eyes of our people and in the eyes of the international audience.

This looking for a solution does not involve any deals with anyone or any vested interests. I do this with pure and patriotic intentions, with only national unity and reconciliation at heart.

I believe that even in the face of the constitutional separation of powers, when the supreme welfare of the people is involved, all the constitutions of our republican democracy must have a congruence of faith and action.

A woman is at the center of governance of our nation today, and it’s my job as chief executive to execute the assurance that I made last Friday to the people of the Philippines and the people of the world that we are not in the midst of a constitutional crisis. It is my job as chief executive to make that assurance stay a reality and to avert a constitutional crisis.

Today, the woman is at the center of governance, not merely because the president is a woman, but because we have fielded women of all ages and persuasions in key positions in the public service.

But more than that the woman is at the center of changing things in our society where change needs to be done. The awardees today are and were women who have championed change and have been able to achieve much change. Women are also the champions of peace and reconciliation.

In many parts of the country, women have quietly nurtured a culture of peace by helping address not only the immediate causes of conflict, but by boldly striking at its roots — inequity, injustice, economic exclusion.

Poverty reduction is the highest agenda of my administration. And women have helped me lead that struggle.

For one, peace can only thrive in an environment of relative prosperity and social justice. And that is why we need to fight poverty aside from that poverty in itself is an evil we must fight.

But building a culture of peace does not stop at addressing poverty.

Peace only reigns when human worth is upheld. The way to peace is the nurturance of the good values of global citizenship, mutual respect, tolerance, solidarity, and freedom with responsibility.

And I am proud, as having been one of the members of the Concerned Women of the Philippines, that these values are the values that the Concerned Women of the Philippines have fought for all these decades.

And let me say again that poverty or social exclusion does not confer the license to kill or to maim. People cannot claim the right to dignity at the expense of other lives.

And once again, I congratulate the awardees of the Concerned Women of the Philippines for what they did especially during martial law in order to ensure human dignity and human rights.

Today, the fight is against terrorism but lurking in the distant clouds is a possibility again that the days of dictatorship and authoritarian rule may come upon us if we are not careful to avert the crisis that could lead to another destabilization.

Women must be involved in this fight. Women must be involved in the fight against terror, in the fight against the possible return of dictatorial forces. Not only in tasks of vigilance, but in the greater task of fighting poverty in the recruitment fields of those who would become the hatchet men and errand boys of the terrorists and the would-be authoritarian rightist rulers.

I have had great difficulty during the past two and a half years of my administration because I came into this position amid great turmoil in the world and in our country. You know only too well the trauma of that impeachment trial. We cannot go through another trauma again because that trial left our country divided. We cannot afford to divide it again already divided as it is.

I came into the presidency when the world had not yet recovered from the 1997 Asian crisis. In 2001, that was compounded by the bursting of I.T. bubble, 9-11 came, early 2003 was SARS. I am proud though that through these critical years, especially the last two and a half years, the Philippines was cited by the last APEC summit as one of the fastest growing economies in the Asia pacific region. Of the 21 member economies of the Asia Pacific region, and they include the most powerful and the most advanced economies in the world, the Philippines is number six in growth forecast for this year, out of 21.

The upturn for the second half of the year is due to the recovery taking place in the U.S. and Japan, along with Europe. But our economic prospects will largely depend not on the growth in those countries but on the course of our way of doing politics.

Already, we can see the mudslinging, the libelous air, the recriminations, the raw posturings in the horizon and even on center stage.

I do not wish to be part of this sorry spectacle of traditional and destructive politics.

I seek to address issues to work, to plod. I seek reconciliation, not further division of this already divided nation.

Our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty.

To develop our economy and create a strong republic, we need to change our system of doing things, to institute true reforms in our politics as well as in our economy. We also need to unify as a people.

I want to concentrate on the economy, on getting jobs back, on healing divisions, on clean elections. And these are difficult things to do in the last several years of internal and external crisis, but the other countries are beginning to recover and we cannot afford to be left behind. We cannot afford for our country to go into the way of destruction because of greater divisions.

And I see my role at this point in time as somebody who will seek a healing, who will seek reconciliation, who will seek a solution to the constitutional crisis that we all want to avoid. It is my role to seek a solution before the crisis even breaks out. And that was why I heard mass this morning with the justices of the supreme court, with the employees of the supreme court, with the judges and the lawyers of the Philippines, and several of you who where there including the Concerned Women of the Philippines.

As I accept the award that you have given me and I feel so honored to receive this award in the midst of the great women that I was able to observe and admire outside and inside the Concerned Women of the Philippines. I mean I admire them from outside and I admire them from inside as a member. I ask you all to join me in praying for a healing, a reconciling solution. Help me make the right decisions and do the right persuasions to assure our country in the world that indeed when we say that we are not in the midst of a constitutional crisis, we mean what we say and we can deliver what we can assure the world.

To all of you, I thank you. This is a defining moment in our history. Let us be united in seeking a solution, the solution that is in accordance with the will of the Lord above.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremony by the Concerned Women of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141305/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7184&Itemid=38