Peace and order problems continue to plague the Bicol Peninsula and the island provinces of Catanduanes and Masbate.

The Communist rebels have spent years as a low-level threat. It is time for their disruption and violation of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. They impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas. They are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. If we are to become a first world country, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all. It is either get rid of them now, or get rid of them later. Whatever happens, they must be stopped.

We must face this challenge alongside the hardship of hunger stemming from extreme poverty and exacerbated by the impact of strong typhoons that passed through Bicol in the past two years.

We can’t say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and hungry amongst us. Let us be a society measured by our ability to live by our faith.

Our long term vision is for the Philippines to join the ranks of first world nations in 20 years. To do so, we will need a robust middle class, world class infrastructure and strong institutions of government. Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affects us here and now.

Those living in poverty have declined, but we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why, during the holiday season and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices.

Rice is not only a staple for our people. It symbolizes our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. We are committed to ensuring that the needy throughout Region 5 have access to affordable rice during this holiday season.

In addition, we will have a Christmas rice distribution to the poorest of the poor of Masbate and Catanduanes, which are among the provinces in the country most vulnerable to hunger.

The way to peace isn’t through the barrel of a gun. Rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity. And central to that success is to invest in the people – in education, healthcare, roads, bridges and schools. We are making those investments. It is working.

Education – We are particular about increasing the number of high school scholarships under the GATSPE or voucher system in Camarines Sur. I am instructing the Department of Education to provide 4,000 scholarships to private high schools since there are not enough public high schools but a surplus of private high schools.

I would also like 4,000 high school scholarships to private schools given out here in Masbate which about the same shortage of public high schools as Camarines Sur.

Healthcare – Health care is also high in our list. In addition to the free indigent health insurance program carried out by PhilHealth, 315 Botika ng Barangays throughout the region sell affordable medicine.

We will increase the BnB’s, paying more attention to the thickly populated provinces of Camarines Sur and Albay, but we must also increase the number of BnB’s in Sorsogon which has only 5 BnB’s now and Catanduanes where only 6 are currently operating.

I have also identified the Bicol Training Hospital in Legazpi City to be regional Heart and Lung Center.

Roads – We must always maintain the Quirino Highway and Andaya Highways in good condition. We must finish the road through Partido District so that travel to Catanduanes will be shorter.

Schools – The last time we were in Bicol, the Regional Disaster Coordinating Council reported that the school building repair under the Bicol CARE fund was far from completed. We are instructing the DepEd to finish them by Christmastime.

The positive impact of these projects cannot be overstated: from health care to building schools, the outreach builds more than buildings – it builds trust, which is the basis for effective and lasting peace.

Disaster prevention is important for security, especially in areas frequently hit by typhoons like Region 5. The plans of local officials for disaster preparedness are commendable, especially the pre-emptive measures taken during the past two typhoons.

The peace meetings we are conducting demonstrate support from the ground for our amnesty program. Congress has demonstrated that it can produce legislation that improves the quality of life of all Filipinos. The most notable recent example is the 2008 budget especially for healthcare and education.

But we need the Congressional concurrence to the Amnesty Proclamation to improve human rights and invest more in peace and order.

Coupled with amnesty is our new paradigm for peace in Region 5. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with the insurgency in Region 5 focuses on a unique combination of soft and hard power to promote peace. We meld together confidence-building measures grounded on dialogue and investments in economic and basic infrastructure development.

We need to vigorously push for the completion of important projects that will boost tourism in the region.

As we announced in the State of the Nation Addresses, Region 5 will have an international airport in Daraga, as agreed upon by the governors. We will also build a small airport in Bulan and extend the runway in Pili. The roll-on-roll-off ferry port and road system will pass through Esperanza, Aroroy, Burias and Pasacao. These are important connections of the Central and Eastern Nautical Highways that will facilitate the transport and lower the price of food.

Most of these airports and ports were reported by the Pro Performance System Task Force to be delayed due to typhoons, technical issues or funding. I direct the DOTC and PPA to expedite the resolution of technical issues to speed up these projects.

The Pro Performance Task Force and the Procurement Transparency Group regularly report to your office on the status of important infrastructure. We expect to hear more progress on these projects.

We want Bicol tourism to flourish: trade and agriculture to bloom fully: that Mt. Mayon in Albay, Donsol in Sorsogon, the Rodeo of Masbate, wakeboarding in Camarines Sur, and surfing in Camarines Norte and Catanduanes will bring thousands of visitors from within the country and abroad.

We congratulate our armed forces for their heroic efforts. We mourn the twenty-two soldiers and police officers who died in combat since January of this year. Communist rebels are holding Bicol hostage to their agenda of unrest, but we will not be deterred in our goal of bringing lasting peace to the region. The military offensive against communist rebels will continue, not as an act of revenge but as a strategy to win the peace.

Ngunit, we deplore any and all killings of political activists and journalists. No person is above the law in this nation. Whether a former president, member of the military or an average citizen, all men and women in this nation are equal before the law. The death of any Filipino citizen in pursuit of their right to political expression violates human liberty.

We will continue to bring perpetrators to justice, work with Congress to pass laws to protect victims and jail criminals. We exhort the nation to leave behind the terrible legacy of political violence and clan vendetta. Thankfully, political killings are down this year but we will not rest until we reach zero.

We have also told our military in no uncertain terms that if there are rogue elements, they must be brought to justice.

But terrorists like armed communists are a threat to the sovereignty of the nation and must be checked once and for all.

The people of Bicol dream of leaving to their children a prosperous and peaceful Region 5.

Thank you and mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the Region V Peace and Security Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135603/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2315&Itemid=38