Thank you.

Maraming salamat, President Strike Revilla. Thank you.

Thank you also Chairman Zulueta; board member Israel; board member Dominic; board member Unico; board member Conching; officers from Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao; delegates.

I would also like to greet Attorney Romy Macalintal, Mrs. Manzanilla, and all of you, good morning.

It is good that you were still able to attend the conference despite all the politics that you are thinking about. Thank you very much for your dedication to your work of governance.

Already, the political landscape is rife with intrigues, controversies, speculations. The people seem to be abandoned in the midst of loud and excessive politicking. I’m glad you’re here not to aggravate the situation but to continue your work. I also will not aggravate the situation.

I’m resolved to make my days more useful by engaging in meaningful events of vital public interest. Perhaps one of the reforms we must pursue in our political culture is the premature hype on partisan issues very early in the day that tends to project us as a severely divided bickering nation.

You know there are really many conflicts in our country. But if we do that, the conflicts worsen. We should address the many things where we are united.

Our people are united behind democracy, civility and good governance. And these are the ideals we must carry with them not the preoccupation with heady partisan issues that is a distraction to nation-building. There will be a time for the lines to be drawn and this is more than two months away. Let’s just welcome the holiday season in the spirit of reform and unity and try to help the people surmount their difficulties.

I am proud of our gains on the macroeconomic front. Our growth rate is higher than expected, higher than that of 15 of the 21 economies of the Asia-Pacific, and higher than at any time since the 1997 Asian crisis. Huwag natin pakawalan ito sa lubhang pamumulitika. The budget deficit at the national level has been kept at manageable levels. But let me tell you, at the local government level, not only is there a managed budget deficit, you have actually a budget surplus at the local levels. So congratulations to you local legislators.

The Bangko Sentral has the tools to maintain the stability of the exchange rate, and we are confident in the BSP’s capacity to use these tools willfully and competently as in the past. I must warn speculators not to test the government’s policy determination. In the meantime, it would help much if people can shake off the election fever and get on with more productive endeavors. Let’s all team up behind political and economic stability and make a strong collective pitch for law and order and development.

Halimbawa tayo — you and your boards, me and my budget — let’s together invest more in education because that is the country’s greatest resource — its people.

My administration has spent on the biggest irrigation program in history. Ngayon kayo namang mga board, sana tulungan n’yo ‘yung magsasaka to be able to access hybrid rice seeds so that they can use these irrigated lands and the hybrid rice seeds you can help them with, so they can more than double their harvest.

You know, yesterday at the meeting at the PCCI, I told them about hybrid rice. And one who helped bring the hybrid rice from China, Mr. Henry Lim, told me a story last night. Yesterday it came out… He said, not only double, some farmers have tripled and quadrupled. Okay, anyway, I speak… But I said at the very least doubled.

Last night I saw him and he was telling me a story. That one time there was a meeting in Malacañang, the farmers who used hybrid were invited. That’s right, their yield doubled, almost all of them, and many tripled and four times. Isn't that right, board member Calderon, in that same event, in Isabela? Isn't that the experience of the farmers there? Okay. Anyway, the farmers didn't go to Malacañang wearing their usual clothes. This businessman was always wearing a suit. So, he was wearing a suit. When he saw the other farmers wearing ordinary clothes, he said, “Oh, I’m sorry, I’ll take off my suit.” The farmer said to him, “Don’t take it off, Mr. Lim, because maybe in a year we’ll be wearing suits too.” because some of them are earning 70,000, 90,000 pesos. Things that they have never seen before, the more productive ones among them. And these are some of the reforms that we can do and we must do.

We must reform also our social assets — land, credit, minimum basic needs. In these social assets, the national government has given an unprecedented number of people the right to buy the land they occupy. It has provided an unprecedented number of incomeless, assetless rural women access to microcredit through the Grameen NGOs. It has provided an unprecedented number of the poor access to health insurance. But I want to thank you local governments. Thank you to the local governments because some of you provided counterpart funding for land titling expenses. Some of you spent on funding microfinance. You have… Many of you contributed to the premium for the health insurance of your poor. That’s why this unprecedented thing I’m saying, we did it together. So thank you.

How many years has the Local Government Code been in effect? 12, right? I remember during the 12th anniversary of the Local Government Code, the president of ULAP, Dolfo Del Rosario, said that there were 12 unprecedented things I did for the LGUs. One of them, I have released to you in full all past LGSEF obligations including those incurred before my time. I hope in your budget deliberations you will use a portion of this also for microfinance because there are so many poor people in our provinces who will benefit if there is microfinance.

The World Bank has praised our vigilant advances in fighting corruption, acknowledging that we have been effective in our lifestyle checks and procurement reforms. You too can enact these ordinances in your provincial board. And this will also help very much in tying up our common efforts. We have already… That ID, you can create a provincial ID in your provincial board. We’ve already several official ID systems in place such as the voters’ ID, the SSS ID, driver’s license, not to mention the millions of corporate ID cards and credit cards being used everyday. Our people have accepted all these instruments of political and economic facilitation. And I don’t see how a national id system can be portrayed as an oppressive instrument. We are simply trying to consolidate what has been done for decades in a single, verifiable and foolproof instrument to deter criminals and terrorists and deprive them of sanctuary among our law abiding citizens. Let’s pursue this program for a safer and more progressive nation. While we are waiting for Congress to consolidate all of this into a national ID, I have some acquaintances in local governments who are already making IDs in their municipalities — Taguig; in Cebu, what, board member? That’s also something you can do. You can do a provincial resolution to provide for a provincial ID. Let’s show these criminals that the law never sleeps and that they cannot escape it.

There is also no letup in our economic diplomacy, which comes from the huge assistance of countries for our development. Many of you are seeing ODAs. Many of you are seeing new investors. In fact, there is a 22 percent increase in our investments this year. Many of them were either convinced as the final decision or encouraged as a first attraction during my visit to them.

I will continue to communicate with you in promoting change and unity. And on this day, I thank you for being here, thinking of work rather than politics. And I encourage you to continue gearing your actions towards tangible and concrete results and accomplishments.

Again, board members, thank you very much for your dedication to your work.

Long live us all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 4th Luzon Area Conference of the Provincial Board Members League. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140515/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7405&Itemid=38