Thank you very much TLRC Director General Antonio Ortiz for your introduction, your explanation, your invitation.

Let us also greet Mayor Neptali Gonzales, Boyet. As Boyet said to me earlier, our economy is doing well. Yes, but it is doing very well, especially the economy of Mandaluyong under the leadership of Mayor Boyet Gonzales. He is a good mayor and was a good majority leader before, so we are happy to have him with us now.

Secretary Angelo Reyes; Mr. Sy; our host, Mayor Gonzales and then… Our landlord is Mr. Sy; various officials of the TLRC; various entrepreneurs who are receiving benefits in partnership with the TLRC, Happy 30th Anniversary to all of you!

Thirty years, that is a very important anniversary, that is why I deemed it fit to come here today.

Over the past thirty years, the TLRC has been our partner in empowering the Filipino people through livelihood programs and services. But I remember that 30 years ago, the name of the TLRC was TRC (Technology Resource Center). Livelihood was only added when Hermie Aquino became the head. But I hope you don't forget your original mandate is technology.

And as Director General Antonio Ortiz said, three years ago, you almost didn't think you would reach this point, you would reach 30 years, because the TLRC had a huge loss then — 400 million pesos. But fortunately, the TLRC was the first agency in the entire government to undertake rationalization. Congratulations to you!

So after twenty years… After two years of streamlining, the center was able to significantly reduce expenses, as Director General said, 66 million and three-fourths of which was due to your savings from rationalization. Congratulations on that too!

So from a… From a losing government corporation, the TLRC now stands as a catalyst for hardworking entrepreneurs for the capability of the Filipino economy.

You know, we greatly praise… We greatly praise NAPOCOR because before, it had huge losses and now it is profitable. But not only NAPOCOR should we praise, we also praise TLRC now.

Now the activities of TLRC are being done in local governments as Director General Ortiz said. We have seen mayors here because there are forty-one technology and livelihood development centers throughout the country. Many training courses, as Director General Ortiz said, have been put on tape and discs so they can be watched at home. So it is becoming… It should be, because you are a technology center, so you should really keep up with technology.

And I am pleased to mention, I am Kapampangan, I am from Pampanga, the Mabalacat Techno Center, the big… It was called a technology center before, now it is called the Mabalacat Techno Center, this will be a good industrial estate in what we call the Metro Luzon Urban Beltway. Because there are so many investors coming in. Last year record foreign investments, two billion U.S. dollars record in the entire history of the Philippines, so they are looking for an industrial center.

I hope Filipinos will also invest. I hope other Filipinos will emulate the family of Henry Sy because SM’s investment is continuous.

The Mabalacat and other TLRC techno centers have created eight thousand jobs in recent years. So everything is really being done so that it can help the economy through self-effort and not always subsidized by the national government.

To speed up the recovery from the losses of TLRC, we are also pushing for technology business incubation. Actually, this is really the first mandate of TLRC. This is a program that aims to further improve the survival rate of new businesses and allows them to grow. So I am directing TLRC to be a partner of DOST in business incubation.

Because the other day, we had a meeting, the Philippine-American Society of Scientists, and we presented our science and technology plan there. And one of them is to put… Because we want science and technology, technology to be the basis of our development. And the science of DOST is doing that so it will put up business incubation centers here this year. And I hope TLRC will be a partner in that.

In fact, Danny Coronacion from CIIF is here, and what we want is for many of the incubation centers to be about virgin coconut oil, because many of our poor people are in coconut areas — oh, Tessie Sy is here, one of the most powerful businesswomen in the whole world so SM’s investment is continuous — and virgin coconut oil has a very large demand all over the world. And we want virgin coconut oil to be as well-known as olive oil from Italy. So that should be a technology resource that TLRC tours around the country and help DOST create incubation centers so that there will be virgin coconut oil plants for the different coconut farmers in our areas, especially those affected by typhoons, Bicol and Marinduque, that’s all coconut country. And in this way TLRC will be more connected to our national agenda.

Our national agenda remains focused on creating good-paying jobs, stable prices, and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to the ordinary Filipino family.

This election in May, first and foremost, is about the economy. The people will choose between those with economic plans and those without. Between those who can continue the momentum of job growth, in the economy, or those who will set back the clock. There are two choices in this campaign: one is building the nation; the other one is for breaking down the walls of the nation. The dividing line becomes sharper every passing day. The choice is becoming clear. And we believe, first of all, because as Boyet said, the economy is good and we have strong partners like Boyet. Finally, the people will vote for the economy over politics. Finally, the people will vote for the future over the past. The people will vote for unity over national division.

And I’m happy to see that the programs and services of TLRC are becoming more and more aligned with our agenda of generating jobs and alleviating poverty through the principle of technology — the foundation of future development.

This is the agenda in which I expect TLRC to contribute meaningfully in the coming years. We expect TLRC to be a leading center of entrepreneurial technology-based resources, a virtual one-stop shop for entrepreneurs with strengthened and modernized services in technology and business information, hands-on training, organizing and linkaging.

And with your keen commitment to the public welfare, I trust that TLRC will continue developing more entrepreneurs, more productive entrepreneurs, creating more jobs that give good income and better opportunities for each and every Filipino family.

Congratulations once again on your 30th or pearl anniversary!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of the “Pearl of Livelihood Filipino” and Entrepreneur’s Congress on the Occasion of the Technology and Livelihood Resource Center (TLRC) 30th Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151421/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1875&Itemid=38