Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Gonzales for your introduction.

Vice President de Castro, other elected officials and appointive officials of the country, General Ibrado, Vice Admiral Calderon, other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Admiral Calderon and the rest of the faculty and staff of the PMA, congratulations for producing such a fine harvest of graduates!

Class “MASIDLAK,” parents and loved ones of our graduates, your batch has the most number of “starmen” or honor students distinguished in academics in many years and the lowest attrition rate among recent classes. Congratulations for such academic excellence!

I therefore address Class “MASIDLAK” not just as young officers but as leaders of the next generation. And I address PMA today not just as a training ground for officers of the Armed Forces but as a higher education institution.

Everything our government has worked hard to achieve has been to make the future brighter for the next generation of Filipinos. You, our graduating class, the youth of our nation, are our hope and inspiration. Everything we must do must be to build a better life for each and every young person in this nation.

Therefore, we will continue hands-on governance until the day I leave office. To that end, we will promote the key initiatives our government has advanced since the day I took office. We will focus on three areas:

One, bringing more power and growth to each region, away from the dominance of Manila.

Two, continuing to promote the importance through our efforts to create sustainable and equitable development of the three E’s: the environment, the economy, and education, including a good PMA education.

Third, a continuous focus on you, the youth of our nation, as our best hope for a brighter, better Philippines.

The foundation of opportunity is education, for instance, a good PMA education. It is the key to a better life. It opens minds and opens doors.

And I think there is no better example of what a good PMA education can do to open up new opportunities than our very own valedictorian, Lieutenant Belen, whose father is a tricycle driver and I congratulate his parents!

Because you want PMA to be not just a good school for officers but a good educational institution. In 2002 our new administration reviewed the PMA policies and curriculum. This resulted in what Vice Admiral Calderon mentioned the PMA Strategic Plan or Roadmap.

Because of this strategic plan, entrance standards are now stiffer but administered to a broader selection of qualified students. For instance, this explains why we have a lower attrition rate today and also why we have such a big batch of honor students. I understand that Batch 2010, for many of you, this is your second degree. You already had a degree when you entered the PMA, that’s why your record of academic excellence is terrific, and also it is because of our new recruitment policies. Congratulations to all our honor students!

And just as we have increased the pay of our soldiers, our typical soldier now earns twice as much as he did in year 2000. We have also increased PMA basic stipends from P10,000 plus in year 2000 to almost P19,000 for 2010. I hope that helps more of our students stay on campus, in the school, in PMA, and helps them also to take care of their parents in the meantime.

Like other higher educational institutions, we now require professors to have a graduate degree. And during our administration, a 142 of our core of professors took up masteral and doctoral studies, 50 new officers were recruited to the core of professors, and more than 30 professors were sent to foreign schooling. So, I dare say that our professors in PMA are as good as any other professors in any excellent center of higher education.

On physical facilities, which we also need for a good education, Vice Admiral Calderon talked about what we have done to improve physical facilities in this school, in this academy. And I believe yesterday Secretary Bert Gonzales already enumerated what those different things are that we have done, how we have invested millions, about 60 million pesos, to address long-running clamor for specific investments, improvements in physical facilities. And aside from that, we’ve improved the campus roads. General Ibrado made sure that they would be finished just in time for this graduation. Congratulations to that!

One of the reforms of the PMA Roadmap is the continuous improvement of the communicative skills of the cadets, starting from your first year in the academy until your last day as cadets of PMA. I remember when I was a senator, our impression was that: the PMA curriculum was very heavy on engineering subjects — that was up to 1996 — and then the amount of engineering units pared down. Because I remember also alumni saying that they would have preferred less engineering and more communication skills. And now we are giving that to our cadets.

But at the same time, we must recognize that in today’s world, a strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone in technology. To build the mind and connect to the world. Education and technology are the twin pillars upon which the future of the nation rests. That is why we remain dedicated in our last months in office to promoting, advancing, pushing for more and better education, including in the PMA, and more and better technological infrastructure.

We have come far in both, but we still have far to go and we must not rest. We have made progress, but more needs to be done. That is why before my term ends, a curriculum review will take place for PMA headed by a committee with chair, Dr. Consuelo Estepa of the UST Graduate School. This should result in a new curriculum for the next batch of entrants. And I instruct Admiral Calderon to make sure that this new curriculum should emphasize technology, the way engineering was emphasized in the 1990s and earlier. This new curriculum should conform not only to the needs of the Armed Forces but also to the requirements of a center of academic excellence here in the north.

We have a deep desire to see a brighter future for our hardworking men and women of this nation, including you, our young PMA graduates today. More importantly, we have an abiding interest in seeing that you, the young people today come into your own, seize the value of education as you have done with a PMA education, and seize the value of modernity and use these tools to advance yourself and the nation.

In advancing the nation, you will build up on what your seniors have achieved in the defense and security of our nation. Therefore, though I have spoken mainly of PMA as an academic institution, let me now conclude by acknowledging the achievements of the AFP for which you were specially trained.

In the lawless provinces of the South, we have brought peace and stability through a combination of strict military hard power and the effective use of soft development tools, namely: the building of roads, bridges and schools and ports, to lift up the economy, the local economy.

I trust that you, the new officers of our Armed Forces will apply the same hard and soft power to achieve lasting peace in Mindanao and other insurgency-affected areas.

While lasting peace has yet to be achieved, we have taken heavy political risks to broker a peace. We have reached within the affected communities to change the peace paradigm. We have brought together an amazing international consensus to aid the process from the outside. Japan, Australia, the U.S., England, the OIC nations, Malaysia, and so many others now have a vested interest in peace in Mindanao.

We have been active in the fight against global terrorism, boosting our intelligence gathering and sharing with key allies, while lifting up the professionalism and training of our own armed services, including PMA training.

As a result, we have narrowed the lair of hardcore terrorists in the South and continue to limit and confine the communist insurgency which is sputtering on empty fumes. As a result of all these, the people are safer than ever. We thanked your seniors in the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Congratulations to you!

While we are proud of what our government has achieved, past achievement is only as good as the ability of the nation to continue to grow and prosper. We fervently desire that the progress we have made will not stop; that what remains to be done will by picked up by you, the next generation of leadership, our graduates of Class 2010.

As a nation, we must keep our sights firmly set on the future, to build on what is good and work even harder to meet the challenges of what remains to be done.

You, our graduates, the young of the nation, are the bridge between the past and the future. It is for you that we right the wrongs, fight for change, and seek to make a brighter day. Our nation has come far, but it still has far to go.

You, our graduates; you, the youth, represent the aspirations of our nation. It is to you that we dedicate the efforts of our government to lift up the Philippines. Now, you will join us in those efforts.

Good luck to all of you! Mabuhay! Congratulations!

And in your honor, I will now sign the Pardon of Punishment in observance to the time honored tradition of the Philippine Military Academy. So, I hereby pardon all outstanding punishments of the cadet corps as recommended by the superintendent, PMA effective today.

Mabuhay to our brilliant Class of PMA 2010!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 105th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy (PMA) “Masidlak” Class 2010. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080527/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27661&Itemid=38