Thank you very much, Governor Jojo Arnaiz, Mrs Arnaiz, congratulations! For this beautiful convention center and for hosting this important rondalla festival.

Vice President Noli De Castro; Mayor Toting Perdices; vice governor and other officials of the province of Oriental Negros; our Cabinet members and other national officials who are here with us today; delegates; participants of the Second International Rondalla Festival of Oriental Negros, my fellow countrymen.

We can see the rapid progress here in Dumaguete and throughout Oriental Negros. This convention center of yours, worth 140 million pesos, came solely from the initiative of the provincial government. Governor Arnaiz says that they will finish putting in the rubberized oval at the Perdices coliseum by June. Congratulations! For a coliseum like this.

This convention center is truly worthy of your goal of becoming a favorite destination for tourism activities, convention tourism, nature adventures, and your goal of being a convention and sports destination. It is fitting for our tourism super region here in the Central Philippines.

Earlier, we went to the inauguration of the new Teletech and the start of the Dumaguete business park, which includes a Robinson’s Mall, following the achievement of your goals.

And in order for Oriental Negros progress to continue as well as the rest of the Philippines, we are avowed not to let politics get in the way of the economy. We are avowed to reinforce the economy with firm political stability. We see the political campaign taking its course in a manner reflecting a full fledged Philippine democracy. This should convince one and all that freedom reigns beside a free market in our country.

The resiliency of our economy as well as our political system has been tried and tested through several crises and storms. The Filipino always rises from controversy to shine in excellence and hard work. We shall prove it once more this year. We call on the opposition not to hurt, but to help grow the economy.

Our national agenda is focused on creating more jobs, stabilizing prices, and bringing the benefits of progress to all Filipinos.

Progress comes to the nation through our unity with the barangay leaders, the mayors and the governors.

This capital city of Dumaguete, formerly called a university town and with a beautiful Rizal Boulevard, is also one of the cleanest cities in the country. Congratulations!

And since you are the host of this international event today, because you host international occasions, like this 2nd International Rondalla Festival which starts today, you also show the love of the people of Oriental Negros for culture and the arts.

Oriental Negros is a university town, but today you have shown beyond being a university town, you are a town of great culture, love for culture.

The visit here in the Visayas, in cuerdas is a good opportunity for togetherness in interfaith, inter-culture and inter-civilization through music. What we are doing today, our guests, is an example of interfaith, inter-culture, inter-civilization togetherness.

Our trust in the local officials of Oriental Negros has further strengthened with this provincial convention center. We know that this is the “crowning glory” of many of your accomplishments, which is why you always win and have four “Galing Pook” awards. Congratulations to the province!

But not only government projects, but also projects from our private sector, the new Teletech is a symbol of great progress not only here in Oriental Negros but also in our country in the industry of information and communications technology and in the improvement of our economy.

Because of these new developments, Dumaguete and the entire province of Oriental Negros are among the first to experience the change and progress happening in our country. Congratulations!

And so on this day, it’s a very rare occasion that the president and the vice president are together in one place. Not because we don’t like each other, we like each other very much. But anywhere in the world, the president and the vice president are supposed to avoid being together, but today we are together. That’s how important Oriental Negros is. That’s how important Dumaguete is. That’s how important this international Rondalla festival is to the cultural life of our country.

Many thanks and congratulations! To all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the 2nd International Rondalla Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151454/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1882&Itemid=38