Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2006 Philippine Development Forum (PDF) ‘A meeting of the Philippine Consultative Group and other stakeholders’

[Delivered at the Sampaguita Ballroom, Taal Vista Hotel, Tagaytay City, Cavite, March 30, 2006]

Thank you. Thank you, Secretary Teves.

Mr. Von Amsberg, members of the diplomatic corps, our development partners, members of congress, members of the cabinet, ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for having this forum again today this year. Each of you here today are partners for progress in the Philippines. Each of you here today is a patriot whether you are native born in the Philippines, whether you reside here or even whether you are visiting from abroad.

I would like to thank the combined power of the people in this room — the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the members of Congress, the local governments who are here today and those whom they represent and other development partners.

The Philippines is on a path of reform. And I thank you Joachim for pointing out the four paths of reform that you are willing to support, and we look forward to very fruitful discussions on how you can completely help in this paths of reform.

I especially want to acknowledge the many nations that are represented here today that are part of the international donor community for Mindanao. Nothing will be more powerful for the future development of the Philippines than to bring peace, stability and justice to Mindanao.

You speak of how do we accelerate and broaden the base of growth. How do we attain the millennium development goals? Many of the answers to these questions lie in peace in Mindanao.

Of all the tasks of reform that I have undertaken, none is closer to my heart than to resolve the age-old division in Mindanao. In a sense that is a personal angst of it because i spent my childhood years in Mindanao. I believe that before the year is out, we will be able to achieve a lasting peace in Mindanao with your support. Yet, the last mile is always the hardest sailing because that is when the destination is in sight but the winds of resistance will blow most fiercely.

Therefore, to help us through this last mile more smoothly, I want to make a personal appeal to all of you who plan to provide aid to Mindanao as peace dawns. Please consider providing your aid now even as we await the signing of a final peace accord. As several nations have already done under the Mindanao trust fund of the World Bank in your phase 1.

A proactive gesture of generosity and confidence will put more air in our sails at the pivotal moment in our journey as we strive to reach the safe harbor of peace in Mindanao.

The vital signs for our economy are all strong and moving in the right direction. I need not point out any numbers to you today in my own remarks because we have the cabinet here and you yourselves know what these numbers are. I just want to stress that the stock market is up and our risk premiums are down among obvious indicators.

On the economic front we have made huge progress through improved revenue collection as you have been asking for. An increase in revenues through new taxes as Joachim said we agreed on last year and we have delivered for this year. A crackdown on tax cheats and a strict adherence to fiscal discipline.

And with savings from debt service, we are now able to make targeted investments in infrastructure, job creation, education, better health care coverage and I hope that these are the areas in which you will help us.

We will be ramping up to one hundred thousand scholarships for what we call center finishing schools to those who want to secure jobs in the business process outsourcing industry. This is part of our thrust to improve the quality of jobs that our labor force is entering. But that’s not good enough, we must contain with bold reforms to ensure that our institutions of government are a strong and good as the people they serve.

We are funding defense reforms to ensure a strong modern military that is loyal to the nation and not to political intrigue. And we are pushing for constitutional reform to ensure a government that is organize to be responsive to the people, and system of government that will hold our political leaders accountable to the people or within the system the people will swiftly and legally throw them out of office.

This is why charter change is so important. To help break the back of the petty politics of the status quo that may put headlines in the paper but does nothing to put food on the table. The people want progress, you know that, you talked to our people. They want action and they want it now. The people here today, you, who are here today are working from a plan, a plan we have presented to you many times in the past and always consistently. And you are here and offering hope. In behalf of all Filipinos, therefore, I thank you from the bottom of my heart.

In the meantime, reform must continue not only for the long-term but also on a day-to-day basis. We’re pushing the senate to pass a progressive national budget that lays out our investment strategy in the nation while adhering to tight fiscal controls.

We want to make sure that every dollar that you invest in the Philippines is well spent. And therefore, we recognize that you want to help us in increasing transparency in governance. That is why the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the Bureau of Customs are on their own crusade to wipe out tax fraud and cheating, and to prosecute government officials who abuse their position. We have enlisted the support of Tony Kwok, the former anti-corruption czar of Hong Kong, to put our house in order. And I thank our ODA partners who have been helping us to finance this effort. His tried and tested approach is inspiring us to be more aggressive. And this one area in which we hope that we will continue to have the support of the ODA community.

I want to continue to privatize our energy sector — that’s where you can help as well — to free up government money to invest in the people, and not a subsidy to inefficient entities. The same is true for mining: I want to develop the mining sector, though not at the expense of our environment or our workers. I believe a modern state can provide a clean environment and a good job especially if you will help us in that respect.

So on every front, I’m pressing forward to reform the nation. On projects big and small, we must press for reform and progress at every level. We don’t have time for the endless cycles of political intrigue, senate stonewalling or partisan investigations.

The true power of the people is being felt with the signature campaign to change our form of government. The old time politicians of the status quo will have to stand back because this train has left the station. It is time for politicians to step back or get run over.

Your being here today and the encouraging words you gave about how far forward we’ve gone since last year is a boost of confidence in the Philippines. And I am thankful for your support.

Once again, in behalf of the Philippine officialdom and the Filipino people, thank you to our partners in progress.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 2006 Philippine Development Forum (PDF) ‘A meeting of the Philippine Consultative Group and other stakeholders’. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214337/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2414&Itemid=38