Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the ASEAN Summit

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, August 8, 2006]

ASEAN: “ONE CARING AND SHARING COMMUNITY”

The Philippines is proud to be the chair of ASEAN this year and host to the ASEAN and East Asia summits in December, also president of the ASEAN Parliamentary Organization in the person of our Speaker of the House of Representatives.

All these underscore our commitment that if s in the interest of the Philippines to be regionally and globally engaged politically, economically and diplomatically.

As we celebrate 39 years of ASEAN, we celebrate how with collective wisdom and resolve, we in ASEAN have broken free from the chains of colonialism to seek the blessings of peace, prosperity and progress for all our peoples.

We have faith that we will continue to find the full promise of a region known for its rich diversity and panoply of races and creeds.

Our leadership in ASEAN this year, as Secretary Romulo has said, carries the theme of “One caring and sharing community.” Through the years, we’ve seen and felt the reassuring presence of ASEAN’s humanitarian power in countries devastated by natural disasters — be it a tsunami, earthquake, landslide or volcanic eruption.

We will push for initiatives that will make ASEAN a shining institution that cares for its peoples, for its environment, and one that truly shares resources for uplifting the disadvantaged integrating the marginalized and realizing the common good.

We will work for the protection of the rights of migrant workers in all corners of the earth. There are many ASEAN workers in the Middle East including two million Filipinos, 30,000 in Lebanon. In this time of crisis, we will share with our ASEAN neighbors our government apparatus. It keeps track of our overseas workers and takes care of their needs. We have moved thousands of our people to relative safety from the most harmful areas of South Lebanon.

We ask our ASEAN neighbors to join us in calling for peace in the Middle East and a secession of violence by all parties.

Starting today, the Philippines will host the ASEAN Center for Biodiversity in Los Baños. That was what we signed this morning. It’s only fitting. Our Sulu Sea is the biodiversity hot spot of the world, and we are one of the 17 megadiverse countries that account for the most of the terrestrial, freshwater and marine species on earth.

We will push for greater cooperation in energy security including a joint energy project with our neighbor Indonesia in the southern Mindanao-Sulawesi border.

Peace and security is at the center of the ASEAN Regional Forum. Only peace and security can enable free and fair trade on sea and land inhabited by almost 600 million people producing almost one trillion U.S. dollars.

By pushing for a convention on counter terrorism, we will advance teamwork in the fight against evil. By engaging our neighboring region, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Nations, we will widen our reach.

At the apex of our dreams, as Secretary Romulo said, is an ASEAN charter ─ a legal organization with a juridical personality ─ bound by institutional rules and standards, empowered to engage the world in more constructive and powerful ways.

Ladies and gentlemen, brothers and sisters in ASEAN, let us work together.

Fellow Filipinos, to make the country’s leadership of ASEAN this year a success, let us help make our dream of “One caring and sharing community” come true.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library