Thank you very much Governor Vic Magsaysay for introducing me. And thank you very much also because day and night your provincial engineers worked to make this perimeter fence and access road of Magsaysay Technological University. And according to Vic, the Administration Building is waiting for help so in consideration of what Vic Magsaysay is asking for — listen to me pms — we will allocate p4 million to help complete the Administration Building.

I would also like to greet our honorable Congressmen, the Congressman of your district, Congressman Ruben Torres. Congressman Ruben Torres was our campaign manager in 1995, when I became the number one senator in the country so I am very grateful to him until now. And now he is Congressman, his role is very important not only here but throughout the Philippines because we expect him to defend our Securitization Law. Once that Securitization Law is passed, many of the non-performing assets held by banks will become money again and thus fund many of our projects, especially housing projects for the working class. And perhaps the graduating students of this school will benefit from that when there is more funding for low-cost housing for working people.

I also greet the congressman on the other side, Congressman Bong Gordon, although some campuses are not under his jurisdiction, many students here are covered by his district. So he is also helping here at the school, for example, he has 67 scholars here at Ramon Magsaysay Technological University. And because of his students here who are constituents, he allocated p3 million to the budget of RMTU in Republic Act 9162.

I greet the various officials of the province of Zambales who came from afar, so many, especially the mayor of Iba, Mayor Danilo Palmoreras. And of course President Rosete and all the officials of Ramon Magsaysay Technological University. And of course our students who are graduating today. Especially their parents.

I also want to introduce and boast about a Filipino who has achieved great success abroad, in a community where there are very few Filipinos, he is the new mayor of the City of Davis, California, Dr. Ruth Uy Monzon and today is not only graduation we are celebrating, we also have two more things to celebrate. One is because I want you students to be sure you have a job when you graduate as long as you can. I brought a jobs fair so you can start looking for a job today. You are 981 graduates and in this jobs fair, 416 have registered to look for a job. And 31 of you were hired on the spot. There are 200 more to be interviewed because we have eight Filipino companies and five overseas companies at the jobs fair so you will have a good opportunity to get employment immediately. For those who want to be self-employed, there is also the TLRC, the Technological Livelihood and Resource Center and 35 of you have signed up and will receive some capital and training for your own business. That is one of our programs so we can ensure livelihood for those coming from schools.

But today is why General Rey Berroya is here, where is he, outside. Oh, there is General Boysie Braganza, Division Commander who takes care of your peace here in Zambales, until Pangasinan, until Aurora. But General Rey Berroya is outside, the Regional Director of the Philippine National Police. Because I want the police to not only arrest criminals and drug addicts, I want them to help our out-of-school, out-of-work urban poor youth get emergency employment so that fewer drug addicts will be arrested if there is employment even for our out-of-school youth. That's what we're doing today, our theme, “jobs, jobs, jobs.” jobs for graduates like you, jobs for those less fortunate than you and who cannot continue their studies.

And so today, I would like to congratulate the graduates of Ramon Magsaysay Technological University. And I would like to thank the students , the faculty, the administration and the staff of the RMTU for actively addressing the development agenda of the Arroyo administration.

I have repeatedly said that our development agenda revolves around the vision of winning the battle against poverty within the decade. This battle consists of four components:

First, promote free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century wherein our competitive advantage is the great Filipino worker. And therefore, our competitive advantage lies in the human resource intensive, skills intensive service sectors like information and communications technology and tourism.

Second, modernize agriculture founded on social equity.

Third, have a sectoral and social bias in our economic development plan.

Fourth, improve moral standard in government and society.

Now regarding the first item about information and communication technology. I congratulate RMTU. I’m glad to learn that you have successfully integrated ICT education in all your curricular programs.

And I am glad that under the build-operate-and- transfer scheme, incidentally which I authored when I was senator, RMTU installed an internet system servicing the needs of the students, the faculty and the administration. Accessing information through the internet has been made an integral part of the different courses offered by this university. And I understand that the students pay reasonable internet fees every semester. And that faculty and staff pursuing graduate studies in progressive universities, the distance education make use of the internet at minimal cost.

It is great that this remote school is up-to-date with information and communication technology. Congratulations on that.

Regarding tourism, it's perfect. You know, when I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry more than ten years ago, I started what they call the West Central Luzon Development Program, supposed to be Zambales, Bataan and Western Pampanga. Then when I moved to the executive branch, my colleagues in the Department of Trade and Industry continued it but they expanded it. They called it the W-Corridor. Because the shape of the area is like a w. That first slant like that, that’s West Central Luzon. And that’s still there, that is Zambales, Subic, Bataan and Western Pampanga. That one going up again, because that’s how a W is, right? And there’s one in the middle, that one in the middle is from Western Pampanga going up to Luisita, and then Clark, down to Clark, down to Bulacan, that’s the industrial corridor. Then the right side of the W is Bulacan going up to Nueva Ecija, that’s our agricultural corridor. Now I explained the agriculture, I explained the industry, there on the left is where Zambales, West Central Luzon, according to that master plan, West Central Luzon is for tourism. So it’s very fitting that here at Ramon Magsaysay Technological University you have tourism, attention to tourism.

Tourism, the experts say, in tourism, our competitive advantage is eco-tourism and beach tourism. It’s very fitting for Zambales. Because eco-tourism is trekking reaching Mt. Pinatubo and beach tourism is our beaches all the way from Iba down to Subic.

You know, when I was young, just a little bit older than you, as a young married woman, because I got married right after graduation. I used to go surfing in Iba, Zambales. I don’t know if that surf spot is still there now. But other places like Siargao in Mindanao and Baler where people also surf when I was a young matron have become tourist destinations. So I expect that in the tourism master plan, those things I did when I was young will be done by many tourists here in Iba, here in Zambales.

On agricultural modernization founded on social equity. We want in agricultural modernization that the state universities and colleges, like RMTU, their research should not be wasted in Ivory Tower Research where the findings only remain on the library shelf. We want it to be used in our agricultural modernization.

First of all, let me say that I am glad that in RMTU, that we are working on agricultural modernization as well.

First of all, here in Zambales, okay, yes, our number one hope here is tourism. Because to begin with, there are already many tourists going to Subic. We need them to have side tours to the north, to the beaches and to Mt. Pinatubo trekking. But you also have a natural resource in agriculture and that is your mangoes. Zambales mangoes have been known for a long time. But if we look at it, whose mangoes really go to other countries? The mangoes of Guimaras. Why? Because they used science and technology to kill the flies in Guimaras, for the new seeds, the new varieties and the soil. That’s why research-based expansion of an agricultural product is very important. That’s why it’s important that your school use its research so that we have a continuous and sustainable production and market for Zambales mangoes.

So Congressman Bong Gordon, he is also proposing that there should be a research and development program for the mango industry, so that the production of Zambales mangoes improves, becomes competitive in the international market. So I expect that here at rmtu, mango-related research will expand and flourish.

I would also like to let you know that the promotion of the use of hybrid rice is the flagship program of the research and development component of the agricultural and fisheries modernization program under our administration. But it is not the only crop that we must do research on. For instance, Bicol is known for abaca, but it seems that Leyte overtook Bicol in this crop. So therefore, it is time to modernize the Bicol abaca industry. And under our agricultural and fisheries modernization program, research and development are supposed to be integrated. Research and development in the state universities and colleges are supposed to solve the needs of agricultural modernization under a unified command. And that is why that here, therefore, the RMTU should, just as I told the Partidos State University in Bicol, that they must concentrate on doing research to stop the disease of the Bicol abaca that is making Leyte overtake Bicol in abaca whereas Bicol was the traditional source of abaca, the same thing here, RMTU should concentrate on developing the productivity of the mango industry because after all, the mango industry in Zambales is much older than the mango industry of Guimaras.

So I am happy to have the opportunity to connect with you students of rmtu. So that we can discuss the future of our country and your role in that future.

Hopefully, the graduate students of RMTU are there, the 31 who already have jobs; the 36 who have signed up for self-employment, congratulations because you can do something right away. And the 200 interviewees at the jobs fair, I hope you all pass your interviews.

And when you succeed, don’t forget that we have out-of-school youth who, if possible, can also be helped to find jobs.

So I am happy this day, tomorrow is my birthday, so I said I will spend these two days in my home region of Region III. I was telling Governor Vic Magsaysay that my observation is, Region III doesn’t think much as a region. If you look at the Ilocos Region, they think as one. The Bicol region, they think as one. Ilonggo region, Region VI, they think as one. Mindanao, they think as one. The Visayan, they think as one. Here, we think along language lines. Pampanga and half of Tarlac, we think as one Kapampangan. Bataan and Southern Zambales, Tagalog. Northern Zambales, you join the north. Then Nueva Ecija and Bulacan are on their own because they are Tagalog. Our languages in our region are different. But we are one region because we are one economy. That W Corridor, you’ll see how complementary our region is if we really think as one region. So I’m thinking that I, my birthday is tomorrow, today and tomorrow – I started earlier in Clark because I inaugurated the United Parcel Service, courier service, this is the biggest parcel service in the world. Three hundred million dollars is that investment. And we want Clark and Subic to be one. So we will build a Clark-Subic road so that it is the middle of the W Corridor and all the way to Luisita. There are three of them. It will be a triangle. But here in Zambales, it’s very clear in agricultural modernization, mangoes, but overall, tourism. And why not? Zambales has the natural wonders and Zambales has the natural warmth of the people.

So, whether you work abroad or in Subic-Clark or in your own business or in tourism or plant and improve our mangoes and trade our mangoes. I hope you succeed because your success is the success of our country. And when you are there working, you are the citizens of our economy. I hope you help me, I need your help to uplift our country.

Thank you very much. Congratulations to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 2nd Commencement Exercises of the Ramon Magsaysay Technological University (RMTU). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230112/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7653&Itemid=38