Thank you very much, Secretary Gilbert Teodoro.

Our other Cabinet members; Bishop Pueblos, the Moving Spirit for Peace and Development here in CARAGA; may I also greet another very important Bishop who has done much for peace and development in CARAGA, the Vice-President of CBCP, Bishop Ochomao of Surigao; I’d like to, of course, greet our host, our host Mayor, Mayor Boy Plaza; our host Congressman, Congressman Joboy Aquino; our host Governor of Agusan Del Norte, Governor Amante.

Together with us are various leaders here in CARAGA: Governor Valentina Plaza of Agusan Del Sur, Congressman Ompong Plaza also from Agusan Del Sur, Governor Ace Barbers from Surigao Del Norte; our two Congressmen there: Congressman Matugas and Congressman Romarate; in Sur Surigao, Congressman Pichay, Congressman Garay, and Governor Pimentel.

Our Cabinet members here aside from Secretary Teodoro who introduced me, our peace process Secretary, Secretary Jess Dureza and your new CORD (cabinet officer for regional development) for CARAGA, Secretary Ace Durano. The reason Ace Durano became your CORD is of course, number one: Preferably, we want someone from here. Ace’s mother, from Surigao Del Sur. So Ace is half Caragan, half Cebuano. And because… Especially because Bishop Pueblos said we want one of the major industries here to be eco-tourism, Ace is really suitable because he is our Secretary of Tourism.

I would like to greet also our uniformed services. We have the Chief of the Police, General Razon; representing the chief of the Armed Forces who is in Africa right now visiting our Philippine troops there, so we have here vice Chief-of-Staff General Romero; and representing the National Security Council, Deputy Director General Victor Mayo.

To all of you, brothers and sisters, participants in the CARAGA Conference on Peace and Development, first of all, thank you very much for the resolutions and promises you made following your theme, “Advancing Genuine Peace and Holistic Development for the Security of Local Communities.”

And we see in the leadership of Bishop Pueblos that the most effective way to address security problems is none other than the combination of the local community here under the leadership of Bishop Pueblos and together with the activities of the local governments.

Our regional peace and security assemblies enable stakeholders, sama kaninyong tanan, to discuss issues, share experiences, draw up plans and coordinate among yourselves. Earlier, anhi kami sa Agusan Del Sur and Secretary Dureza was recounting how important have been the inputs among the stakeholders including our Congressmen. In that case in Agusan Del Sur, he was talking about Congressman Ompong Plaza’s inputs to the discussions yesterday. And we encourage the participants to learn from the best practices of other provinces and other regions.

Ang CARAGA usa sa labing malinawong rehiyon sa nasod, busa nihimo nato kining atong conference for peace and development aron mahibalo ug tibuok nasud kung unsay nahimo diri sa CARAGA busa naa ta kalinaw. And earlier, Bishop Pueblos gave an award to two important peacemakers, peacebuilders, one from the police and one from the military, and I congratulate them both. Apan dili kini katarungan aron maghinay-hinay kita sa pagbantay. Mahimo gihapon nga threats in neighboring areas can spill over. Eternal vigilance is the price of enduring freedom.

These communist rebels have spent years as a low-level threat. Low-level so there is a chance we can solve the problem through peaceful ways because the threat is low-level. But members, they are there, they impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas, including the rural areas of CARAGA. And we cannot deny that they are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. So if we are to become a first world country, as in the preamble of your resolution, we have to put a stop to that ideological nonsense and criminal acts once and for all. And we want that this will end by 2010.

Yes, we have to do some hard-power action. So the AFP, aided by the PNP, are going after hard-core combatants, but note the term hard-core. And here in CARAGA we see that if you talked about hard-core combatants their numbers continue to dwindle in the face of continuous setbacks. Not only from our military actions but also from our civic actions in reaching out to the poorest of the poor.

In the military portion of the fight, the maneuver battalions do the S.O.T., conduct patrols against the NPA, clear and consolidate NPA areas, then leave behind organized Cafgus as stay-behind forces and move on to clear other areas.

We should also strengthen the institutions of government in order to achieve and maintain peace and progress. We need to ensure that justice and human rights flourish through a strong criminal justice system.

Kauban sa pangita sa kalinaw ang amnestiya ug kinabuhi sa mga rebelde nga gusto mobalik sa bahin sa balaod. And I’m glad that part of your resolution is urging congress to affirm the amnesty proclamation that we have made. And I look forward to our Congressmen from CARAGA who are here to be the sponsors of the affirmation of this amnesty resolution.

To ensure priority development support for local peace initiatives, as Commander-in-Chief, I have ordered the office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process headed by Jess Dureza and the Commanding General of the Armed forces’ Philippine National Development Service Command, a newly created command. What are they doing? Their job is not to fight but rather to build. They build infrastructure, they build community projects and so on. I’ve asked them to submit to the Executive Secretary a list of areas scheduled for local peace initiatives such as what we are doing here in CARAGA and the priority programs and projects due to be sustained such as what Bishop Pueblos enumerated in the resolution. What should be the projects extended and/or launched in these places in tandem with the peace efforts. The Executive Secretary shall then disseminate the list to agency heads for priority funding and implementation, based on the OPAPP-AFP schedule of peace initiatives and subject to regular updating based on conditions and requirements of the ground.

Here in Mindanao, it's not just the NPA that we are facing, there's also the MILF. And we are close to an agreement with the MILF. We remain optimistic we can overcome the final barriers on ancestral domain so that we can bring finality to the peace. Perhaps here in Caraga, because half of the population here are indigenous people, you can understand what the issue of ancestral domain is. But even though we haven’t come to that final peace agreement even now we have already achieved a great deal. Mindanao is vastly improved in terms of safety, security and economic growth. And I hope the world sees that. So the current agreements are making things better, but Mindanao will really take off if we achieve lasting peace and the millions of foreign aid promised comes pouring in because the world wants peace in Mindanao, and the world is ready to support peace in Mindanao moving towards irreversible development.

Duna pa ikatulo diri sa Mindanao ang Abu Sayyaf. The Abu Sayyaf stand in the way of bringing peace, stability and order to the Southern Philippines. We must wipe them out once and for all. They are a menace to peace and a beacon for international thugs who wish to join their ranks.

We commend our Armed Forces for their heroic efforts against the Abu Sayyaf. We deeply regret and mourn for the soldiers who have been caught in the line of fire. The Abu Sayyaf has been holding Mindanao hostage to their agenda of mayhem. They hold even areas like CARAGA even when they’re not here because they give the whole Mindanao a bad name. The travel advisories for the prospective investors. And tourist do not say, do not go to this island, do not go that island, they say do not go to Mindanao. So they hold even other areas of Mindanao hostage. But we will not be deterred from our mission, which is to bring long-lasting peace to this island. The military offensive against the Abu Sayyaf will continue, not as an act of vengeance but as a strategy to win the peace.

But even in the areas where they are and especially here in CARAGA, the way to peace, as Bishop said, isn’t mainly through the barrel of a gun. Rather it begins with providing a person a job, food on the table and human dignity. And central to that success is to invest in the people — in education, health care, roads, bridges and schools. We are making those investments – it’s working. The positive impacts of these projects cannot be overstated, from health care to building schools, the outreach has built more than buildings — it has built trust.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy so that we can invest on these things and our overall economic health. I am proud of the fact that we are pre-paying our external debt. We will balance the budget in 2008, two years ahead of schedule, so that we can save on the interests. And we make sure to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs. And we will not sacrifice long-term gains for short-term political expediency.

The gains of our economic growth are being reinvested in our people through increased infrastructure and social service programs.

Sama sa education: The Department of Education is making sure every grade school student has a textbook in Math, Science and English. And I have instructed them to maximize the use of distance learning in the NPA areas to make sure the content is not infiltrated. And I hope Gilbert that the National Service Command, the new command, development command will also produce soldier-teachers for this purpose.

Health care: DOH and PCSO work with the local governments to provide health insurance for indigent families and improve long-term care for our senior citizens. We came from Camiguin earlier. Of course, Camiguin is a small province, but in Camiguin, health insurance is universal. One hundred percent of the people have health insurance. And one hundred percent there is no insurgency in Camiguin. So I instruct the DOH and the PCSO to continue to work with the local government units on health insurance. Also, I instruct them to send doctors and medical personnel to conduct free clinics in the S.O.T. Area and to upgrade primary local government hospitals to the secondary level by helping them acquire the equipment to deliver babies and do simple surgery. Earlier we came from Agusan del Sur, there is a small hospital there in Esperanza started by Governor Eddie Bong Plaza and continued by Governor Tina Plaza. And what we said, we will contribute to them is equipment to help them deliver babies, do simple surgeries and apply anesthesia. The PITC was there also. The role of the PITC in our peace process should be to set up pharmacies selling half-priced medicines. And there is also the nutrition council. We had a meeting the other day with the union of local authorities together with the nutrition council of the Philippines. And one of our resolutions there was the nutrition council shall also work with the local governments on anti-hunger programs.

Especially in Agusan del Sur which is the largest producer of rice and corn here in the region, hunger should be eliminated there. Hunger should be eliminated throughout CARAGA, and that is what we want NNC to work with. I have instructed the cabinet to immediately focus on the provinces with the most hunger.

Roads: We saw your resolution that Bishop Pueblos read. We prioritized the Butuan-Davao road. It looks good now. Next under construction is the Surigao-Davao road and next is the Butuan-Tandag road. So Bishop Ochomadi doesn't have to travel for eight hours to get here in Butuan.

Mga taytay: Gi-inaugurate nato sa akon niaging pagbisita ang dako ug gwapo nga Diosdado Macapagal Bridge diri sa Butuan. Ug kaganina nahibalo ko sa Agusan Del Sur nga katong kalsada, katong Butuan-Davao road na hapit kitaan niadto ang kontrata tungod naa slippage but because of the… but you know, when we threathen to cancel it, they worked very fast and they even had savings so they were able to build a bridge on top of all of that.

The DPWH and the DOTC are improving our infrastructure to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty. And we hope that with the infrastructure like an airport, we will improve the airport in Siargao so that the resources there can be accessed. When I last went to Siargao there was one five-star resort with 12 rooms. But now I heard there are two five-star resorts already. Improving, ever improving. The business climate must improve in order for us to have investors but they need infrastructure. So airports for tourists are one important infrastructure.

Schools: The DepEd is building and repairing schools as needed to have a maximum grade school ratio of 50 students to one classroom for two shifts. So if there are still grade school classrooms with more than fifty students in two shifts in one classroom, let us know so we can build more classrooms.

Earlier today when I was in the plane with Secretary Dureza, he also reported to us that our peace intervention in 20 barangays in CARAGA with 8,963 household beneficiaries has a total project cost of more that 20 million pesos under our act for peace program managed by the Philippine government and the U.N. with direct support from the government of New Zealand. Ug kaganina sa inyohang resolution that Bishop Pueblos read nga unta ang ccpd mahimo full partner sa aton mga development initiatives. Jess Dureza said that is already done, CCPD is an official partner of development.

On livelihood: My colleagues from the DTI must help the people market your products at better prices and mobilize the private business sector. I saw in your different workshops there is a business sector perspective of course because the private business sector stakeholders together with the LGUs, the religious, the academic sectors and civil society.

And of course, we must enhance civil-military relations. And that was what this new command is all about that has been created, the National Development Service Command, Support Command. Because we must wield a new paradigm of peace through the use of both hard and soft power.

We must continue to pursue the peace formula that bishop described of effective capability-building programs, dialogue, and for those who are hard-core, military might. We must meld together confidence-building measures grounded on economic and basic infrastructure development. The experience of CARAGA is great proof that this is what we need now.

And so I want to thank you, I want to thank Bishop Pueblos, I want to thank the priests not only for singing the beautiful song about the impossible dream but also making true in CARAGA the impossible dream of peace. And with that peace, may we reach throughout… True progress for our region.

Many thanks for the good example that you have shown. We give you our strong support. Continue this.

Daghan salamat kaninyong tanan.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the CARAGA Conference for Peace And Development (CCPD). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140204/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2224&Itemid=38