Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the celebration of International Women’s Day

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Ging Deles for your introduction of me, although we all know each other, right? Oh! It was Secretary Dinky Soliman. I always mistake the two, twins in thought. Sorry, good thing you didn’t hear me address Ging Deles.

Thank you very much Secretary Dinky Soliman for your introduction of me. And I want to greet everyone here but earlier all their names were already mentioned in the long speeches. There is only one I didn’t hear mentioned, Mayor Pewee Trinidad, who is our host. I’m not fond of long speeches and we have so many big shots here now — of all parties and all shades — because this day, even during campaign season, everyone united for women.

And because Oyo De Dios already said, Amelo Reyes already said our accomplishments and what we still plan to do for women, I won’t repeat what they said. I will just remind you of our three main policies for women — promoting economic rights, defending the human rights of women, and helping women in good governance.

On that… First of all, in good governance — gender sensitive governance. It just happened that half of our cabinet are women. Proof, who are they? Number one, Secretary of the DBM, Emi Boncodin; number two, Secretary of Finance, Nitz Amatong; number three, Secretary of Justice, Mercy Gutierrez; Number four, Secretary of DOLE, Pat Sto. Tomas. It looks like Pat Sto. Tomas is for Senator 2007 ah; number five, Secretary of Social Welfare, Dinky Soliman; number six, Secretary of Science and Technology, Nina Alabastro. Number seven, Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Delia Albert; number eight, Secretary of Anti-Poverty, Veronica Villavicencio; number nine, Secretary of Environment Bebet Gozun. Number ten, Secretary of the Peace Process, Ging Deles; number eleven, Secretary for Priority Programs and O.D.A., Mai Jimenez.

That’s eleven, not including the Executive offices that are constitutionally independent: Chairman of the Civil Service, Karina David; Chairman of the PCGG, Haydee Yorac; Chairman of Human Rights, Puring Quisumbing. That is our contribution of women to good governance. Not including the many women leading agencies, in our various agencies. As they say, if you need somebody to do the work of two men, find one woman.

Regarding the human rights of women, after we waited for a very, very long time. In fact, these laws were authored by me when I was still a senator. It became an administration measure — oh, Senate. I caught up with you then, right? Nice to see you girls — two administration measures finally passed, protecting the human rights of women — the Anti-Trafficking Law and the Domestic Violence Law. Thank you to Senate President Drilon, to Speaker De Venecia and all the Senators and Congressmen and Congresswomen, those who are here and those who are not, who worked overtime so that these laws for our women finally arrived.

Regarding economic rights, Oyi and Amelo talked at length about the various things that have been done — housing, etc. But for me, my favorite is that we reached microfinance or small loans to one million women in our country. Where are their representatives here now? Entre-Pinay, Pasig City, thank you. SEA-K and others, that’s it! — no, Napolcom. That’s not microfinance — those are SEA-K of like, Parañaque. You are included in the one million women who have had a new life because we gave attention to the economic rights of our women.

So three contributions of women to good governance – human rights of women, economic rights of women. We still have a lot to say.

Long live women! Happy Women’s Day to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the International Women’s Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090355/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5659&Itemid=38