Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Joint National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Cabinet Group and National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) Cabinet Group Meeting and launching of the Tourism Central Philippines Tour

[Delivered at Sabang Port, Brgy. Sabang Puerto Princesa City, Palawan, February 23, 2010]

Good morning to all of you.

We are very happy to hold our Cabinet Meeting here in Puerto Princesa which together with the province of Palawan during our administration the number one destination for tourism investments. So it is important for us to do this event today as part of our tour of the Super Regions.

Since the day we took office, it has been a goal of our government to lift up every part of the Philippines — not just Manila. The provinces are the heart and soul of our nation. Our job has been to nourish that heart and soul with investments in our people and our infrastructure, so that every Filipino can thrive.

Our tours of the nation have been a staple of our time in office. More importantly, we have not only traveled to the provinces, we have invested in the provinces. Our political process is warped. It funnels too much economic and political power in Manila. We have aimed to spread the opportunity across the nation, and take back the tilt to the power brokers in Manila.

To spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila, we designed the Super Regions. If you will look at the screen, you will see the Super Regions: Agribusiness Mindanao, the Cyber Corridor, the Luzon Urban Beltway, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, and Tourism Central Philippines, where we are today.

Central Philippines consist of the Visayas, Bicol, MIMAROPA, and the Islands of Northern Mindanao. It attracts the majority of foreign tourists to the Philippines, anchored by Boracay, Cebu, Palawan and Bohol, because of its natural wonders and the natural warmth of its people. The job of the national government is to provide the means to take the tourists to those wonders through transport facilities, meaning, ports, airports and roads.

For instance, let’s begin with Boracay, the leading overall tourism destination. There, we upgraded the Kalibo Airport to take in international flights, and these international flights have been helped along by the ASEAN Open Skies Policy. We’ve also improved what used to be called the “abortion road” to Caticlan. And now a private investment in the Caticlan Airport itself has started construction.

We have also built good roads from Boracay to its spillover destinations in Panay, and I want to invite our Cabinet members here to interrupt me anytime that something is wrong or to — not accurate — or to elaborate because this is a working report. So we’re just opening it to the media.

So, as I said earlier, we have also improved other roads leading from Boracay, for instance, the Aklan-Libertad-Pandan Road. And also since we built the new international airport in Santa Barbara, Iloilo we have also built the road from Santa Barbara, Iloilo to Iloilo City. And Iloilo City connects to Guimaras and its beaches — where is Larry Mendoza? I want him to validate this — via the RORO-capable Jordan wharf. And on the other side of Guimaras, we built the Sibunag RORO Port to connect to Bacolod.

In Negros, we built the Bacolod-Silay Airport and we are building a second access road between the new airport and Bacolod City and further on to Sipalay, with its Mediterranean ambience.

As I said earlier, the number one tourism investment destination is Palawan. While Boracay is the number one tourism destination, the number one tourism investment destination is Palawan anchored by the Banyan Tree investment. Banyan Tree was the one who developed Phuket and so, therefore, we hope that Northern Palawan will become another Phuket with the leadership of Banyan Tree.

Palawan has nearly 2,000 islands. Imagine we have 7,100 islands in the Philippines and about 1,700 are in Palawan. So how do we take the tourists to Palawan? We take the tourists to its wonders by upgrading the airports of Puerto Princesa and Busuanga, and building the San Vicente Airport. Also by completing the road backbone from El Nido to Rio Tuba whose gaps we filled. For instance, when I used to come here when I was running for senator and even when I was a senator, you couldn’t go by land from Puerto Princesa to El Nido. Now, you can. Now, you can. Okay.

And also, where we came from now, the Underground River of Puerto Princesa, the guide was telling us that when she was young it took them the whole day to travel from Sabang to Puerto Princesa. Now with the new road that we have built, it’s much more convenient and together with the publicity of the world’s 7 New Wonders the tourism to the underground river has tripled according to our host Mayor Hagedorn.

So if Boracay is the number one overall tourist destination and Palawan is the number one tourism investment destination, Cebu is the number one destination for foreign tourists. And they say it is because it has a world class airport, very near world class resorts, especially in Mactan Island and convention centers.

But there were some ugly roads in Cebu that we have inherited from the past; we have made them beautiful. Just as we have done in Palawan where we are building the… or have built the backbone from north to south, the same thing with Cebu province. For instance, from Cebu City going south to the resorts of San Fernando, Moalboal and Badian, and then going up north to the treasure sharks of Malapascua — which we’ll visit tonight and tomorrow morning — and even onwards to Masbate’s white sand beaches through the Cebu-Masbate RORO nautical highway.

There is an energy gap in the Visayas but it is being plugged by a 200-megawatt plant in Naga, Cebu and a billion dollars worth of investments by Metro Bank and its partners for more than 600 megawatts in Cebu and Iloilo. In fact, their new 250-megawatt plant in Toledo, Cebu soft-opened last Sunday and will be inaugurated on March 1 with myself as the guest of honor.

We have likewise extended the Dumaguete runway. And the Roll-on/Roll-off ferry system connects Negros Oriental to the beaches of Siquijor. Now I mentioned the anchor tourism destinations in Central Philippines: Boracay, Cebu, Palawan and Bohol.

Bohol became a destination distinct from Cebu since the time it defeated the communist terrorists in 2005 and since we completed the Bohol Circumferential Road. That is why now it deserves its own international airport which we are building in Panglao Island.

We also built the Jagna, Bohol and the Balbagon, Benoni and Guinsiliban RORO Ports in Camiguin which makes Camiguin’s beaches accessible to the Visayas. And in Camiguin, we have built a beautiful circumferential road and on the other side of Northern Mindanao Islands a better road to Dakak beach in Dapitan City.

Going back to the Visayas in the eastern part, our upgraded airports in Tacloban, Guiuan and Siargao provide the means to the perfect surfs of the Pacific. The Tacloban Airport whose upgrading we have begun is also the gateway to the dive spots of Southern Leyte, especially Limasawa.

For Bicol, which is part of Central Philippines, the access road to the proposed new international airport in Daraga, Albay has just been completed. You see they have no real international airport… to me there’s an international airport in Legazpi, but the governors feel that for international flights to come to Bicol they must have one really good international airport comparable let’s say to at least Puerto Princesa or Cebu. And they all agree that it should be in Daraga in Albay. The road has been finished; the right-of-way for the runway has been acquired 30%, enough to start the construction of the runway itself. So the local government is in-charge of purchasing the right-of-way and then the national government with the DOTC builds the runway itself and the terminal.

And of course roads. We’re improving roads like the one leading to the beaches of Caramoan in Camarines Sur and there the Development Bank of the Philippines provided the province of Camarines Sur with a P700-million loan to develop the Caramoan beach and the water sports complex in Pili.

Donsol in Sorsogon is the number one eco-tourism destination according to Time Magazine in Asia. We modernized the old rickety one-way bridge to Donsol, Sorsogon whose whale shark interaction is as I said, the best eco-tourism experience in Asia. And the traffic increase has turned Donsol from a fifth class municipality to a first class with a P70-million contribution to the economy last year. Its small banca operators exemplify the benefits of our GREET program. GREET means, Grassroots Entrepreneurship for Eco-Tourism. In fact in one of my State of the Nation addresses, I cited Alan Amanse, a college undergraduate and young father, who used to earn 100 pesos a day from fishing and driving a tricycle in Donsol. He became a whale shark-watching guide, and his income jumped tenfold to a 1,000 pesos a day and he started building his dream house.

We were in Donsol yesterday and I looked for him and I asked him, how’s your dream house? He said under construction pero meron pa, bubuksan ko na ang sariling resort ko this coming May, because he found an investor to invest in him. That’s an example. And this where we are here, this resort, are examples that the private sector has responded to our investment in roads and airports and RORO by their own investments in hotels, lodging houses and infrastructure worth almost 600 billion pesos nationwide between 2004 and 2009 alone during the term of Secretary Durano as Secretary of Tourism. Congratulations, Ace!

And as I said earlier, Central Philippines receive half of this investment, and of the almost half of this investment most of it is here in Palawan. So congratulations to our host, the Palaweños!

Our nation has been blessed with some of the most scenic beauty in the world. Even more important, our nation has been blessed with the most welcoming, energetic and friendly people on earth.

If we are to succeed in building up our tourism, and it is a huge economic boost to our nation — how much Ace of our GDP is now attributable to tourism, you were telling me? In 2008 9.0% and it’s been growing at 15% every year. So, that’s more than 10% by now for sure — we must invest in our people, our infrastructure and our environment. So, as part of this investment, we declared nature parks in Tubbataha Reefs. Right, Joel during our administration?

In Northwest Panay, near Boracay; in North Negros, near the Bacolod-SiIay Airport; in Central Cebu; in Mt. Isarog in Bicol. We are funding the Bicol River Basin Watershed Irrigation, Flood Control and Water Conservation Project. And in the Underground River of Puerto Princesa, which was declared a nature park ages ago, in 2003, we declared it as a National Geological Monument.

We have also set up almost a 100 marine and fish sanctuaries in Central Philippines since 2001, including Tubbataha and the whale shark sanctuary of Donsol.

We have provided also billions for rehabilitation efforts for climate change adaptation especially in the aftermath of typhoon “Frank” in Panay, the series of calamities that hit Bicol like “Reming,” the landslides of Southern Leyte, and the oil spill in Guimaras. So the people are back on their feet and the tourists are back on the beaches.

We embrace the concept of a sustainable economic model: where there is no conflict between a clean, healthy environment and a robust economy. We can create jobs and keep our environment safe and sacred. For instance, here in the underground river, tourism has tripled in the last three years. But Mayor Hagedorn said that there is an informal estimate that the carrying capacity of tourism there is only 300 tourists a day. But at its peek, there are 1,000 who want to see it. So, I’m glad that there are resorts like this so that the tourists can wait for their turn and not insist on being there even beyond 300 because they have other things to do here in the resort.

But on the other hand, the 300 is a guesstimate, and I am asking Secretary Nina Alabastro who was with me in the underground tour earlier if DOST can make a real scientific estimate, what is the real carrying capacity of the underground river. Because if it’s more than 300 then they can rest easy that there will be more tourists and yet the environment is taken cared of.

To invest in all this infrastructure and environmental care, we have made many tough and unpopular choices to control the deficits and increase taxes to pay for the future of this nation. So we thank our congressmen who are here today with us and the other congressmen for helping us to enact those taxes even if they were unpopular for me.

The nation must expand its political and economic footprint to lift up all nations — not just Greater Manila. That is why we have insisted on investing billions of pesos across the nation to link the nation together through a better, more modern transportation system and also to keep our nation clean, safe and beautiful to tap the best of our natural beauty.

From day one of my presidency, we have been committed to investing in our people and our provinces away from Manila. To lift up our God-given attributes: our people, our land, our culture. The world has responded by coming to the Philippines. We take great pride in bringing more political power, economic opportunity and social justice to the regions.

And I think nowhere is that more evident than here in Palawan with all those tourism investments coming in. So, congratulations to the people of Palawan! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Joint National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) Cabinet Group and National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) Cabinet Group Meeting and launching of the Tourism Central Philippines Tour. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080559/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27592&Itemid=38