Thank you very much Secretary Lina. Our Secretary of Interior and Local Government who was formerly the president of ULAP. That's why he really knows your needs, so when he became Secretary of Interior and Local Government, he made me give you everything you desired in the past.

Distinguished host mayor of Pasay City, Mayor Peewee Trinidad; Congresswoman of Pasay City, former member of the Councilors League, Congresswoman Connie Dy; your president, National President Melendrez; EVP Benavidez; esteemed Chairman Dakayo, your discourse apo Chairman Datuin; Vice Chairman Veloso; Secretary General Alejandro; President of Metro Manila Camila; Chairman of Metro Manila Jorge Banal, better known for his son, a hero of the impeachment trial; members of the executive committee and national board members; and also here are other guests from the DILG, Undersecretary Soliman; former chairman of PCl Pinggoy Lagumbay, my fellow provincial; and former president Mike Rama; and to all of you, councilors, I greet you on the occasion of your fifth congress. Good afternoon to all of you.

My fellow Kapampangan, good afternoon to everyone. To my relatives and friends, including Chairman Datuin, good evening to all of you. To my fellow provincemates, may grace be with all of you. To our brothers and sisters from Mindanao, where I come from, good afternoon to all of you. Assalamu alaikum pagariya. To my wife's fellow Ilonggos, good afternoon to all of you. To the Waray people, good day to all of you. And to the Bicolanos, good afternoon to all of you.

Our gathering today is special because this, your anniversary is not just your anniversary. We specially held this day because it is the first day of our celebration of the sixteenth anniversary of EDSA 1. We all remember what happened on February 22, 1986. We remember that EDSA People Power 1 started when a large part of the military, led by Vice Chief of Staff Fidel Ramos and the RAM led by then Colonel Gregorio Honasan, broke away from the government of Ferdinand Marcos and sided with the Filipino people.

This morning, in celebration at Fort Bonifacio, at the Libingan ng mga Bayani, we honored President Ramos for his role not as President of the Philippines, but as leader of the part of the military that sided with the people on that day, February 22, 1986. This noon, for the first time in the celebration of People Power, there was a first fellowship of the RAM, Senator Honasan's comrades and the various leaders of the RAM to celebrate their contribution not only to EDSA — their shift to the side of the people on this day 16 years ago — but also because after the separation of paths after EDSA 1, during EDSA 2, many returned and became part of EDSA 2. And now I am with you in celebrating this day. The day the Armed Forces of the Philippines sided with the people. How did you get involved there? Different branches of the military were celebrated earlier? Because they sided with the people. There needs to be a representative of the people in our celebration and the Councilors of the Philippines, you are the representatives of the people, of the ordinary people who the military sided with on that day. I consider you, the councilors of the Philippines, as true servants of People Power.

I learned that although only 1,200 attended the 1st national Congress five years ago, this number increased to 7,000 at the 4th national Congress in 1999, and now there are more than 8,000 delegates here. Record attendance. Congratulations on the good attendance.

I am pleased that the Philippine Councilors League is alive and well, active and getting stronger. The national government needs your help to promote the welfare of our country. You are the partner of the presidency in fighting poverty and upholding law and order.

Your league is very close to my heart. When I was Senator and Vice-President, I always attended your PCL National Congresses. Maybe you are tired of my coming here. There was even a time when I attended some of your Provincial and Regional Councilors Congresses. I attended your national assembly in Cebu City on February 3rd of last year, when I first attended your assembly as president.

When we were in Cebu, I told you that the progress and development of our country depend on our cities and towns. And it is fitting that we celebrate this on the first day of People Power. Because the development of our country is in People Power. It is not dictated or manipulated from the top of the national government.

The resources, capabilities, imagination and diligence you need can all be found in your community.

In my state of the nation address to Congress last July, I said that in order to eradicate the country's poverty, there are four parts to our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan: First, promote a system of free enterprise suitable for the twenty-first century; Second, modernize agriculture based on social equity; Third, give special attention to the underprivileged; and Fourth, raise the level of morality in government and society. As you said in the Theme, “Advancing Good Local Governance Platform for Poverty Reduction” that is in agreement and similar to my fourth part of the fight against poverty, raising the level of morality in government.

The first, the free enterprise suitable for the 21st century. In free enterprise, the main way to eradicate poverty is to provide jobs for the people. And to provide jobs for the people, the main requirement is investments. That is why this is the main requirement of the national government from the local governments. Let's work together to reduce red tape, because that is the main complaint of investors that hinders their investments.

Secondly, let's also look at the problem of peace and order. We can see how terrorism and crime destroy the economy. We can see how the Abu Sayyaf kidnapped not only those vacationing in Dos Palmas, not only the nurses in Lamitan, but also kidnapped our entire tourism and economy, and destroyed the lives of the hostages, and continue to destroy their lives like the lives of Deborah Yap and Roland Ullah.

I want to assure Deborah Yap and her loved ones that the government has not forgotten her. She is always in my memory as a woman. She is always in my prayer.

I would also like to convey this message to Roland Ullah and his family. And I hope that our councilors who greeted us there from Sulu will convey this message to the family of Roland Ullah that the fight against Abu Sayyaf will not end until Roland Ullah is rescued.

Mrs. Deborah Yap was working as a registered nurse at Jose Torres Memorial Hospital in Lamitan when she and four others were abducted by Abu Sayyaf members who had escaped from the hospital.

The Armed Forces has orders to ensure the safety of Mrs. Yap and Mr. Ullah while pursuing those who abducted them and Mr. and Mrs. Burnham of Wichita, Kansas.

Meanwhile, I have instructed the Department of Social Welfare and Development to address the situation and problems of Mrs. Yap's four children. According to Mrs. Elvira Pamaran Valbuena, Mrs. Yap's sister, the nurse's four children — Jonathan, Anthony, Mary Anne, and Bonbon — have stopped their studies because there is no longer money for expenses since their mother was abducted.

Mrs. Yap is very brave. According to reports, she is now helping as a doctor and nurse to Mr. and Mrs. Burnham, who are now weak and both sick. Deborah is a courageous woman. According to reports, she has also lost weight and her body has deteriorated due to the hardships she is experiencing. I also instruct the DSWD to provide assistance to the family of Roland Ullah.

Meanwhile, I congratulate once again the soldiers of the Armed Forces, especially now during the celebration of February 22, the day they joined the people. I congratulate them for their courageous and final pursuit of the terrorists in Basilan.

And I would like to acknowledge once again the United States for their support to our soldiers in their capability-building so as to speed up the annihilation of the Abu Sayyaf. As we have realized from the helicopter crash that occurred this dawn, coming to the Philippines to train our soldiers is not a picnic for the U. S. soldiers. They also put their lives on the line and they came here knowing the dangers as well.

The success of ‘Balikatan’ is the success of two friendly nations that have had a deep relationship for a hundred years. Sometimes the relationship is good, sometimes it is not so good when interests differ.

But now the interests of the Philippines and America are united against terrorism, against the enemies of freedom, and against the enemies of democracy.

Our reward will not only be freedom from fear, but freedom from poverty will be the result of our cooperation. Peace and progress are the fruits of the success of ‘Balikatan’.

Along with that, we can further ensure the safety of Mrs. Deborah Yap, Mr. Ronald Ullah, and Mr. and Mrs. Martin Burnham.

So, councilors, you applauded me earlier when I mentioned thanking the Americans. I hope you will continue your support for ‘Balikatan 2002’. Let us thank the American soldiers and also salute the Filipino soldier.

Let us wave the Philippine flag higher because on the island of Basilan, the spirit of friendship and cooperation between nations is very much alive. The courage of the Filipino soldier is very much alive, ready to die and sacrifice their loved ones so that we may once again be free, peaceful, and united as a great nation.

That's what you said, advancing good local governance. The increase in the measure of morality in government, what is expected of you councilors by our citizens is through council resolutions and ordinances and by personal example, to remove the undeserving, improve the service of the organization, defend integrity, and be strict in good manners. Honest governance cannot be done by a few. It needs to be implemented at all levels of government.

Honest governance starts with personal integrity and work ethic. For example, as your president, that is my belief. If I want to have good governance, it needs to start with me. This also applies to the family of the leader, so my first Administrative Order prohibits government agencies from dealing with, contacting my relatives regarding contracts, supplies and appointments to government positions.

Honest governance is also about suppressing corruption. That means bad governance affects the poor because the improper use and abuse of funds deprives them of opportunities to improve their lives, as well as the services they need.

We must fight corruption. It destroys trust in our institutions, promotes crime and injustice, and robs citizens of hope for their future.

In all of this, as Joey Lina said, our administration will continue to support and strengthen our local government units. You saw this again in the past, during the previous administration, 10, 20 percent of your IRA was deducted and a local government equalization fund was created so you would beg before being given funds that came from your share of internal revenue. And before the funds from your IRA are released, you still need to submit work and financial plans to be approved by the DBM. All of that has been reversed by this new administration. That is why we need to do our tasks together. We need to strengthen our unity to ensure success for the good of the people.

The plight of the poor must continue to be heard in the halls of government. It was heard in EDSA sixteen years ago, we heard it again in EDSA Dos last year. Honest management, good governance is our weapon against poverty. Good governance is our platform for poverty reduction. This is a principle of service that we must follow at all times.

As I said in a lecture at the international institute for strategic studies in London recently, and I quote, “evil causes terrorism but the evil of terrorism would not be able to spread so much if we did not have so much poverty.” End of quote.

Therefore, we must remember that terrorism grows rapidly where poverty and suffering are widespread. It is no coincidence that terrorism is now confined to the province of Basilan because Basilan is the poorest province in the entire Philippines. That is why the fight against terrorism and the fight against poverty are truly intertwined.

Therefore, while I encourage world leaders to continue the coalition against terrorism as a way towards global prosperity, I also call on our local leaders, our councilors, to intensify the fight against poverty and terrorism. I need your help and the help of every Filipino to face these challenges, and to strengthen the foundation of our country's development.

Let us continue to work together to fulfill our national dreams. Let us continue to strengthen our unity to accelerate development in the countryside, to spread honest management or good governance as you said, and to provide a peaceful and prosperous life for all our citizens and future generations of Filipinos.

Long live the Councilors of People Power.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 5th National Congress of the Philippine Councilors League (PCL). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230518/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7608&Itemid=38