Thank you very much Chairperson Oyie de Dios.

Our friend, friend of women, and she is the host here at ULTRA because ULTRA is under DECS, Secretary Raul Roco; our host also because this ULTRA is in Pasig and she is a good example of a woman leader, Mayor Soledad Eusebio; another woman who takes care of workers, not only the great Filipino worker but also the workers all over the world because she is Secretary of Labor and President of the International Labor Organization, Pat Sto. Tomas; friend of women in the countryside because her job is to ensure every year that two hundred thousand hectares are distributed to farmers, Secretary of DAR Nani Braganza; if women lead in taking care of workers in the private sector, women also lead in taking care of workers in the government, Chairperson of the Civil Service, Karina Constantino-David; and our colleague now who is helping us with matters of education in Malacañang is Presidential Assistant Mona Valisno, also a woman; it's like a Senatorial Proclamation, each name has its own group. Okay. Then, I suppose this also has its own people who will applaud, the organizer of this National Women’s Day, Commissioner Myrna Yao; and this ULTRA — we are inside DepEd — but the ULTRA itself is run by the Sports Commission. She is also a woman, Commissioner Cynthia Carrion; other commissioners of the NCRFW; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; other government officials; distinguished guests; women and those who love women.

The power of Filipino women is very important to the overall welfare of what we call human resources. We have come a long way but we still have a long way to go before we can say that the power of our women is fully realized.

While we are here, chatting, the problem of poverty in the Philippines still has a woman's face. Many women continue to suffer from physical and emotional battery. So attitudes still need to be changed. The structures of community and culture still need to be organized and undergo change.

And as Sabsy Palanca said earlier, our Master of Ceremonies, last year I gave an instruction to the National Council on the Role of Filipino Women to write a draft framework plan for women that would include current policies and what are called emerging women’s concerns and our proposed policies regarding women.

This day, after my speech, you will see the video of the summary of what they wrote. I won't say this is a launching yet because before I formalize and release the Executive Order, there are still other things I want to ensure are truly in line with the policies of our government.

However, it's good that we already have what we can call a penultimate draft. The final draft before the final formal plan itself. Because when we have a plan, there will be a more concrete basis for the planning of agencies and for budgeting for the gender and development budget. And because there is a plan, there can be answers to the shortcomings of current gender mainstreaming activities. We expect this new plan to give special attention to the two things I mentioned last year, which I have been advocating for since I was in DTI until the senate. Those two are: one, women’s economic empowerment and one, the protection of women’s rights. And that is what the Commission on the Role of Filipino Women added, gender sensitivity in governance.

We expect that in this plan, the poorest women and the women in the countryside will be the primary beneficiaries of our plan. For example, right now, one of the government's major programs for women. In fact, for me, for economic empowerment, the one I mentioned specifically in the State of the Nation Address last year for women is what is called the Grameen Banking Strategy or microfinance. And our desire is that the NCRFW help the NAPC achieve that, three hundred thousand women will benefit from microfinance every year. In that way, after our three-and-a-half years of the current administration, one million women will be able to enter microfinance and have the opportunity to have their own livelihood.

Through this plan, we also hope to improve the implementation of policies that defend the rights of women in terms of human rights. In other words, through this plan we shall focus on abused women, violence against women, the protection of the girl-child and measures to combat trafficking of women and children.

When I spoke at the United Nations General Assembly — I was their last speaker. I spoke on the last day of the general assembly — I said, as head of state, head of government and female commander-in-chief of the sixteenth largest country in the world, that as long as we do not address the power and rights of women, we cannot say that we have eradicated the problem of poverty in countries.

And now from a year ago until now, there is a major event. 9-11, the war against terrorism. And something I constantly say to the whole world is that the fight against terrorism is a twin fight against poverty. But now I want to add that because as I said, we cannot say that we have eradicated poverty if we cannot enforce the power and rights of women. The fight against terrorism, the fight against poverty are also twins of the fight for the rights and empowerment of women.

For example, those countries where… Or those communities where terrorism is more prevalent, those are also the societies where abuse of women is more prevalent. Look at Afghanistan under the Taliban. Look at Abu Sayyaf in Basilan and listen to witness after witness of female hostages testifying that they were raped by Abu Sayyaf.

Therefore, if we talk about the rights of women in the Philippines, in our south, we must suppress the terrorism of Abu Sayyaf if we want to stop the rape of our women in our south.

So it’s like the world is turned upside down, when someone says that when we ask for American help to train our soldiers so that we can suppress Abu Sayyaf more, that is anti-women. What is anti-women is Abu Sayyaf, not those who suppress Abu Sayyaf.

And to ensure that even those who help us suppress Abu Sayyaf also defend and respect the rights of women. The Visiting Forces Commission, which once had so many members. I believe that the more members there are, the fewer people will go to the meeting, the less it will work. So I made the membership only three coming from the government — DFA, DND and DSWD. That’s why Dinky Soliman was there with Tito Guingona and Angie Reyes. The sole task of Dinky Soliman was to ensure that the rights of women are respected even with the Visiting Forces here.

In the past, the visiting forces rule said that the soldiers are not supposed to leave their camps. What was the reason for that? Supposedly because we don’t want prostitution. But if you don’t state your purpose outright, what happens? The prostitutes are brought inside the camp. So I said, rather than that, let’s put it directly, the rules and regulations must say that the visiting forces are not allowed to procure the services of prostitution. That is our policy now, outright. So if they want to go out, they can go out as long as their entertainment is guided to ensure that no prostitutes are brought into the camp and no prostitutes are dated outside the camp. That is the way we can ensure the protection of the rights of women without exploitation. But it is more important to suppress those who rape our women. Aside from our common criminals, the Abu Sayyaf have made rape a part of their terrorism.

An important part of the framework plan for women that I want to read carefully first before I release or promulgate the Executive Order is that concerning the reproductive rights of women. Because I want to ensure that the policies contained therein, in letter and in spirit, are consistent with the population policy of our current administration.

What is this policy? Our policy regarding the population comes from our constitution. According to our constitution, responsible parenthood is important. That is the origin of our population policy. What does responsible parenthood mean? Of course, parents should study their responsibilities to the family, to their children, to each other. And part of studying their responsibilities is that in their study, they need to decide correctly how many children they can raise with dignity. And when these responsible parents decide how many children they can raise in a dignified manner, the way they will implement their decision must be in accordance with the religious and cultural beliefs of each couple. That is our policy. That is why I want to make sure that these policies are there, clear and that no one will make any misinterpretation. Besides, many are asking what the population policy is. This is a good place where they can find our answer.

Therefore, I am pleased that we are here again, from last year to this year, we have made progress. Because there was no framework plan now there is a framework plan. And hopefully next year, what can we expect from each other? Hopefully next year, this framework plan will be implemented and felt by our women, especially our women in impoverished communities so that, hopefully, our framework plan will help in eradicating poverty, in suppressing the exploitation of women, and in empowering women in our new century.

Happy International Women’s day to all of us.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremonies of the Framework Plan for Women in Celebration of International Women’s Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230306/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7631&Itemid=38