Maraming salamat Dr. Mona Valisno, my Presidential Assistant for Education.

You may now sit down.

First of all, allow me to greet the Governor of province Samar, Governor Milagros Tan; your Congressman, who invited me to be in this occasion, Congressman Uy; the Mayor of Calbayog city, Mayor Sarmiento. And I would also like to say that with me today is Presidential Adviser on job creation Cito Lorenzo.

I am happy to be here once again in Calbayog City to greet our graduating students and to discuss your future, the future of Calbayog. The future also of the entire Samar. And that is why I am pleased to greet you all, as well as the officials of your school under the leadership of Dr. Caillo, the President.

In our economy, in our 21st century, I know that when you graduate, the main thing you need to know is where the jobs are now. So that is what we need to do. And I would just like to tell you about the various things that our government is doing for Calbayog and Samar so that there will be more jobs here in your area.

First of all, as I said before in the State-of-the-Nation Address when I became president and spoke to the Congressmen — Congressman Uy was there, he heard my speech — I said that the main challenge of our country is to eradicate the problem of poverty within a decade. These problems have been around for a long time, even during the generation when my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal, was president, he said the same thing — the main job and how to eradicate poverty.

Speaking of my father, although many of you don’t know him anymore except maybe reading a page or two about him in the history books, I just want you to know how much Diosdado Macapagal loved Samar.

Your port of Calbayog, that was given by Diosdado Macapagal when he was president. And when he ran for re-election, even though his opponent was the husband of a Waray woman, he still won here in Samar, so Samar also loved Diosdado Macapagal.

And when I became a senator, it was like my father, I also loved Samar and I tried to help all the towns of Samar and that's where your Niaga Park is. Was Niaga the name before? That came from my countrywide development fund.

Now that I am president, it is not only the parks that are being helped, but how to eradicate the problem of poverty.

Number one is jobs. That's why I told Secretary Cito Lorenzo — that's why he's with me because he is the advisor for jobs creation — I said on the occasion of my visiting Calbayog for the graduation day of Tiburcio Tangcinco Memorial Institute of Science and Technology, let us have a jobs fair so that the students who are graduating will know where the job availability is.

So there is a jobs fair outside; and I have here a partial report of the jobs fair. There are several participating recruitment agencies. There are for overseas, there are 7 overseas recruitment agencies participating in the jobs fair now and there are two local recruiting agencies — one is cal energy based in Ormoc city because they are the ones doing our energy projects there in Tangonan geo-thermal, and then there are job openings, and Shining Star Distributor. And as of 9 o’ clock there were 558 registered applicants. Well, I’m not surprised because we have 500 graduating students today. But I’m happy to let you know that here in the jobs fair there are 1,934 job vacancies.

So, I hope that there will be a matching between the job vacancies and what are the jobs you feel you can do, graduating students of this wonderful institution.

Let me say, let talk about the other job opportunities that we would like to have even outside of this jobs fair. Number one nga is the jobs for because the way to fight poverty in the 21st century is to promote of system of free enterprise where jobs are created by investments. Yon ang unang-una.

Secondly, we want to modernize agriculture, and by modernizing agriculture we would like to create one million jobs in agriculture. Here in Calbayog our modernization program is there in our rice because Calbayog has 1,000 irrigated hectares and we want to put hybrid rice there. The hybrid rice that I was able to get as assistance from China when I made my state visit to China. This 1,000 hectares is what we are preparing for under our hybrid rice program also under Cito Lorenzo, our presidential adviser for job creation, to include 1,000 farmers in the hybrid rice program. So this will add jobs for 1,000 farmers.

Before we came here, Secretary Cito Lorenzo and Mayor Sarmiento had a meeting to discuss how to expand jobs in Calbayog.

Aside from the hybrid, the second part of agricultural modernization is fish, the smoked fish. Because as they say, there is fresh fish and there is smoked fish. Speaking first about the fresh fish, what we are doing, what we are working for is to help Calbayog market your fish to supermarkets in metro manila for better prices.

Ngayon yung smoked fish, yung tinapa sabi ni mayor, Calbayog has the best tinapa in the whole country. But even if the product is good, alam n’yo to be able to market packaging is as important as the product itself, and you need the technology to improve the marketing, the packaging so that your delicious tinapa can be brought to other parts, to manila and other parts of the country or even for export. And so for this purpose, Secretary Lorenzo will coordinate with department of science and technology and the markets for your tinapa. Sana dumami ang trabaho ninyo doon.

Also for agricultural modernization there is coffee. Robusta has been tested and it is good for Calbayog. And you would like to do for Calbayog what we have been able to do for the cooperatives there in Sulu because in Sulu their coffee is extensive and they are able to sell it. And there is war there, here it should be easier, right? Here you have the land but you do not have the market. And financing is also needed. So Secretary Lorenzo will link up Calbayog with nestle and the Manila Coffee Retailers Association — including there the name of, Starbucks, so that way hopefully Starbucks will be carrying Calbayog Robusta.

Also for agricultural modernization we have vegetables. Right now there is an on-going negotiation with Makro — you know Makro — for the supply of vegetables through the help of the Philippine Business for Social Progress. Perhaps you know the Philippine Business for Social Progress here in Leyte although maybe not so much in Calbayog. Because the Philippine Business for Social Progress has a very large program in Maqueda Bay — the Maqueda Bay revival and also helping some communities in Maqueda Bay to revive the water and also to give alternative livelihood to the fishermen of Maqueda Bay, PBSP is doing that. So for you in Calbayog, the help you are giving is how to sell vegetables from Calbayog to Makro. So that’s what we hope happens, that one day your friends in Metro Manila will see vegetables from Calbayog from Samar.

But this still needs further investigation regarding logistics and product quality because vegetables are perishable so we have to overcome that perishability. But it is also good to know that an Australian company based in Melbourne has signified the intention of providing assistance in the production of vegetables. And the initial project will be that of young corn. So we are hoping that Calbayog can also benefit from that.

Isa pang produkto sa modernization of agriculture ay yung bananas. Ten tons of bananas for banana chips can be produced and Cito Lorenzo will be linking up your city with banana chip exporters because we have a good export industry for banana chips.

And finally in the modernization of agriculture, Samar is a province of coconuts. I’m sure many of you who are graduating here come from coconut families. So that is the future of Samar: how to modernize the coconut industry — how the coconut farmers, when the price of coconut is low, can have additional income. And I am happy that we finally have a future here because after 15 years we can finally use the proceeds of the coconut levy.

I am happy that now the government is the one running the United Coconut Planters Bank. The United Coconut Planters Bank is the manager through several layers of corporations of the coconut levy. While the principal of the coconut levy and its ownership is under litigation in the Supreme Court and the Sandiganbayan, we already have the power to use the income. And so hopefully in a month or two we will be able to declare dividends. Well, we don’t call them dividends, some of the funds available from the coconut levy and they will be used for the good of the coconut industry — for the good of the coconut farmers and therefore for the good of the province of Samar.

And in the meantime because your school is very important, we have to provide for the continuing education — the human resource development for your school. I am very happy that today as part of your graduation present I am bringing three million pesos from the president’s social fund for the rehabilitation and renovation of this socio-cultural center. But I would like to advise your president if it’s possible to use only one million here and use two million for other things like for example computers and broadband facilities — to use it so that our students here in this very important school are ready for the 21st century, ready to get a job immediately and ready for the province of Samar to rise from poverty at last.

Once again, congressman Uy thank you very much for inviting me to this graduation as you invited me before to the city fiesta of Calbayog when you were a city mayor. And I would like to thank also Mayor Sarmiento for all the homework that was done before I could come here so that he can work on the plans to be done here, and my very efficient presidential assistant for Eastern Visayas Victor Domingo will help to follow-through on all of these projects for the beautiful city of Calbayog.

And so I shall end my congratulatory message to you today, and before the graduation diplomas are distributed to you I shall first distribute and give to your president the … Check for your beautiful school.

Congratulations. Good morning to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 64th Commencement Exercise of the Tiburcio Tangcinco Memorial Institute of Science and Technology. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230230/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7627&Itemid=38