Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Engineer Feliciano for your welcome and for introducing me.

I would also like to greet Chairman Eduardo Mangayan and Attorney Laureles, Secretary Debangko and all the delegates who are here today. And of course, Mr. Villason, the vice chairman of PAWD; and of course my colleagues in government, Larry Jamora, the administrator; General Dumpit, the chairman and to all of you, welcome. To my fellow Kapampangans, good day to you all.

To my relatives on my mother’s side, good day to all of you. To those from Mindanao where I grew up, a warm welcome to all of you, including those from the Visayas. To the fellow provincemates of my husband who are Ilonggos, good morning to all of you. To those from Eastern Visayas, good morning to all of you. And to our big delegation from Zamboanga, buenos dias. To our Muslim brothers, Assalam Alaikum. And to all of you, I greet you.

I am happy to be with you because you are my partners in serving the ordinary Filipino. Because in my travels, the ordinary Filipino understands that the basic needs of the ordinary Filipino are food on every table and health. Clean water is important like food. When you are an ordinary Filipino family, what do you eat, what is on your table? Rice, fish, of course water — can you eat without drinking water? Water is also important for health. Without water or with dirty water, people get sick, and healthcare costs increase. So it is a challenge for all of us, partners, to bring clean water to the ordinary Filipino family.

The water districts are water districts outside of Metro Manila. Because in Metro Manila and some large cities there are franchise holders. However, I just want to share with you my experiences with the problem of clean water here in Metro Manila. Because here in Metro Manila alone during my travels last year, I learned that in Metro Manila alone there are 160,000 households — and that’s times five to cover the number of people — that’s the number of households that do not have clean water even though they are covered by Manila Water and Maynilad.

So what I did was launch a large-scale clean water program in Metro Manila. I pressured Maynilad and Manila Water to speed up the connections. And for those connections that are physically difficult to make in a short period of time in 2003 or early 2004, they are installing tanks or bringing water trucks daily and opening public faucets.

I made the MWSS and PAGCOR monitors of this project. Because in those areas without water connections, they buy water from far away — 200 pesos per cubic meter. With a connection, it’s only 20 pesos, one-tenth of the price. But I said, while there is no connection they need to bring tanks or water trucks and that is to speed up the connections, for free for now. To pay for the suffering of the people for years who are paying 200 pesos per cubic meter.

Now, we have fulfilled the need of 160,000 families who were found to have no clean water. They now have access whether it’s through direct connections that have been expedited, clean water tanks, water trucks, or barangay community faucets. We are currently expanding this to parts of Rizal and Cavite which are also covered by Manila Water and Maynilad.

Here in Metro Manila, we are urging the franchise holders — Manila Water and Maynilad — to speed up their actions, but outside of Metro Manila, our approach is different. Like electricity in Manila and large cities, there are franchise holders, but in rural areas there are electric cooperatives. The same is true for water in Manila and large cities, there are franchise holders or concessionaires. But in rural areas and many cities in the provinces, there are water districts. And here outside of Metro Manila, in the provinces, our policy is to strengthen the water districts. Strengthen yourselves. Because… The experience with water is really comparable to the experience with electricity, so of course, what’s important is good management. That’s why I appointed as head of LWUA, the administration of LWUA, a good businessman from Iloilo, Mr. Larry Jamora.

You know the business district of Iloilo, I think half of the land there is owned by the Jamora family. And because they are good at running a business, I hired him to bring modern management to LWUA in managing the important problem of clean water. And I congratulate him and his colleagues at LWUA because they have brought additional clean water to three hundred thousand Filipinos – because 60,000 families, that’s 300,000 additional Filipinos — by building almost fifty large water supply projects which cost more than half a billion pesos. That’s what LWUA has done to add new clean water. But the water districts need to use your income so that you can expand.

I am pleased to learn that ninety percent of the water districts are now operating on a 24-hour, seven-day basis. Congratulations on your dedication.

Therefore, we expect the continued improvement in the management of water districts so that the problem, the aspiration of the ordinary Filipino to have clean water will be fulfilled.

Aside from the problem of clean water in Metro Manila, there is also the problem of clean water in more than a hundred municipalities. And what is the first thing requested before having clean water? To establish a water district or to expand the water district to the next largest town.

I hope we can give this attention. And I also want you to know that one of my programs for the poor, KALAHI (Kabalikat Laban sa Kahirapan), is also forming partnerships with foundations to find funding for the installation of water in more than 100 waterless municipalities.

I hope Larry will combine the water districts and the foundations that KALAHI is talking to so that there is a combination of funds from the foundation and management from the water district to provide clean water to these more than 100 waterless municipalities.

Larry can definitely do that because you are already included as a water district and he knows the different businessmen who have large foundations that help here. You know, Larry was nominated for mayor of Iloilo City. But he declined the nomination because he wants to serve our goal of having clean water for the common Filipino.

It is also important that we do this, the problem with water isn't just a lack of funds, it's really a lack of water coming from nature. In the last October and December, especially in Luzon, there was a lack of rain. We are trying to have cloud seeding when the clouds are good. But it is also important because you cover many areas, you talk to many people, let's work together for water conservation.

You know, there was a woman there in Payatas, when I delivered a water tank, the moving water tank, the one that goes there every day, she told me, because that part of Payatas has been without water for a long time, for several years. So they buy 200 pesos per cubic meter, so they really need to conserve. And she told me how she conserves water. She said when she takes a bath, of course, she uses a dipper because the water they buy, there's no running water. But she stands in a basin. So the dipper used, the water in the dipper is collected in the basin and that's what she uses to initially scrub her laundry. After that, the water she used to scrub the first wash of the laundry is then used to flush her toilet.

Imagine, one water, three uses. And she learned that because water is very precious. I hope that in other places, even if water isn't very precious, you water districts can tell this good example of a woman in Payatas who knows how to care and be a responsible user of clean water.

So we have a lot to do. We need to provide water. We must have clean water and clean government. That's a very good symbol or slogan – clean water as a symbol of essential services; clean government as a symbol of the governance that all common Filipinos are waiting for, including you and me.

So today, I think you read in the newspaper about some government officials, from the BIR and customs, who failed the lifestyle checks. That is something we can say is praised about the Philippines by other institutions because we are only now using lifestyle checks to catch corrupt officials. Because we need to use effective technologies to investigate. And I expect that in the entire operation of the water district, we will provide not only clean water but also clean governance to the people we serve.

To all of you, congratulations!

Happy anniversary! And may you have a successful convention.

Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during The Opening Ceremonies of the 25th Annual Convention of the Philippine Association of Water Districts (PAWD). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091049/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5492&Itemid=38