Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 28th Annual Conference of the Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines (FINEX)

[Delivered at the Garden Ballroom, EDSA Shangri-la Hotel, Mandaluyong City, October 11, 2002]

Thank you very much Secretary Lito Camacho, the head of my economic team.

Chief Manabat, President of FINEX; Mayor Abalos; Edgar Limon, Executive Vice President of FINEX; Benito Soliven, my student; Ronnie Alcantara, Grace Tiongco, Senen Matoto, Esther Magleo, other members and officers of FINEX, Excellencies of the diplomatic corps, other government officials, distinguished members of the financial sector, ladies and gentlemen.

I have always considered FINEX as one of the most important fora for giving policy pronouncements. I have been speaking before FINEX since I was undersecretary of Trade and Industry.

And today, this is an especially important conference especially in these times when business and investment must weave around fluid scenarios of uncertainty.

And so, the financial community must go beyond yourselves as you have recognized, and close ranks and share solutions and resources.

We must identify and focus on key milestone accomplishments, so we have a roadmap.

The U.S. economy is still slow though our exports have been jumping. If you look at the volumes in the ports, they have been more active in this last five months than in the last seven years. Nonetheless, because the U.S. economy is still slow we can’t rely, we can’t depend on exports for our sustainable growth in the few years to come. It is now up to the domestic economy.

I believe the model we should follow should encourage the shift to new sources of domestic demand rather than rely on exports for our survival. And this new sources though they are not new in the sense that they’ve been around for a long time but they are new in the sense that we must give them great priority. I would consider most notable among them the capital-efficient small and medium enterprises.

I understand that FINEX has a program to assist these small and medium enterprises, do the documentary requirements to access credit and, therefore, this is a special call to you.

On the part of a government, this model called managed asset reflation involves prudent monetary policy, a gradual reduction in public-sector debt, and a balanced budget in three to four years.

On the part of you, the financial executives, i am asking the banking system to avoid extending credit to unproductive asset sectors such as luxury properties and industries already saddled with excess capacity. Instead, I am asking you to allocate more of your portfolio to the capital-efficient small and medium enterprises.

On my part, I am focusing my energies on this model, and I am leading by example. Though it would be a small portion of the entire resources available in the banking system, I have started the “one town, one product, one million-peso” project as a pump primer to jumpstart the attention to small and medium enterprises. Under this program, a loan of one million pesos shall be lent to SMEs in each of the 1,610 municipalities and cities in the country. The loan shall be utilized for a niche product that has a proven market or the expansion of an existing enterprise.

Aside from SMEs, the main multiplier should be housing. The government does not have the money. So I want to let the private sector, the financial executives drive the domestic economy.

In key areas, I want to free up the private sector from the traditional thinking of bureaucracy at least for a window of 12 months. Thus, in my personal work program for the next 6 months the following are included:

First, SMEs, as I have already explained.

Second, jumpstart housing. How? Banks are very liquid. Even medium-sized banks have billions in t-bills. We will let the private sector jumpstart the housing sector by giving banks policy signal incentives to fund developers on their own then get bureaucracy out of their way.

The middle-income sub-sector, for instance, five hundred thousand pesos to 2 million pesos is bankable even if the market is not as large as the socialized sub-sector, but we must start somewhere. The central bank’s monetary board is the key to liberate the banks. And I am gratified that the BSP has now agreed to increase the loan collateral value for housing accounts to 80 – 90 percent of the loan value. I have also asked the BSP to grant the Agri-Agra reserve eligibility for new housing loans up to 2 million pesos. And they have been quite sympathetic with this request. To follow-up and make sure that these circulars are brought out and carried out is the mandate of Secretary Mar Roxas, the government representative in the monetary board. It is his mandate to overcome traditional thinking in the bureaucracy.

Third item in my work program is to reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon. Presidential adviser Cito Lorenzo and Al Cusi, general manager of the Philippine Ports Authority, have started doing something about these rates by promoting competition at the ports, addressing reported overcharging in cargo-handling tariff, reducing the government share of port fees to 10 percent, amending the bidding terms of reference for cargo-handling services. This reform is now incorporated in the bidding terms to focus on lower rates for the bidders services and not how much will be the share they’ll give the government, and suspending previously approved increases in wharfage and usage fees. This policy bottlenecks now out of the way, I have now instructed DBP to lead for the other measures to bring down cargo rates. DBP has put in place a 30 billion-peso credit facility to fund all of these things that are not very clear in the screen but DBP should have a prospectus to show this in a very, very big map. Because when they gave it to me in a small map, I couldn’t read anything. So I have this now in my office of the president, and I look at it everyday and I have it memorized.

Anyway, this is DBP’s logistics highway. And to finance this, DBP has put together this project, complex of projects. They are worth 30 billion pesos and DBP has a financing facility for loans up to 15 years for financing equipment and infrastructure projects for a sustainable distribution system inherent to maritime transport and related land transport.

This project is geared towards the development of progressive long-haul shipping to constitute the country’s national backbone in the transport of bulk products and the development of a ro-ro ferry and road network to link the islands to the growth centers of the country.

I have instructed Liani Nañagas to go full blast and concentrate DBP on this. Examples would be for DBP to finance logistics, storage and port facilities in Mindanao. Also shipyards, post-harvest facilities and institutional support services like maritime schools and technical and vocational training institutes are included in the program. So with RO-RO ships and ports.

This is open to investors with project feasibility studies, of course, and with the capacity to put up 50 percent equity and with the project equipment as collateral cover. The rates are negotiable and can be as low as 11 percent in peso terms, fixed for the duration of the loan.

So I asked FINEX to promote investments in these areas. There’s this whole list of projects which you can’t read. But this is to whet your appetite to get the prospectus from the DBP. And if you have investors in any of these areas that are enumerated then please get a credit facility from the DBP within the next six months.

Fourth item in my work program — infrastructure to decongest Metro Manila. We will focus on beginning construction of the commuter links between Metro Manila north to Clark such as northrail, and south to Batangas Port such as completing the tollroad all the way to Batangas Port. This will make housing projects outside of Metro Manila, where land is cheaper and the lifestyle more conducive to family viable. Once the developer see the construction of the transport links breaking ground, hopefully they, with your support will begin work on the ancillary housing projects.

Incidentally again, to lead by example and to jumpstart — though we want this to be primarily a private sector endeavor — I have asked Sonny Vistan to be a special assistant for private sector housing by putting together a package whereby he will make available the inventory of lands owned by the government institutions which will serve as the government equity for housing for government employees. But these lands will be made available for the private developers to put up. With government land being the equity that should make housing truly affordable.

Within Metro Manila, we will monitor the smooth start of the MRT final linkage with LRT. Also within Metro Manila, I have instructed MMDA’s BF Fernando to sit down with DPWH’s Datumanong (Sim Datumanong) and PAGCOR’s Efren Genuino. Since PAGCOR financed the lighting of C-5, which has drawn praises from the public, I have asked the three of them to review MMDA’s infrastructure program for Metro Manila. Oh! No, not MMDA’s program, DPWH’s program for Metro Manila. The mission is to ensure that the program makes sense, and will produce visible results quickly.

Fifth item in the work program, to help Lito Camacho, will be PCGG contribution to fiscal resources. I have instructed my legal counsel Nonong Cruz to work with PCGG Chair Haydee Yorac to expedite the release of the 600 million-dollar Marcos deposit with the PNB. I am also asking Haydee to already work to liquify the coco levy’s remaining 27 percent of SMC, which if sold thru bidding, will generate substantial dollars and funding for our system.

Six item in my work program — make Makati a specific urban tourist destination. The D.O.T..-Mckinsey study says that along with Cebu-Bohol, the most popular tourist destination in the Philippines is still Metro Manila. We can combine this finding with the fact that the biggest spending Japanese tourist is the single working female. When I went to Malampaya to inspect the facilities there, and Mar Roxas waited for me in El Nido, while he was waiting for me to pick him up in the helicopter, he came across a group of young Japanese working females. And naturally, they bonded immediately and chatted — that’s Mar Roxas for you. but what he found out is that they were spending 1,800 dollars each for four days. That is the kind of tourist we want.

This kind of tourist, the Japanese working female, prefers urbanized destinations like Hongkong and Honolulu, where they travel in small groups of friends for shopping and R & R. Given these two findings, Metro Manila’s continuing relative attractiveness and the spending habits of the biggest tourism spender market segment, Makati, with its compact, easy to secure location, world-class malls, entertainment facilities, and cheap shopping can be promoted as an attractive destination, perhaps with a side trip to Boracay or similar resort as part of a package. I can read Benhur Abalos’ mind. Mandaluyong can also qualify for that. Well, Benhur you are welcome to put together a similar package.

A Hawaii-based expert who works with an international consultancy firm specializing in tourism recently observed that with proper packaging, Makati offers more than Honolulu does. So I have instructed the D.O.T. to specifically promote this concept to the Japan’s tourist agencies and bureaus by hosting groups of officials of such agencies and bureaus to come to the Philippines to see for themselves. Once these are on board, the Japanese mentality of going by groups and the word of mouth will take care of the rest.

Seventh item in my work program for the next six months is to stimulate private investment in agriculture. This may require legislation but it is worth pursuing. The biggest obstacle to the free flow of private sector investments into agriculture is the rigidity of second-round land transfers under carp, that is agri-business’ entrepreneurs are not permitted to consolidate land that has been carped in order to create economic-sized estates. This also discourages you, the banks from accepting such land as collateral. So I have tasked Lito Sarmiento and Cito Lorenzo to work with D.A. and DAR on this problem. Sergio Osmeña, I believe last year, filed a bill to address this issue. And I have counted it as one of my five top priority legislation when I made my state of the nation address this year.

Even as I believe that this work program which had seven points for the next six months will create economic impact, I am also keeping watch over potential land mines in the near term. And that gives me an eight item in the work program.

The upward trend in oil prices is a key point of focus. While imported crude oil now accounts for a mere 11.75 percent of the power generation mix — unlike in the last gulf war when it was the majority of our requirements — the transportation sector is heavily dependent on oil imports.

The social impact of transport cost cannot be overstated. I am determined to undertake all reasonable means to keep transport costs down.

I have instructed Transportation Secretary Larry Mendoza — and Lito Camacho knows about some of these because he would be involved — to explore ways and means to stem the upward pressure on fares. Larry is in constant dialogue with various groups in the transport sector to explore other forms of reasonable relief from rising costs other than just merely raising transport fares. The good news is that MRT 3, LRT1 and the Philippine National Railways are not going to hike ticket charges.

Let me take this opportunity to assure everyone that the supply of oil and oil products in the country is more than sufficient and adequate. We have a highly diversified source of oil products. Thus, any possibility of a supply shortage is negligible.

Upon my instruction, Energy Secretary Vince Perez has been monitoring even more closely the inventory levels of oil and oil products in the country. Our country’s oil inventory levels remain within the normal range of between 50 to 65 days supply, which in itself is sufficient to see the country through any of the foreseeable scenarios in the case of a war against Iraq.

There has not been in the last twenty years, an incidence of serious supply interruption to world’s oil supply even during the desert storm of 1991.

We can also take comfort in the fact that today the Philippines currently sources its oil products from 15 different countries, of which only three are in the middle east. This will give us alternative sources. Following a series of meetings with Vince, the local downstream oil players continuously and unanimously reassured us that they have arrangements in place to ensure a steady and sufficient supply.

The government has and will continue to pursue arrangements with oil supplies including Russia for alternative deliveries of products that will provide us an uninterrupted supply in the likely event that the contingencies will be needed.

The government will also exhaust all possible avenues to provide even more supply security to the Filipino people within the limits of practicality and economic good sense. I have instructed Vince to continue to examine stockpiling measures and demand-side management contingency plans. These will be implemented if they ever become necessary and for as long as they will not needlessly increase the price of our oil products.

Financial executives, these are some of the things that will occupy… Oh, these are most of the things that will occupy my mind for the next six months. Be with me in carrying out these initiatives.

Let us join hands in meeting formidable challenges. Our country deserves our best working together. Our country deserves our looking beyond ourselves in order to make sure that our economy makes it through this trying times. And that we all build a strong republic to win the battle against poverty within the decade.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 28th Annual Conference of the Financial Executives Institute of the Philippines (FINEX). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210929/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8412&Itemid=38