To Secretary Nitoy Roque for your introduction of me, and I would also like to thank Brother Victorino Balais, the representative of the workers in the SSS, for your proposal for now and in the future. I would also like to greet Allan Montaño of the Federation of Free Workers, Renato Robles of the Alliance of Filipino Workers – do you represent the OFWs? Rico Hermoso of… congratulations to your winning member; Sister Bernadette de Guzman who helps migrants; Brother… of the Alliance of Workers in the Informal Economy and received a certificate for training vouchers for the members, Espie Ocampo of PGEA, Leonardo Desierto of the Alliance of Independent Union in Hotels and Restaurants, various leaders and members of National Labor Groups, our host here Tessie Sy-Coson of SM Group who has provided so many jobs, and to the great Filipino workers you represent, a warm greeting on Labor Day!

This is a day of gratitude to the great Filipino worker. We rejoice and celebrate all that our great workers have done for the development of the country. This is a day of gratitude to all of you, because the theme is “Kaagapay sa Pagbabago” (Partners in Change). Thank you for your partnership in change, partners for progress. This is also a day of gratitude to all those who helped the workers succeed in your endeavors for nine years. There are the representatives of your employers, and there are also government bodies because our policy is tripartite in our administration.

Dan said many things that need to be done and gave his and your proposal or five-year plan to further improve the situation of the worker here. But I also thank him for recognizing that we have already done a lot during our administration.

Because the gap between the situation in January 2001 and now was really huge. Hopefully, time has erased the painful memories of that time from our minds, when our politics were chaotic and we were on the brink of bankruptcy.

During that time in 2001, no one wanted to invest and that's why there were almost no new jobs created. It was a time of unemployment, very small salaries and very high inflation. The country's debt was larger than our GDP at that time and our foreign reserves were thin and almost depleted at that time.

When I became president, I knew, as an economist, that we had to stop the outflow of funds and act immediately to increase the country's funds. In other words, we needed strict reforms that would be painful but would provide long-term progress in the end.

I pushed for reforms amidst criticism. I even sacrificed my popularity to carry out economic and national treasury reforms. But I am happy that many of the worker sectors represented here were among the first to give me their support. Thank you all very much.

From the beginning, these works you supported and your tremendous help shaped the building blocks of change that delivered 37 quarters of consecutive economic growth, and the creation of nine million new jobs. When I entered, 27 million were employed, now it's 36 million – nine million jobs were created. That means that in the nine years of my presidency, about one million Filipinos on average got jobs. If we compare this to the period from 1987 to 2000, the average number of jobs created then was just over half a million workers. So our job creation during our time is almost double the job creation of the previous three administrations.

We respect the statements of Brother Vic and we will strive to work on them, and in the coming times. But I also want you to reiterate what Vice President TUCP, former Congressman Alex Villaviza, said the other day. He pointed out, for example, that our workers income augmentation program helped union members who lost their jobs, in the formal sector and their families. The checks we gave earlier, or the awards we gave to outstanding workers and enterprises, this was a great achievement during our time.

Those who lost their jobs, the expats livelihood fund when there was a global economic crisis, people were losing jobs in Dubai, losing jobs in Taiwan, we allocated 1 billion pesos in funds for those who would lose their jobs. And thank God, only 200 million was needed so far, so we still have funds there. Earlier, we gave funds here to our very beautiful lady in front, and I asked where she came from… from Riyadh. And now she has put up a beauty salon in Payatas through our Workers Enterprise and Expat Livelihood Support Fund.

So now I want to visit in Pagadian the hotel built by… run by the workers themselves, I think I will go there in Pagadian this Tuesday. I will try to adjust my schedule… Because we see microenterprises or even medium enterprises run by workers, not just the hotel, not just the beauty parlor, pharmacies selling generic and affordable medicine; production of organic fertilizer that helps create jobs, and this is good about organic fertilizer, it not only creates jobs but also ensures a sustainable environment and creates green jobs, and prevents climate change; we were also able to provide workers with discounted rice, and stores, and many more.

Vic is a member of the SSS, I think he remembers when there was a serious situation when the price of oil rose, when we had an oil crisis… the employers of SSS paid for the increase in the SSS premium. That was a result of our Tripartism. And now, because there was a global economic crisis, the workers proposed an amnesty for SSS and Pag-Ibig and we fulfilled that.

I hope many of you benefited from the SSS and Pag-Ibig amnesty. Earlier, the labor leaders here were surprised, the leaders who are standing and receiving certificates, this is for TESDA, the TESDA fund for skills training has placed many young people in the jobs offered, including BPO and even TUCP, right? You have training for BPO, even market vendors are trained for BPO. Here in the TESDA system, as well as scholarships, in our administration, more than 11 million have graduated from various skills and livelihood training.

More high-paying jobs have emerged, such as BPO, IT and others, and even for ordinary workers, although there are still many challenges, wages have been increased almost every year.

And regarding your request to raise wages again, there are ongoing tripartite talks, so I am telling Secretary Nitoy Roque, a career labor official, Nitoy, do something to speed up our tripartite discussions on the minimum wage.

I just want to let you know that our minimum wage is favorable to our workers compared to other countries in the region. The monthly salary here depends on the region, $148 to $256, this is higher than the minimum wages of Vietnam, China, Indonesia and Thailand. If you think about it, Thailand, Indonesia and China are richer than us but our wages are higher. And our wages are now almost the same as Malaysia, which is also much richer than us.

However, we want, as Brother Vic said, for the worker to feel that he benefits from development, so let's expedite the discussion of the wage increase.

But I also hope you understand that if we remember, our inflation remained low during our administration, so the situation of our workers is better than in our neighboring countries that are suffering from high inflation.

And for government workers, Espie, didn't we implement the Salary Standardization Law? And it has increased many times and will continue to increase because for the next three years we have already made a law for 2010, 2011, 2012, the salaries of workers in our government will increase.

When there was a global economic crisis, we had an emergency employment program like CLEEP, OYSTER, NARS, which also helped create jobs.

And the funds of TESDA for training placed thousands of young people in the jobs offered by the job market, placing the poor and many young people in a better situation to fill the jobs looking for workers.

And when we saw that a crisis was coming during the time when food prices were rising in 2008, we enacted the Tax Relief Package Law of 2008, which exempted minimum wage earners and others with the same income from paying income tax; so now if you pay a minimum wage, you no longer have to pay income tax. So that is also your additional income.

There is also a law that strengthens the rights of workers to organize themselves; and the Magna Carta of Women, which seeks to ensure the equality of women and men; and the law that seeks to eliminate the worst forms of child labor; and we also have a law against trafficking in women and children; and the Migrant Workers Act increases protection and services for OFWs.

In our agreements with other countries, we have ratified three important ILO conventions: on forced labor and two conventions on migrants. So in the implementation of ILO conventions, the Philippines is among the leaders in Asia and the Pacific.

Our policies have empowered the representation of the working class in various government agencies, for example, the SSS and other levels of the mechanism and decision-making process.

The NLRC Tripartite, that's what was mentioned, used a deep word, Brother Vic, I don't remember… but I asked what it meant? He said that what you did, Secretary Roque, is being overshadowed by labor injustice, we talked about what that means… Allan said that the NLRC has so many layers that the process takes a very long time. But Nitoy Roque said that we have now appointed 46 labor arbiters, so the process is getting faster now. So we expect that the labor injustice that overshadows what we are doing will also be addressed now in the NLRC system.

It is true that there are still many challenges for justice for workers, and we recently established a Tripartite High-Level Monitoring Body to look at the difficult cases of unions and workers. This is an example of the fact that tripartism has been strengthened.

Therefore, our 37 quarters of uninterrupted economic growth is a result of our reforms not only in the economy but also for workers, and also a result of your care. The progress we have enjoyed came from the sweat of the workers.

Thank you for your important contribution to maintaining industrial peace for a long time. Thank you, and more people now agree that faster, better, and acceptable solutions to misunderstandings are achieved through orderly discussions and not through conflict.

In 1998, there were almost three hundred strikes. Did employment increase? Now… last year, there were only four strikes, employment increased, wages are rising, and continued discussion in the Tripartite Wage Board is necessary.

I am honored to be President of a country composed of excellent examples of the greatness of workers like you.

Therefore, to the great Filipino worker, thank you very much for the opportunity to serve all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080031/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27897&Itemid=38