Thank you. Many thanks.

Many thanks Secretary Remonde for your introduction of me.

I’d also like to greet Mr. Rene Cristobal and the other officers of the Bagong Bayani Foundation; Lito Coscolluela, SRA Administrator and other officers of the Galing Pook Foundation; Nitoy Roque and the other government officials who are here with us today. Of course, our awardees, the investors of the Excellent Places and our New Heroes.

A warm greeting to the local governments and the OFWs who received the Galing Pook and Bagong Bayani awards.

We are honoring today the best from two sectors that, although different, are united in purpose – to help in the development of our country.

On this occasion, because we have heard of their accomplishments and we no longer need to repeat how impressive they are, let us also greet the other true heroes of this country those who have gone unsung. Those unsung heroes don’t demand the spotlight or expect red carpet treatment. These men and women are motivated by the simple but profound values that drive this nation forward. Peace, hope, charity, love for family, a desire for good education and rights towards a good job with a decent salary that will give them the ability to feed their family and educate their children.

Who are these heroes? Those who received awards today, of course they are heroes, but the ordinary Filipino is also a hero.

The nurse who strives to take care of the elderly.

The farmer who fights flood and famine to deliver life-saving crops needed to nourish our nation.

The taxi driver who literally drives our nation forward, bringing people to their places of work, worship and friendship.

And of course our overseas Filipino workers, the overseas worker who is making the ultimate sacrifice by seeking career opportunities overseas and sending back remittances to celebrate the holiday season with their families, and making contributions to keep our economy afloat during these challenging times.

That is why we always call our overseas Filipino workers the new heroes of our country. And to all of you who received the Bagong Bayani Awards this year, congratulations!

Among our heroes are also the dedicated public servants who reach higher year after year to raise our governance standards so that our government can better serve our citizens. Heroism is also good governance of our barangays, towns, cities and provinces. So to our Outstanding Local Government Executives in Galing Pook, congratulations!

But as I said today, as we honor our LGU and OFW awardees, we also celebrate the unsung heroes who are our country’s source of strength, our backbone, our hope for the future. They are a reminder to all of us that we must never lose sight of the importance of growing our economy, providing peace and security, and now more than ever, ensuring peaceful elections and a smooth transition so that the gains of the last eight years will be locked in and our nation will remain strong.

Just as we celebrate our hardworking heroes, both the ones who received the awards so deservedly today and those who are unsung, your government is doing everything in its power to put food on the table and protect the paycheck from high prices and high inflation.

We continue to invest in our country’s systems for health care, education and social services. Just as I have done in the past eight years, I will continue to wake up every day, until the last day of my term, and work diligently and vigorously to fight for the common Filipino. Our people deserve no less.

As we enter the Christmas season, we must count our blessings and look to the future with hope and optimism. We must come together in this season of peace and celebrate faith and family and pray for those less fortunate.

We must unite to bring goodness to our communities, not harm or accusations. We must put aside our differences, be they personal or political. And I say this at a critical time in our nation’s history as we prepare for the elections next year.

Most importantly, we must offer ourselves to those who are poor among us, especially during Christmas, just as our heroes do for us every day, whom we honored today, as well as our unsung heroes.

Despite the challenges we face as a nation, I am optimistic about our future due in large part to the optimism and resilience of the Filipino people.

We will ensure that our government continues to work diligently to bring government services to the people. It is important that the government works for the people. Again, I will repeat — the people deserve no less.

Therefore, to all of you who serve the people, whether you are private citizens working overseas or you are public servants, all those we honor today, and to all those who manage the barangays, towns, cities and provinces who support our reforms, and to all OFWs, it is an honor to be with these living heroes as we pave the way towards a bright future.

Because of you and our other heroes, the country progresses.

So to all of you, thank you very much and congratulations!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the conferment of the 2009 Galing Pook and Bagong Bayani Awards. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133709/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27051&Itemid=38