Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Arthur Yap, for your introduction of me. And since you have already submitted your resignation because you are an unopposed candidate for Congress in Bohol, thank you for your service.

Governor Antonio, agyamanak ti welcome remarks yo, and thank you for recognizing and acknowledging the assistance we have given to this very important agribusiness province of Cagayan.

Apo Mayor Delfin Ting; the Vargas family, thank you for your hospitality in letting us use this facilities of your excellent school to be able to make our presentation of Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle. And I would like to also recognize former Mayor Randy Ting and former Assemblyman Tony Carag. And aside from Secretary Arthur Yap, I’d like to introduce two other cabinet members: Secretary Peter Favila of Trade and Industry, and Jun Icban, Press Secretary. So, Mayor Baby and the other mayors, senior member and administrator, as I said the Vargas family, dagiti estudyante, dagiti teachers, dagiti faculty ti Vargas Colleges, naimbag a bigat yo amin, Apo.

Since we began our term as President, it has been the government’s dream to improve every place in the Philippines — not just Manila. The provinces are the heart and soul of our country. In our work, we aim to nourish the heart and soul of our nation through investments in our people and our infrastructure, so that every Filipino may prosper.

I’m very glad to be here again in Cagayan province. I’ve come so often, I have visited every single town of Cagayan province.

Our travels throughout the country have been central to our presidency. More importantly, we did not just travel to the provinces, we invested in the provinces. We sought to diminish the excessive power of the economy and politics in Manila. So we have aimed to spread the wealth throughout the country, and take back the prejudice that is towards Manila.

To spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila, we designed the Super Regions. If you will look at the screen, you will see the Super Regions: Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines, the Luzon Urban Beltway, the Cyber Corridor and North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle or NLAQ, where we are.

The North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle consists of Regions I, II and CAR and the northern part of Region III. This is rugged country, you’re between the Sierra Madre Mountains and the Cordillera Mountains, but the rugged north of our country has some of the most hardy and hardworking people in the Philippines. The long history of grit and determination especially of our farmers and small businessmen has kept this nation moving forward.

Hardworking people want good jobs and good wages.

The good work in North Luzon is seen in agribusiness. In our administration, the loans of Land Bank to farmers, fisherfolk, and entrepreneurs are almost double that of the two previous administrations. Together, they total P97 million. In the last administration, 161 billion pesos. And P14 billion of that went to small farmers and fishermen, double the total loans from 1982 to year 2000.

Hardworking people want a good education for their children. We built more than a 100,000 classrooms during our administration. And of this, more than 12,000 were for NLAQ schools. Ken nagrugi tayo dagidiay ladderized system of education in more than a hundred schools, kas iti Vargas Colleges. Kadagitoy eskwela nga adda ladderized education, mabalin nga agrugi dagidiay vocational courses, inton malpas, mabalin ag-graduate ken agtrabahon wenno agtuloy para ti college degree. And I am glad that here in Vargas College, you are one of those offering the ladderized system of education.

Ta ado nga oportunidad wenno gundaway para ti agribusiness. I was asking, nagsaludsodak kenni Board Member Vargas no adda kayo nga Agribusiness courses, awan pay kano. So, we will ask TESDA to be able to help you. Also Secretary Arthur Yap, before you leave, after all, my last day for appointing your successor is still March 10. Before you leave, maybe you can help them put together a short Agribusiness course here in Vargas College for ladderized education.

Ta we have been pushing for more enrollments in Agribusiness courses in the 20 state colleges and universities that offer them. And I’m glad, itatta nga aldaw, we see some of the scholars, the provincial scholars, studying agriculture in the various state universities and colleges of Cagayan province. Thank you for joining us today.

We have also provided college and post-graduate education for over 600,000 scholars, on top of the billions that we have provided… billions of pesos we have provided for vocational and technical education, and I’m glad to hear from Board Member Vargas that Vargas College is a very strong recipient of CHED scholars.

Hardworking people want improved roads and bridges in order to get to work and conduct business. Kaspangarigan, in my father’s time in the 1960s, he built the Halsema Highway from Baguio to Bontoc. But by neglect by succeeding administrations, that road deteriorated. Idi kalman, we inaugurated the rehabilitated road. Kuna ni Loreta Bayaan idi kalman, maysa nga farmer leader, kunana from a mountain trail, President Diosdado Macapagal gave them a highway, and then it went back to a mountain trail after his administration. But now, President Macapagal Arroyo restored it back to a highway. Saan laeng data, we also extended it to Ifugao. Saan laeng data, it’s not gonna be on the chart, Baguio to Bontoc, we’re also building a connection from Bontoc to Tinglayan, and as you know, Tinglayan is already connected to Tabuk and to Tuguegarao. So it will be very easy to travel between Tuguegarao and Baguio once that Bontoc to Tinglayan segment is finished, we have a problem with right of way but the other portions are already done or will be done in a few weeks time.

Apay importante dagiti kalsada? Well, just to give an example of the Halsema Highway. Before the rehabilitation, the “ahente” bought the Benguet vegetables for a low price because they were no longer fresh when they reached Baguio, worse when transported to Manila. Today with the Halsema Highway, their vegetables are transported quickly from their gardens to Baguio. And the roads going to Manila are also improved with the SCTEX and the NLEX, so the “ahente” now buys their vegetables at a good price. The road will even be better and the trip will even be faster with the private sector Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Toll Road which started construction yesterday.

Aggapo SCTEX addan napipintas nga kalsada inggana Baler ken Dingalan diay Aurora. Adda met baru nga kalsada aggapo Baler inggana Casiguran diay Aurora. And as I said, ti Tabuk-Tuguegarao Road which will hopefully connect all the way to Bontoc but maybe the right of way — I don’t know if it can be done during my administration — but at least there’s only one part of the chain that’s not completed by the end of our administration.

Ngem haan laeng dagiti dadakkel nga kalsada, iti administrasyon tayo met ket nagaramid met iti nasurok nga 2,000 kilometers of farm-to-market roads in the entire NLAQ.

Nagaramid met tayo wenno nangpasayaat dagiti airports para dagidiay produkto iti agribusiness. Kaspangarigan, ti Poro Point International Airport nga nalpas idi napalabas nga tawen; the Bagabag Airport diay Nueva Vizcaya which my father built for the Rice Terraces and which we have lengthened; duwa nga airport diay Batanes; ti umay nga airport nga kuna ni Governor Antonio itattay, diay Lal-lo, which is where the international airport of Cagayan Valley will be, asideg ti Cagayan Zone, adda met dagidiay airport diay Baler ken Casiguran; adda private sector airport diay Binalonan, Pangasinan which started operating since 2008; and ti airport diay Alaminos, Pangasinan nga inaramid idi bidding idi Disyembre. So North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, with a plenty of airports for your agricultural cargo.

Dagidiay pantalan, we rehabilitated the port in Santa Ana, Cagayan. Agaramid met tayo iti feasibility study para iti Salomague Port diay bangir diay Ilocos Sur. So this is important, ’cause you did infrastructure in order to be able to transport your products.

Hardworking people also want more support in science and technology to improve our crops and productivity. Ta no awan nga technology, no awan nga science, no adda El Niño, awan nga harvest. Ngem itatta ta adda technology, uray adda El Niño, we should be able to overcome, and that’s why we have almost 500 irrigation pumps for your towns in the southern part of Cagayan province. But I am glad to hear that the northern part of Cagayan province is not feeling the effects of El Niño and we can still expect a good harvest from the northern part.

We started for 400…

Oops! there’s an earthquake. Wow! Okay. Well, let’s pray it will not be anything like Chile or Haiti.

Nangipuonan tayo para ti 400 nga post-harvest facilities ditoy NLAQ manipud idi 2004 kas iti cold chain para ti Trinidad, Benguet, a refrigerated storage facility and refrigerated trucks to deliver vegetables to Manila. Idtoy Cagayan, our most important post-harvest facilities are the flatbed dryers tano haan masapol nga ag-dry dagiti corn and rice yo dagidiay kalsada because that produces 30% of post-harvest losses. So flatbed dryers are more scientific and better technology.

Together with technology is irrigation, so even without rain, there is water. In our administration, not only these irrigation pumps, but 700,000 hectares of NLAQ were irrigated through new, restored, or rehabilitated irrigation systems. For example, small irrigation systems irrigated 500,000 hectares of farmland throughout NLAQ. Today we are visiting one of the rehabilitated irrigation systems in Delfin Albano, Isabela. There is also the San Roque Dam which we are improving in the Agno River Project to provide irrigation to 35,000 hectares in Eastern Pangasinan, Western Nueva Ecija, and Northern Tarlac, to be completed by 2012. The Casecnan Dam Irrigation Project was completed in December, helping 55,000 hectares in Nueva Ecija, our largest rice producing province, and the Banaoang Irrigation System is expected to irrigate 6,000 hectares in Ilocos Sur.

Tano makaurnong iti dolyar and to save our air from climate change, windmills in Batanes and Bangui, Ilocos Norte turn megawinds into megawatts. Ti Bangui Bay project ket mangmangted tatta iti 30% iti masapul nga enerhiya iti Ilocos Norte. Ti San Roque mangted iti hydropower into no 2013. But me, I don’t like hydropower, especially big ones, because when you have El Niño, they don’t work, like what is happening now in Mindanao. Mas nasayaat ti wind power, which we get plenty of wind here in Northern Luzon. Ken I remember, Governor Antonio telling me nga umay dagidiay wind projects, wind power projects iti Pamplona ken Aparri.

(Off-mike Response from Cagayan Gov. Alvaro Antonio)

Okey, so the equipments are now being off loaded, so asidegen ti wind power idtoy Cagayan province.

As for land reform, we distributed 150,000 hectares of private land and 600,000 hectares of public land, including ancestral domains. For example, 100,000 hectares for the Bugkalots and Ilongots in Quirino, Aurora, and Nueva Vizcaya. Some 150,000 Bugkalots there built irrigation and planted their own vegetables and corn.

I also remember attending a land distribution combined land reform and ancestral domain in Rizal in the neighboring province of Kalinga.

Dagiti mannalon ket nang-benepisyo met babaen iti agro-forestry kas iti jatropha, kaspangarigan, 200 hectares idiay Fort Magsaysay in Northern Nueva Ecija. Adda met dagiti proyekto nga panagmula iti niyog kas dagiti inrugi tayo idiay Lal-lo, Cagayan in my one of my recent visits here, idi malpas nga tawen ken idiay Nueva Vizcaya ken Isabela into no March 16, coconuts in the northern provinces.

Tano pondoan dagitoy puonan, we have made very tough and unpopular choices to control the deficits and increase taxes to pay for the future of this nation. Education, the economy and the environment have received the largest share of the money. I would suffer the criticism any day and over and over again to see our nation prosper. You, the youth of our nation in particular, deserve a better deal than your parents. In you, we will see a brighter day. No price is too high to pay for your education and your future success.

The nation must expand its political and economic footprint to lift up all regions, not just Metro Manila. That is why we have insisted on investing billions of pesos across the nation to tie the nation together through a better, more modern transportation system; to lift up you, our next generation with more schools to ensure a better education; and keep our nation clean, safe and beautiful to tap the best of our natural beauty.

Maysa laeng tayo nga pagpagilyan. We are one nation. So let us all stand shoulder-to-shoulder to lift up our nation, to lift our nation up and to give you, our next generations even more opportunity.

God bless you all, Lord.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle Tour: Visit to F. L. Vargas College, Centro Tuguegarao. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080518/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27667&Itemid=38