Thank you, Secretary Defensor.

Speaker de Venecia, other officials of the Philippine government, members of the diplomatic corps, members of the mining industry both in the Philippines and all over the world, ladies and gentlemen:

Welcome to the Philippines and welcome to Malacañang!

I think I shouldn’t say too much anymore, the speakers of the last two days have said it all. Your confidence in the Philippines buoys our hopes for a brighter future.

This conference comes at a time when the Philippines is experiencing political dynamism and economic growth: 6.1 percent growth rate, record levels of the stock exchange, very rapid strengthening of the peso, and of course, our supreme court two months ago ruled… and a few days ago ruled with finality on the constitutionality of our mining law.

Speaker de Venecia is here and I would like to thank Congress for avidly immersing itself in the shaping of equitable revenues to put our fiscal house in order.

We in the executive department are keenly focused on a ten-point pro-poor agenda to break the back of cyclic poverty.

Our institutions have a synergy of ideals and intentions intensely focused on the overriding welfare of the Filipino people.

There’s an air of urgent change and reform lifting the ship of solidarity and enterprise. And I thank you because you’re among the first to come here to give the Philippines a second look. Your trip shall be the start of a mutually rewarding experience for both your firms and for the Filipino people.

Our economic fundamentals are strong and stable founded not on public enterprise but dynamic private enterprise. And we shall compete for your investments through good governance, quality human resources and competitive incentives.

Our infrastructure programs are shifting into high gear in identified areas of mining growth. We are developing the best logistics hub in Clark and Subic just north of Manila.

Our crime rates have been on the downtrend in the last three years. We are working with our regional partners to check terrorist movements across the seas, while our soldiers are training alongside American troops as we take on the common foe of terrorism.

We offer a sound legal, operational and security environment that will enable solid profit alongside predictable social and environmental imperatives.

A mineral production sharing agreement can be obtained within six months — right, Mike Defensor? An environmental compliance certificate can be obtained in four months, and a precondition certificate from the commission on indigenous peoples can be obtained in three months.

Corruption will be punished as firmly as professional conduct will be upheld and rewarded.

We have linked two of our major line agencies — environment under Secretary Defensor and trade under outgoing Secretary Purisima, who will go to finance, and incoming Secretary Santos whom you met today –to spearhead all other concerned agencies in speeding up the processing chain.

I look forward to a strong partnership in shaping the overall environmental and social strategy in your prospective areas of operation. Winning the hearts and minds of the people in the community is the first step.

We are addressing the issue of abandoned mines now, and we shall not repeat the dire lessons of the past. We must make sure that the land is fit for tilling and habitation when we leave.

More than ever, I’m convinced that we need to get down to more community dialogues in the spirit of sincerity and mutual respect.

We must listen to the voice of indigenous peoples and local governments because they guarantee the stability and longevity of your investments.

Help us bring down the message of responsible mining now before negative attitudes seep into the fabric of the community.

As our lifetime partners in the fight against poverty, I invite you to help us meet the challenge of sustainable development through responsible mining.

Thank you, Mabuhay!

Bon appétit!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner Reception for the Participants of the International Mining Investment Conference of the Chamber of Mines of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082223/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3075&Itemid=38