Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Orientation on Infant and Young Child Feeding.

Thank you very much, Secretary Duque. Dr. …. of the World Health Organization; Dr. from UNICEF, Bernie Flores of NNC, chiefs of hospital; chiefs of medical professional services, participants from private hospitals:

We gather today to protect and nurture our most valuable resource: our children. Our government, civil society, and the private sector are united behind the most important issue of our time: how to lift ourselves out of poverty.

Today, the Manila Declaration on Infant and Young Child Feeding creates a step to end hunger and give children a healthy start.

A strong and healthy child is as valuable as a strong a healthy nation.

Infant and child feeding aims to fill our children with hope. Every child needs a “healthy start” in life. That is why I told Secretary Duque to call the programs within the declaration the Healthy Start or *Malusog na Simula* IYCF program.

We made difficult decisions to raise new taxes so that our poorest children will not go hungry. With the money our country earns, we can help raise our children with proper and nutritious food.

Over the next three years, our plan is to deliver the benefits of a strong and stable economy to our citizens. Nothing is more important than investing in the health and well-being of our children through this infant and young child feeding, or “*malusog na simula*.”

We must do everything in our power as a society, government, and individual citizens to care for our future. And our future is the children.

In our travels around the country, we talk to mothers and fathers whose only wish is to give their children opportunities they did not have. Our “*malusog na simula*” or healthy start program is a step towards fulfilling those dreams.

Our aspiration to build a single Philippines begins with ensuring that our children are given a healthy start, or a *malusog na simula*.

As elders to them, we have a responsibility to the children throughout the Philippines to ensure that their basic food needs are met so that they can contribute properly to the stability of our country.

Infant and Young Child Feeding, which we will now call “malusog na simula,” is a component of a broader accelerated hunger mitigation program.

We continue to face the challenge of cutting the incidence of hunger.

Last year, we formulated a plan to cut hunger, it is centered on low-cost food, food aid, roadworks and rural building jobs, family farms, microfinance and regional wage adjustments.

The hunger mitigation program framework proceeds from the recognition that hunger is caused by (1) unavailable or insufficient food to eat and (2) no money to buy food.

Therefore hunger mitigation consists of supply and demand measures.

On the supply side, the program is (1) to increase food production and enhance efficiency of logistics and food delivery. On the demand side, the program is (1) to put more money in poor people’s pockets, (2) promote good nutrition and (3) promote natural family planning.

Let me share with you the elements of this framework: to increase food production, the emphasis is on productivity programs including livestock, crops, regeneration of mangrove and coastal fishery, farm family or (gulayan ng masa) and irrigation.

Yesterday we attended *simbang gabi* in Smokey Mountain and there we inaugurated their greenhouse, their mass vegetable garden where they plant all the ingredients for *pinakbet*.

To enhance efficiency of logistics and food delivery, we have:

A) The Barangay Food Terminals. These are the drop-off points that we are putting in poor areas. For example, in Smokey Mountain we will put a drop-off point near the river so that the barges coming from Palawan and other areas of MIMAROPA will enter the river and just unload there on the river banks in Smokey Mountain.

B) And also the *Tindahan Natin*. So as I said, the Barangay Food Terminal is a drop-off point in areas thickly populated by the poor. Whereas *Tindahan Natin* is like a sari-sari store, actually it looks like a sari-sari store but the concept is a specialty store. You can buy cheap rice and noodles that are eaten every day here.

We first had these built in areas where many people are experiencing hunger. Now there are almost eight thousand *Tindahan Natin* outlets in the country.

The logistics are included here, there are also roll-on-roll-off ferry ports because that is cheaper than putting food on the same vessels used for narcotics. The delivery trucks are simply loaded. Then we also have private ports and private shipping opened up. That way there are more. When you have a big supply of ports, you have lower prices… Competition with each other.

Then, farm-to-market roads so that transportation from the farm to the market is affordable.

And then efficient local transport at the local government level. We are reminding the local government units that they have no authority to collect fees from trucks that are just passing through them.

And then we have the food for school program of the national government, where one kilogram of rice is given to pre-school, day care and grade one students in food-poor areas to take home to their families.

We must nourish the hearts and minds of our children through the blessing of education, but before this happens, they first need full stomachs.

Our children should face each day happily, healthily and with hope. They should look forward to knowledge and not to the basic need for food.

This program also aims to provide proper nutrition through the early childhood care and development system, in accordance with the Early Childhood Care and Development Law which we seem to be forgetting to implement.

The ECCD system includes nutrition service programs that provide for the needs of young children from birth to age six.

One of its objectives is to achieve improved infant and child survival rates by ensuring that adequate health and nutrition programs are accessible to young children and their mothers from the pre-natal period throughout their early childhood years.

Bagamat hindi pa natin fully implemented ito, with what we have been achieving so far, we are gratified that according to the millennium development goals monitor, the child mortality rate has been reduced from 40/1000 live births. Now, we are down to 32/1000. And we’re very much on track with the millennium development goal to reduce it to 27/1000 by 2015. Congratulations to all of you involved in child nutrition! (applause)

Providing nutrition to children who would otherwise be hungry is the most important thing our country can do. This is good manners, social needs and economic well-being.

In our hunger mitigation program, we also create an NGO network to support feeding programs.

And we also have now given the farmers’ option to buy back the rice they sell the NFA if they can get a higher price outside from the traders.

Now on the other side, the demand side: to put more money in poor people’s pockets, the program includes:

First, improve productivity in coconut areas by promoting coconut coir, virgin coconut oil and other value-added products, and coconut production. Because the poorest farmers we have are the coconut farmers.

Second, more aggressive microfinancing.

Third, maximize employment in the construction and maintenance of farm-to-market roads, irrigation and road maintenance. I don't know if you see them when you pass by the road, those wearing blue t-shirts cleaning the shrubs, those are what we call oyster out-of-school youth. And that is so that their families can have income.

And aggressive training is important… for us to be competitive.

And then, upland land distribution for jatropha and rubber.

And of course, to promote good nutrition, the program includes the following:

Conducting social marketing, of which this orientation is a part.

Nutrition education in schools.

And promoting breastfeeding, appropriate complementary feeding until two years of age, and increased consumption of vegetables. The promotion of breastfeeding for children up to two years old, with emphasis on exclusive breastfeeding for the infant’s first six months, is our fundamental approach to reduce if not eliminate hunger among infants and the very young children.

There is no substitute for mother’s milk, as most Filipinos know, but this knowledge has not been translated into practice. Our data indicate that more and more mothers are weaning their infants from breastmilk after only one month. A mere 16% of infants remain exclusively breastfed at 4-5 months, and very few are nourished by mothers’ milk up to 2 years old. We must act, and act fast to ensure that the nation builders of the future are provided proper nourishment.

One immediate concern which is why we’re having this is to involve all 1,426 accredited mother-baby friendly hospitals to fully implement the rooming in and breastfeeding act, the milk code and other laws on providing proper nourishment for infants. We need the strong will to make hospitals uphold our laws and work even harder to encourage other hospitals to join in our campaign.

The Supreme Court’s decision upholding all but three provisions of the milk code encourages us to be more creative in advocating breastfeeding as the best way to nourish our young.

By breastfeeding, we promote natural family planning where we emphasize birth spacing.

And it is the DOH, through the national nutrition council, that oversees the implementation of the hunger mitigation program.

We deeply feel the situation of our less fortunate countrymen. Ending poverty is our main necessity to do at present. I consider this a personal responsibility and duty of our government to give dignity and comfort to every citizen in our country.

The greatness of humanity cannot be achieved if the people are hungry and impoverished. We firmly desire to alleviate inhumane, immoral, unjust, and economically debilitating poverty.

And I’m glad that we’re making real progress in alleviating poverty. The incidence of extreme poverty is down, it’s below 10% for the first time in our history. (applause)

So, the people can be assured that we lead with a heavy hand to guide the nation. That we will not falter in keeping our hand on the tiller of the ship of state.

As we enter the holiday season, it’s essential that every person of means help those in need. Those of us in government should do everything in our power to be a catalyst for this process.

You–who are involved in infant and young child feeding are securing our country’s future, for tomorrow belongs to today’s child. And you cannot give the nation a better christmas gift than what you are giving now.

On behalf of the Filipino children, thank you. Merry Christmas and best wishes for your continued success! (applause) Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Infant and Young Child Feeding Orientation. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135545/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2310&Itemid=38