Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, On the 102nd Commemoration of the Battle of Pulang Lupa

Thank you very much Congressman Edmund for your introduction. You may all be seated.

Honorable Governor Carmencita Reyes, Mayor Pizarro, Bishop Oliveros, my colleagues in the cabinet who are here, Secretary Sonny Alvarez and Secretary Manolet Dayrit. Also present is the Chairperson of the National Commission on Culture, Secretary Evelyn Pantig. And here is our new Chief-of-Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, it was his birthday last night. Happy birthday, General Benjie Defensor. Our various defenders of our peace, our children, relatives, family members who are heroes of the Battle of Pulang Lupa, members of the provincial board led by Vice Governor Rejano, members of the Torrijos Municipal Council led by Vice Mayor Rasa, various mayors of Marinduque, various local government officials led by ABC President Torrijos Chairman Rejino, students, teachers. Distinguished guests, fellow countrymen, happy anniversary of Pulang Lupa to all of you.

It is widely known that Marinduque is a very beautiful province and its people are kind. This is what I want to prove and feel again. It’s wonderful to return to a place where people always give a warm welcome. Some even say that Marinduque may be small like me, but it has a big heart like me, especially when it comes to welcoming guests. I have been here in Marinduque many times, I have visited all the towns of Marinduque. Even now, as the mayor said, this is my second time to come here in Marinduque and I truly believe it has become even more beautiful and its people even kinder.

I remember that I came here in Torrijos in 1996. I was still a senator. I was the guest of honor at a provincewide painting contest in Boac, then I passed through here in Torrijos, not because Torrijos was on the way, I intentionally went here. The trip was long and tiring then because I was still a senator and didn't have a helicopter yet. But now, I am president and my coming here has become faster because I use a helicopter. I told my companions, Secretary Sonny Alvarez and Secretary Manolet Dayrit and others: we should be grateful for the warm welcome here. I even asked them, with Manolet Dayrit beside me, and he told me that the welcome here is very warm. And I said that Marinduqueños are truly known to be kind to visitors, kind to everything. And not only kind, but brave and patriotic. That is what we are celebrating today, right? This celebration we are holding today is important in the history not only of your province but also of our country.

The “Battle of Pulang Lupa,” as the governor said, which took place here on September 13, 1900, is one of the few battles where Filipinos defeated the Americans. Even though the brave guerrillas led by Lt. Col. Maximo Abad only had old rifles, bamboo spears, and bolos. They were able to defeat the invaders with superior weapons.

In the battle that took place, four American soldiers were killed, five were wounded, and 48 were taken prisoner, including the commanding officer, Captain Deveru Shields.

In the colorful history of our country, our ancestors sacrificed a lot to prove their love for their homeland. Our heroes of Pulang Lupa, as well as Jose Rizal, Marcelo H. Del Pilar, opened the eyes of fellow Filipinos to the truth that we have our own country that we should love and take care of. The people of Pulang Lupa, as well as Andres Bonifacio and Emilio Aguinaldo, fought for our independence and the independence of our first republic was fearlessly fought for by your brave ancestors here in Pulang Lupa.

Therefore, in our gathering today, we refresh in our hearts the sacred lives offered by our martyr countrymen from Marinduque. In this way, we once again focus on and value the freedom we enjoy because of the sacrifice of our ancestors. Now, we feel the joy of living in a free homeland. That is why we continue to offer sacrifices and lives to protect our freedom.

We are building a strong Philippine republic. The two important things for a strong Philippine republic are: first, it should not be for those in power but for the entire people, especially those who cannot defend themselves.

Second, a characteristic of a strong republic is this, it should be stable, and the bureaucracy and institutions should be strong. There should be strong defense of peace and order. That is why we are fighting, our brave soldiers and police are fighting terrorism and criminality. They are as steadfast in fighting terrorism and criminality as our leaders here in Pulang Lupa. While the citizens are striving to rise from poverty.

Building a strong Philippine republic is a continuation of Bonifacio’s revolution, of the heroes of Pulang Lupa that has not yet ended. They achieved freedom from the Spanish, from the Americans, but not yet freedom from poverty. We continue our struggle against poverty to improve the lives of the Filipino people and strengthen the foundation of our freedom. But we also need to fight the obstacles to our progress – such as terrorism and criminality. Our fight against poverty will only succeed if we accompany it with a fight against the obstacles to our development. If our ancestors succeeded in establishing a free country as happened in the Battle of PulangLupa, our generation must unite and work together to establish a strong Philippine republic.

I congratulate Marinduque because your crime rate is low here in the province. And your province is jueteng-free so congratulations as well. Continue this fight for peace and order. You should be vigilant against rebels who come here to encourage you to join their beliefs because it is easy for you to recognize strangers who come here. Immediately coordinate with the authorities if you notice people with suspicious behavior. Solving the problem of peace and order will be easier if citizens are willing to cooperate with the police and military.

A strong Philippine republic should rely on self-reliance, especially when our friendly countries are suffering. In the Battle of Pulang Lupa, the Americans were our enemies. Currently, the Americans are our friends, but America itself is still struggling to recover its economy after September 11, 2001 and is busy fighting terrorism in various parts of the world. That is why we should further strengthen our own economy and our own defense of our citizens. For the benefit of our own economy, what I am referring to now is the establishment of small and medium enterprises. I launched a project that we call one town, one product, one million peso loan for small and medium enterprises.

Here in Marinduque you have six towns, right? So I have a check with me for six million pesos. This I will hand over to the Department of Trade and Industry of the province… Because the DTI, together with the governor, together with the mayors, should look for what should be the product of each town.

I think what the governor said earlier after our very beautiful butterfly ceremony. You know, this crowning, I’m familiar with it because I’ve been to Marinduque many times and I’ve been to all the towns, I’ve also had a crowning ceremony in other towns. But it’s only now that I’ve seen our butterfly, the legend of the butterfly that we made. For the national audience, what is the legend of the butterfly of Marinduque? She said, “if anyone desires a wish to come true, they should capture a butterfly; whisper their wish to it, set it free, let it soar high to the heavens your wish will be brought up high to the greatest spirit who hears and sees all”. So that’s what they did earlier. Today, we set these butterflies free, trusting that all our wishes and prayers for our beloved President will be granted. Thank you for your prayers.

The governor said that actually Marinduque can be made a butterfly center in the whole world. You can raise butterflies, culture butterflies. That’s a good thing that this one million pesos per town, one product can be used for. She just said there’s an obstacle, there’s an old DENR ruling that prohibits exporting butterflies. That’s why Sonny Alvarez is here. She said we should separate the endangered species from the common species. Governor Reyes said that we can culture them, like the log ban but with industrial tree plantations. If you plant, you can harvest. But the virgin forests cannot be cut down. So maybe Sonny can do that. Those that you catch cannot be sold, but if you raise them, that might be allowed. So raise what you caught, propagate them, and that will help the loan of one million pesos per product, per town.

I also think that the loans should focus on the towns that will strive to develop a mango fruit basket here in Marinduque like Guimaras. Mimaropa should have a source of superior quality mangoes that can compete in domestic and international markets. I hope my action of separating the Calabarzon region and Mimaropa region will benefit your efforts. Before, weren’t you just part of Region IV? I, as president, used my power to separate you. You are now a separate region so you won’t be second class citizens in Region IV. Helping each other and like that will help you even more if you have your own DTI Region IV-A or Mimaropa, your own Regional Director of Police, Regional IV-A of Mimaropa, your own Regional Director of Region IV-B of the Department of Agriculture… So for example, for this to have a Mango Center, the DA of the Mimaropa region needs to cooperate with your provincial government and I know they are already cooperating. But if the whole Region IV helps, they will still have to take care of the coconut in Quezon, they will still have to take care of the coffee in Cavite, so the regional office of the DA should be separate to focus on cooperating with your provincial government and thus a project can be built by your provincial government and the Mimaropa region to make Marinduque also like Guimaras.

To start this, Leony Montemayor isn’t here but he has a gift for you. The DA sent 15,000 grafted mango seedlings for the target of 5,000 hectares of new mango orchard in this province. There are also steps taken by the department of energy to help with your problem with the price of electricity. Secretary Vince Perez isn’t here now because he’s preparing for my meeting with the electric cooperative that will be held in Malacañang when I return from our celebration here.

But what Secretary Vince Perez, Secretary of Energy, wants to convey to you is this: in May, I told Napocor that they should reduce the PPCA or Purchase Power Cost Adjustment to 40 cents per kilowatt hour. Marinduque, you don’t have PPCA, so nothing was reduced. You have PPA but no PPCA. The PPCA is a part of the PPA that was reduced, because that is the power of the president to reduce that part. The Energy Regulatory Commission is the one with the power to reduce your PPA forcibly. Napocor isn’t really charging you PPCA. What Napocor is charging is foreign exchange adjustment and fuel cost adjustment.

And I hope you remember that last year your electricity went down by 30 cents per kilowatt hour when Congressman Edmund Reyes passed the Power Reform Act and for small islands like Marinduque. You should also know that Napocor is covering the expenses involved in the Purchase Power Agreements. From January to June, the subsidiary of Napocor in Marinduque has reached 123 million pesos. Without this subsidy, your electric bill because of the subsidy is subsidized by 10 pesos. That means if there was no subsidy from Napocor, your bill would be closer to 10 pesos per kilowatt hour. So this subsidy will continue while the Energy Regulatory Commission hasn’t finished reviewing the contracts with the IPP or Independent Power Producers. As I said, without this subsidy, your electricity would be even higher by 10 pesos. Nevertheless, I’m looking for the seedlings, 10,000 have been planted in different towns and the 5,000 arrived last week.

Anyway, let’s go back to electricity. The reform continues. Trust that we are carefully monitoring your electricity expenses. So instead of sleeping here tonight, I will go home because I have a meeting upon my return with the electric cooperatives. I have a meeting with Vince Perez. What we will discuss is the forgiveness of the debt of the cooperatives to the government. Hopefully, if the government forgives the debt of the Marinduque cooperative, it will pass on its savings because it will no longer pay the debt to the government, we expect the Marinduque electric cooperative to pass on the savings to lower electricity rates for you.

I have long understood your problem regarding the damage caused by the former Marcopper mines. Even when I was a senator, one of my frequent visits here in Marinduque was because of the electricity problem. We discussed this issue during my official visit to Canada last January… Congressman Edmundo Reyes because of that issue. As I understand it, he hasn’t accepted the offer of Placerdome technical services to allocate 12 million dollars for clean-up and one million dollars for compensation for those affected by the tailings spill here, because you want to know how much the clean-up will really cost. So as Governor Reyes said, I advanced 20 million pesos from my President’s Social fund for a complete study to determine the best way to rehabilitate and restore the areas affected by the tailings spill. This includes the Boac river, Oogpog river and Kalangkan bay. Half of the said advance money is already with the provincial government and Secretary Alvarez has also signed the letter of agreement for the Marinduque environment and health study which he has already endorsed to Congressman Reyes. Those are the papers that Governor Reyes and Congressman Reyes gave me. And why is Secretary Manolet Dayrit here because Congressman Reyes is also asking for a hospital. Manolet Dayrit will take care of that.

We are moving towards building a strong Philippine republic and I will fulfill that to the best of my ability. I ask you here in this heroic land of red soil to work together. Let’s fix the nature of Marinduque. The ones left by the mine and the butterflies that we will raise. Let’s fix the livelihood of Marinduque. Let’s establish the mangoes and the small and medium enterprises. Let’s continue to fight for peace and order. And let’s ensure, let’s monitor the electric cooperative so that when its debt to the government is forgiven, it will lower its rates to the people of Marinduque. This should be our work program for Marinduque in the next 12 months. So that when we return here again to this red soil next year, we can say in honor of the heroes of the red soil that we continued their struggle for the independence and peace of the poor and all the people of Marinduque and the whole Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 102nd Commemoration of the Battle of Pulang Lupa. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211556/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8382&Itemid=38