Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Legislative Agenda Planning Workshop

[Delivered at the Diosdado Macapagal Hall Landbank Plaza, Malate, Manila, September 23, 2004]

Thank you very much, Speaker Joe de Venecia, thank you for inviting me here. And thank you for organizing this workshop, as always, to arrive at consensus. Joe de Venecia is the master of the win-win solution congratulations. Deputy Speaker Raul del Mar; Deputy Speaker Gerry Salapuddin, our host in this building Cito Lorenzo and Gary Teves, my Cabinet members who are here, Deborah …who financed this meeting so that there’s no cost to the Philippine government. members of the house, civil society leaders, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

How providential that this hall in which we’re holding this workshop is named after my father. That’s why his picture is there. It’s his birthday next week, and I’m asking him to pray for us from his home in heaven, because aside from having been president like me, he was also congressman like you. In fact, as president he was the father of land reform and the father of the land bank. That’s why this hall was named after him.

But this month we remember not only my father’s birthday. We also remember that 32 years ago, martial law was declared. That was what the meeting of the National Security Council Joe de Venecia talked about was all about. Since that time, when martial law was declared 32 years ago the nation has been struck with ideological strife that has now combined with the partisan strife arising from three successive extraordinary upheavals in political leadership.

When I called the national security council on that day September 21 as Joe said, my message was– it is now time to begin to heal the wounds of EDSA one, two, and three. for those of you who listened to my inauguration address you will remember that this is one of the ten legacy points that I declared in that address last June 30th.

By the way, let me take this opportunity to say that if I was able to make an inaugural address at all last June, it was because the vast majority of you, the congressmen supported me in the last elections, thank you so much for that support.

And now I will need your support again this time in fulfilling the ten-point legacy agenda that I talked about in that inaugural address amidst the difficulties that our nation is encountering. I thank you Joe for the twelve -point program that you, Raul and Gerry gave me and it is very much a part of my ten-points, for example, reviving the mining industry, your number one, is part of my number one point to create ten million jobs. Mobilize investments of the Mt. Diwalwal gold mine the same thing. Explore and develop more oil and gas wells, is part also of the creation of ten million jobs. And so, these are, I’m very grateful that you have this summary because Romy Neri is now putting together under my very close direction or medium term plan and we will find a place for this paragraphs in our medium term plan in the appropriate chapters.

I have a very meaningful acronym for my ten-point legacy agenda-many of you know about this already. It’s beat the odds:

B for a balanced budget,

E for education for all,

A for automated elections, and

T for transportation to connect the whole country. That’ s b-e-a-t, beat.

Then t is for terminate the hostilities with the NPA and the MILF,

H is for heal the wounds of EDSA,

E is electricity and water for the whole country. T-h-e, the.

For odds, o is for opportunities for 10 million jobs.

D is decongest Manila. And

Ds is for develop Subic-Clark. B-e-a-t-t-h-e-o-d-d-s, beat the odds.

If you in Congress support me the way you supported me in the last elections, we can beat the odds.

We can beat the odds even as our nation faces the threat of a grave economic crisis. Those are the odds. If we act on time and in tandem. Our national survival rests on whatever patriotic consensus we can build. That’s why I’m glad we have this workshop.

In my state of the nation address last July, I told you of the five reform packages I need to achieve my 10-point legacy: the economic growth and job creation package of which a lot of this is there. The energy independence package, that’s why I’m very glad that we have this exploring and developing more oil and gas wells. The social justice and basic needs package, the education and youth opportunity package, and the anti-corruption and good governance package.

To promote good governance, I asked you to enact a government re-engineering law that will give a silver parachute for early retirement so that the payroll savings can fund a better-paid, lean and mean bureaucracy.

To promote education, I asked you to enact a law that will standardize day care teaching to provide one extra year of education instead of a fifth year of high school.

To promote social justice, I asked you to enact a law qualifying farm land as collateral and other laws on land titling that constitute what the world calls the de SOTO reforms. In fact, because we’re in this hall I might add my father was the father of land reform. Now, with this new reforms it will be the new land reform.

To promote energy independence, I asked you to pass a franchise law for Transco so that, its privatization can fetch a good price and help reduce Napocor’s huge deficit.

And to promote economic growth, I asked you to pass eight revenue measures that we need to finance our growth without resorting to so much borrowing.

Of the eight revenue measures, I thank you for assuring me that you can pass at least four this year. And of the four, may I say that the most urgent is the indexation of taxes on alcohol and cigarettes.

I understand that the committee on ways and means chaired by Jing Lapuz over there has already sponsored the tax amnesty and lateral attrition bills. I congratulate and thank Jing, but I also congratulate and thank Tito Miniong, Gary’s father … Avier, Eric Singson and the other members of the committee for your swift response to our request. I also appreciate the dedication and perseverance of Junie Cua, chair of the house committee on trade and Danny Suarez whom I saw walked in. There you are Danny, oh! There is Eric. Thank you Eric of the oversight committee, Blue Boy Nepomuceno, chair of the civil service committee and Nonoy Andaya, chair of the appropriations committee. I must of course acknowledge, the Speaker Joe and all the members many of you who are here today who have consistently shown your full support for the revenue and other crucial measures.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the several of your members who have donated personal funds to the Bayanihan fund. Thank you. and to the many of you who have acknowledged the need for transparency and commonality of purpose in the allocation of your congressional funds.

I wish we didn’t have to enact taxes at a time of hardships for the poor. But it is time to act now rather than when it is too late. It’s time to act now or we’re still credit worthy in the eyes of our creditors, it’s time to act now or we can still grow at 6.2 percent as we did in the last quarter.

This growth was been financed by borrowings because we are still credit-worthy, but we cannot sustain growth based on borrowings. We must finance growth with our own resources.

Our fiscal problem is a cumulative result of incessant borrowings in lieu of generating the proper level of revenues to meet the needs of our people. As our national debt grew from one billion pesos in my father’s time to 30 billion pesos on the eve of martial law and exponentially growing. So, did the amount of interest payments we needed to pay grow.

And aside from these interest payments, the national government is also saddled with financial obligations to our LGUs. From 1992 to 2004, the IRA share of local government units has more than doubled. In terms of the percentage of the budget seven percent in 1992 to 16 percent in 2004.

The net result of these combined increases in interest rates and LGU shares has been the reduction of capital spending and other vital expenditures.

For 2004, our interest payments stood at 32 percent IRA 16 percent. Personal services ate up an even bigger share, leaving us with only six percent of the national budget for infrastructure and economic growth.

This creeping trend has reached a precarious threshold. And I’m glad that congress agrees that we should not wait until we reach a point when the entire budget could be solely devoted to debt payments and IRA and personnel.

Our external debt to GDP ratio at 71 percent is the third highest in Asia, when our ratio of revenue to GDP at 14 percent is the second lowest in Asia.

We must act now to bridge that gap.

And as the source of revenue laws, you, the congressmen have it in your hands to bridge this huge gap and allow our nation to ride out the tide of the crisis without imposing too great a burden upon the poorest and the grandchildren of the poorest who live in the margins of the economy.

We in the executive branch, on the other hand, will remain vigorous in going after tax cheats, in enforcing fiscal discipline and sharpening tax collection efficiency. I am instructing the BIR to use all the powers in its command, including the power to garnish bank accounts of notorious tax evaders as soon as their assessments are final.

And I have just signed an executive order giving the commissioner of customs the powers that used to be exercised by the defunct economic intelligence and investigation bureau in order to combat smuggling. next Tuesday, I will call a command conference of the Bureau of Customs to examine the performance of each collector.

I have read the riot act to my appointees in the GOCCs. The board members who are unable to accept the burden of sacrifice must surrender their positions now. while I’ve said it’s only realistic that for those executives where we have a danger of losing them to the private sector must be paid their highest price. … already acknowledged Rey David who’s coming in with a cut in pay. Today, I want to acknowledge Gary Teves who’s also voluntarily reducing his pay.

If we work together to beat the odds, we also have a better chance not just for beating the odds but for unprecedented growth: these things that Joe sent me they were part of his 747.

And indeed, if we work together to beat the odds eventually not this year, maybe not next year but eventually we will get to the stage of growing seven percent for seven years would your sustained prosperity for the greatest number of our people.

Indeed, the economic crisis we are facing now constitutes the odds. But it’s the proper venue, and here’s to gather together our shared dreams and aspirations for this great nation.

Our people’s salvation depends on the cooperation of its leaders with the people and with one another. With a collective heave of great political will, we will break the yoke of mounting debt and free our people from the vicious cycle of poverty.

This is the time for sterner yet greater days, when action takes precedence over words.

This is the time for unity. This is the time for patriotic fervor. And I join the rest of the people in wishing you Congress, all the best in your valiant efforts to do your essential and crucial part to build prosperity for the greatest number of our people.

Together, let us beat the odds. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Legislative Agenda Planning Workshop. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133148/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5694&Itemid=38