Thank you very much, Secretary Andaya and congratulations! For this very good idea.

Secretary Sto. Tomas, you are the mother of our workers, so I greet you and all of them on Labor Day.

If American soldiers have PX goods, now government employees can also have PS goods, this is the PS Mart. The PS, meant procurement service. So this PS Mart is for the smart consumer, for the thrifty shoppers. Why? Because the items sold here are bought in bulk by the government of the DBM in large quantities, thus ensuring that prices are all discounted.

The government is the largest buyer of consumer goods in the country and uses this power to get value-for-money for whatever they buy. So the DBM, the government has a 'shoppers’ advantage' and now we are extending this 'shoppers’ advantage' to those working in the government so they and their families can also benefit from low prices of goods.

The procurement service does not take advantage of the low prices it buys in bulk because under the law, it cannot earn more than three percent. So if there is a Shoemart outside, there is a PS Mart inside. Of course, there are still more items available at Shoemart but there are also many items available here at the PS Mart next to us.

Let's look at the prices. As Nonoy said, household goods and office supplies are 20 percent lower than outside. So Pat Sto. Tomas said, offices can now get rid of accusations of corruption because office equipment can be bought here at… Office supplies here at the procurement service. And look: sugar, here P33.50, outside P38.00; rice outside P22.00, here P18.00; cooking oil outside P22.00, here P19.80; sardines outside 10.28, here P9.93; noodles, P13.25 outside, here P12.80; corned beef outside P22.00, here P20.10; coffee outside P4.80, here P4.10.

The payroll of the national government is 330 billion pesos per year. And a large part of this is used to buy things for the family and the home. By opening the doors of the depots and warehouses of the procurement service, it is open to cooperatives, we offer our colleagues at work to come together, combine their grocery money, get big discounts and let their organization earn which they can then use for mutual aid. This is the spirit of Filipino bayanihan shown in the age of the internet. And this is the first example, Nonoy, right? This is now the PX store or PS store or PS Mart of our government employees. Each region should have a depot, Nonoy. Ah, there will be a depot for each… There are 12 now. For example, the depot of Metro Manila is in Paco. So the various cooperatives or even those running the agency, Pat, should contact these depots to have a PS Mart in all offices and departments.

After establishing the stores, we will ensure that consumers have money to bring there and shop. Last month, if you remember, we gave a thousand pesos additional allowance to all employees of the national government. And I followed this up with an urgent memorandum order to Nonoy to speed up the reform of compensation, right, Nonoy? That will determine that the pay in the public sector will be more tied to merit and performance. This proves that the government cares for the people and also knows how to take care of itself.

So this is what we are doing for government employees and we are opening this as part of the celebration of Labor Day. So I congratulate the officials of the procurement service or PS, they are very good at taking care of the funds entrusted to them. Not only did they save money, they even multiplied it through the best way of management and sound investment choices, they even invested here in the PS Marts.

Nonoy said, it is self-liquidating. Small profits will fund expansion created by demand from government employees. Nonoy said, no new funds are being taken from the treasury for this project. And soon, when the PS Mart blooms across the country and its signs are part of the landscape, we may remember this day, Labor Day 2006, and say that this chain of commissaries was established without the need for additional appropriation.

So again, to Nonoy of the DBM and to all government workers, Pat and I, the secretary of labor, greet you all, Happy Labor Day!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the launching ceremony of the DBM Commissary or PS (Procurement Service) Mart. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213919/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2794&Itemid=38