Thank you very much Nani Braganza, my Press Secretary.

I’d like to also greet Dagupan’s most senior sons, Speaker De Venecia and Mrs. De Venecia; our host mayor, Mayor Benjie Lim; I’d like to greet, of course, the organizers and leaders of this conference headed by Jaime To, president of the Bangus Association of the Philippines, welcome to Pangasinan all the way from Sarangani; Mr. Tanjangco, Chairperson of the Congress; and my appointive officials — Garry Teves of Landbank; Cito Lorenzo of Agriculture; Rene Diaz, Presidential Assistant; Dagupan son, Pingkoy Duque, President of PhilHealth; and Dagupan son also, Albert Balingit, member of the Board of Landbank.

My beloved countrymen, to all of you from Dagupan, happy Feast of the Sea and Labor Day. To those of you from elsewhere, I said, happy Feast of the Sea and Labor Day because today is the feast of the sea of Pangasinan Province.

And I am happy because despite the serious trials we are facing now, such as SARS, you still gave enough time to things related to our progress, such as holding this congress that aims to further improve the performance of our bangus industry, especially in the global market.

And thank you for coming to the province of Pangasinan, the province of Alcala which is now out of quarantine. This Bangus festival is one of the most important events of pista’y dayat. It is also important on Labor Day for this occasion. This emphasizes — we are doing this on Labor Day — emphasizes the aim of improving the condition of our workers by developing our industries, especially through the modernization of agriculture and fisheries.

Even if we face problems such as SARS, this shouldn’t be an obstacle to going on with our lives. The government will do everything planned to solve the problem of SARS. So it is better that we don’t panic and just continue our activities as long as our customs are clean. We already have guidelines that we are implementing for this, so let’s not worry too much, just be alert.

At the SARS Summit I attended in Thailand, that was one of the things discussed. That the biggest threat to the world and Asian economy now is not SARS itself, but the paranoia about SARS. There, the WHO said, those who had outbreaks before March 15 — because March 15 was when the WHO issued a warning about SARS — those who had outbreaks then, those were the thousands who got SARS or hundreds who got SARS. Those who got SARS after March 15, like Thailand and the Philippines, were very few because it was immediately controlled because we already knew how to deal with the problem. If we compare, Hongkong and China — 3,000 had SARS, the Philippines — 3 had SARS. And it might even become two if it is proven that Adela’s father died of cancer and not SARS. Vietnam reached 63 cases and five died, but now Vietnam is SARS-free. So we have SARS under control. What we should control is the paranoia. So it’s good you are here.

Truly, SARS circulates because our world is global. Globalization has disadvantages like diseases also becoming global. But globalization also has advantages that the bangus industry of the Philippines should use and take advantage of.

So the theme of your congress, “Bangus goes Global,” is just right. Because it’s really time for us to show the good qualities of our bangus fish to the whole world. We should take advantage of the global market and produce what can compete internationally like products from our delicious bangus.

I know the delicious bangus. Benjie said I am a certified Bonuan bangus-lover because every vacation we pass through Dagupan to eat Bonuan Bangus. And I was doing that even before I became president. So when I became president, I said why would I stop that custom of mine, so that’s how it is.

This industry has a lot of potential, especially if we consider that its production is very large. Last year, according to Cito Lorenzo, it was over 200,000 metric tons, 232,000 metric tons in production. With that big production, I instructed Secretary Cito Lorenzo to study the possibility of exporting our products to other countries.

As a result, we have a roadmap that aims to establish the export market for this product within fifteen months. We are determined to bring bangus into the world market. Ten countries are being targeted initially, where there are an estimated 5.6 Filipino workers. We can be sure that the world market will support your plan for a 160 million peso bangus processing plant in Dagupan.

For that 160 million, Benjie is only asking for 50 million from the national government. So if Emi Boncodin is hearing our broadcast, “Emi, Cito Lorenzo will pester you to release that 50 million.”

This processing plant will create frozen, smoked, marinated, deboned bangus. As well as canned and bottled bangus to be exported to America and other countries with Filipino communities.

By June 2004, we expect to ensure the low-price supply of quality bangus fingerlings. Increase bangus production by 25,000 metric tons and add value to the bangus industry with the end view indeed of breaking into this export market. They did that, let's maintain the facilities at the National Integrated Fisheries and Technology Center in Bonuan. The other existing hatcheries is in Calape, Bohol — do we have people from the Visayas here? — which caters to the needs of the Visayas. And a new hatchery will be built in Samar to address the needs of Mindanao.

There, with Mr. To, he said, “‘That’s their fisheries there in, in Sarangani, that’s not a fishpond, that’s a factory. Because their production methods are very high tech and modern.” Eventually, as we build more hatcheries we can lower the price of ten centavos per fry. With sufficient supply and lower cost we expect a dramatic increase in milkfish production and the creation of more livelihood opportunities for our agricultural workers in breeding fry production and marketing for our coastal communities.

Look at what Mr. Fil Hipolito did — is he here? Fil Hipolito? No? Oh well! He should be here. Anyway, let me tell you about him. He is from barangay Damortis, Sto. Tomas, La Union. He trained at the Bonuan Center here in Dagupan. He converted his prawn hatchery into a milkfish hatchery. On April 3rd, he sold 3.3 million milkfish for 30,000 pesos. For a period of 22 days, he was able to produce 600,000 fries amounting to almost 200,000 pesos. His gross earnings totalled 150,000 pesos and this was only within a period of three weeks. So to those who are watching — because those here already know that — you who are watching, in areas with potential for milkfish hatcheries, this can be a source of income. The Bonuan Center of Dagupan is even willing to provide bangus eggs on a pay-later-when-earning’s scheme. The price of feed is what makes it expensive. One should only use the simplest methods for semi-intensive fish farming.

What I’m saying is, we shouldn’t have fish farming that is too intensive. With the increasing occurence of fish kill due to intensively farmed and overcrowded fishponds and cages, we have to shift to safe and environment-friendly technologies. Let’s bring back the lablab feed, Joe knows this because his father… Joe’s father sent Joe and his siblings to school because his father was one of the pioneers of milkfish. He knows about lablab. As far as I know, this is the main reason why Bonuan milkfish is delicious.

Let us also establish mariculture cage zones or parks. And so on this day, if you have mariculture, that is also going to help us make our bangus production more scientific. And so on this day, as we celebrate the sea festival and the value of labor, let this meeting inspire all of us, especially after the meeting you will see the longest bangus grill. May all of that the visuals and the substance in this meeting inspire us to work relentlessly for the continued revitalization, competitiveness and success of our unique Philippine bangus industry.

Furthermore, thank you and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the Ist National Bangus Industry Congress. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201423/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6333&Itemid=38