Thank you very much, Ka Blas.

I probably won't mention the names of my companions here on stage because Ambassador Ong has already introduced them. But I will greet Ambassador Ong because no one has greeted him yet. And to all of you, my countrymen, good evening to all. To my fellow Capampangans, mayap a bengi que congan. To my mother's province-mates, good evening to all of you. Ah, Ilocano too. To those who came from Mindanao where I grew up, maayong gabii kaninyong tanan. To my fellow Ilonggos, my husband's province-mates, maayong gab-i sa inyo nga tanan. To all my beloved countrymen here in Malaysia, good evening once again.

So, how are you all doing now? Looks okay. I am very happy to be here, so I extend a joyful and heartfelt greeting to all of you from our countrymen in the Philippines.

And thank you for your warm welcome to me and my companions here in Kuala Lumpur. We are delighted and grateful that we were able to gather tonight even though today is an ordinary day. I know that most of you can only go out on Sundays. So it's good that you were able to find a way to meet tonight. I know this is extra effort on your part, so thank you very much.

You, our emcees earlier, reminded us of our gathering here before. Many of you – many of you are here again – I came here in 2001, that was my very first state visit as president. And perhaps you remember why I first visited Malaysia before the Americans like other presidents, because of the great help Malaysia and Prime Minister Mahathir gave our country in finding peace, in being able to negotiate with the MILF to resolve the conflict in Mindanao.

I am pleased that you remembered what I said before that you are competent, professional, but I also said before that I consider you as overseas Filipino investors. Back then, we hadn't even… discussed what we're discussing now. So much more now that you've proven that my nickname is really true. I believe even more in this nickname because of what you're doing here, while you're doing what benefits you, you're also benefiting your communities there in the Philippines. For example, your savings cooperative is surprising. Not many Filipino communities in different places have a savings cooperative like yours. And imagine, just one year, three million pesos already. Congratulations on your savings. And also thank you for the eighteen classrooms that you will donate. As Ambassador Ong said, that's just for starters.

I just want to explain how this started. Because I was thinking, every time, we always lack classrooms. I said, let's do an inventory once and for all. All schools where the student-classroom ratio exceeds 100 students to one classroom, we should build a new school building. If more than fifty but less than 100, there should be two shifts. But if more than 100, even with two shifts, it's really not enough. So, I said, let's build additional classrooms in all schools that are having more than 100 students per classroom, once and for all. And Secretary Ople and Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas heard this plan. And of course, that requires thousands of classrooms because thousands of schools have a student-classroom ratio exceeding 100:1. Well, tell other OFWs and overseas Filipinos like you, and the response was great because you really send money, right, for your relatives to study. And many times, when I visit, I see that it's donated by the Filipino community of so and so. I even inaugurate your projects sometimes when I'm the guest speaker at a fiesta. So I'm not surprised, but I'm happy that you liked our plan to close the classroom gap in our country once and for all. Thank you for your help. Thank you for the 18 classrooms.

And this skills training program is admirable. You are doing this through bayanihan. And thank you to those who were awarded earlier because you give your weeks to teach your colleagues. I learned that your skills training program has been used by many to learn and to improve their lives.

And perhaps we should also know, because many have started businesses, I just want to give one example. An example, whose story I heard, is your colleague, a former domestic helper named Dolly Sumampong. Do you know Dolly Sumampong? She is a domestic helper. Her grandmother is a laundrywoman in Davao City. Her mother is also an overseas domestic helper. Here, Dolly enrolled in a business development class of my excellent former colleague at DTI — where is Glen? He received an award earlier. So, she studied at your Filipino Workers Resource Center. Our trade attache, Glen Peñaranda, taught her — you’ve done a lot here on top of the many investments you’re getting, Glen — he’s getting a lot of Malaysian capital, he’s still getting Overseas Filipino capital.

Because Dolly, for example, after a year of study and having saved capital, she returned to Davao in 2001. Now, I am happy to report to you her success. She now has two businesses there. One is named SC Laundry Services and the other is Mom Doll Lechon and Food House. So she is a good example of an overseas Filipino investor. Thank you very much, Dolly, for her investment. But to you as well, even if you are still here, thank you very much for your investment in the Philippines. Because I know that your remittances continue to flow, helping to improve the lives of the poor in our country.

Filipinos living abroad, the largest Filipino community is in America — there are three million of them. There are eight million Filipinos abroad. The second largest after America, with three million, and many of them are already American citizens, the second and number one in Overseas Filipino Workers is Saudi Arabia with one million. But the third and largest here in Asia is Malaysia — 600,000 Filipinos are here in Malaysia working as contract workers, although here in the Peninsula there are only 17,000 of you. So, out of the 17,000 here, imagine, 1,200 are inside and there are still more outside. So almost ten percent of the Filipino community in Malaysia is here tonight, on a working day, you are really hardworking and your enthusiasm and unity are high.

And from what I see in you, for the second time, my recognition of your contributions is truly complete. As our emcees said, it has been passed after a long time of waiting, finally, in my administration, the Overseas Voting Law and the Dual Citizenship Law have been passed.

And I am pleased that here in Malaysia, I learned that 2,500 Filipinos in Malaysia, here in the Peninsula, in the small community of 17,000, 2,500 of you have registered from Johor, Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh and Penang. Percentage-wise in a community, this is one of the largest percentages that have registered among Filipinos here in the Peninsula, Malaysia. So thank you very much.

You are investing in the education of your relatives. You are now investing in classrooms. You are investing in the capital of your relatives, even your own capital. And the savings will also be used by savings cooperatives for investments. Another broad accomplishment of my administration, as they say in surveys, the best program of my administration, according to some, is housing. Because the largest housing program has happened under our administration in the history of our country. And many of those buying houses are for their relatives who are also Overseas Filipino Workers. So hopefully you too, with what you have saved, you might consider buying a house for your loved ones.

Is there Pag-IBIG here, Ambassador? That one. So that is also a good way to provide comfort to your countrymen in the Philippines. Then when you return, you will also have a home to return to. Many houses have been built in the Philippines in the two and a half years of my administration and many of them are because you have gifted houses to your relatives.

So I am happy to visit here often. Actually, we have met twice since I became president, but actually this is my fourth visit here. Because after my first state visit, I was invited by Prime Minister Mahathir to a conference, a business conference. After that, he invited me to the summit meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement where, thanks to the good work of Secretary Blas Ople, the Philippines became vice chairman. Now the Philippines is vice chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. Now, as Ambassador Ong said, my coming here now as a guest of Prime Minister Mahathir again, is because he is the chairman of the 10th Organization of Islamic Conference Summit which will be held tomorrow.

And this is a great honor for the Philippines because for a long time the OIC has been existing and now the Muslim countries are united, only now has the president of the Republic of the Philippines been invited. And I expect that this means that it is also being seen that the Muslim countries, we respect the Muslims in our country and we consider them to be truly a part of the Philippines and not others. So here with me now is Governor Parouk Hussin, he is the Governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

During the MNLF rebellion, Governor Parouk Hussin was like the shadow foreign minister of the MNLF. Now, he is still with the MNLF but the MNLF is already part of the Philippine government. That is the symbol of Governor Parouk Hussin.

In fact, yesterday, the good report of Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda of Indonesia — he is the chairman of the Committee of the Eight of the Organization of the Islamic Conference which monitors the peace agreement between the Philippines and the MNLF — and Wirajuda’s report is that we have fulfilled our commitments in the MNLF peace agreement and the mnlf peace agreement can be considered the most successful project of the OIC in its entire history.

So now, I am here again to ask for the help of the OIC again in our search for peace with the MILF. And there is great hope for this. The agreements being formed in institutions like the U.N. and OIC for peace and development in Mindanao, that gives us great dreams and hope.

Now, the peace we desire is within reach if the peace talks push through. And the peace talks will likely push through here in Kuala Lumpur towards having a lasting agreement.

I had a small revamp in my Cabinet, and Secretary Angelo Reyes, who was formerly Secretary of National Defense, is now my Special Ambassador for Counter-Terrorism. This is because all countries fighting terrorism have such a position. And that is what Secretary Reyes is doing. In fact, he is in America now because of that job. I appointed Secretary Ed Ermita as Secretary of National Defense, who was formerly Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process and chairman of the peace panel for the peace talks. From peace, he is now handling national defense. What message is that? We want to include our peace policy in the mainstream of defense policy. That is also what my appointment of Secretary Ed Ermita as Secretary of National Defense means. Secretary Ed Ermita will now implement our agreement with Indonesia and Malaysia to fight terrorism. Because the three of us countries — the terrorists go around our countries — because we have common seas, so we also have an agreement, the three of us. Three countries fighting together. Ermita will implement that.

So he is here now to say goodbye to those helping our peace process, the Malaysians, and to introduce his replacement, this is Secretary Ging Deles. Secretary Ging Deles, when she was in an ngo before EDSA 2, she gave her whole life almost to find peace. So now… When I became president she became presidential adviser… Ah, secretary for Anti-Poverty. But now, she is back to her main beloved work throughout her life and that is to establish peace in the Philippines. So we are really looking for peace through dialogue and also through fighting terrorists.

The killing of international terrorist Fathur Rohman Al-Ghozi in Mindanao last Sunday, that is proof of our determination to suppress this threat in the midst of positive developments such as the expanding participation of our neighboring countries in asean in the fight against terrorism, including Malaysia.

The terrorists are falling one by one. This reduces the weight of terrorist threats across the broad range of countries in Southeast Asia including our country of course. We’re moving effectively to check terror in concert with our neighbors like Malaysia. Our ongoing constriction measures are eating up their room for maneuver and the peace process with the MILF will continue to isolate them. Our determined moves against poverty will drain their recruitment bases. We shall beat terrorism decisively and comprehensively.

In my two and a half years as president, I have gained extensive experience in seeking peace, fighting terrorists, and understanding what needs to be done to change our society in a way that will bring economic growth and end poverty.

I have truly seen in my two and a half years as president that deep change is still needed, not only in day-to-day operations but in the very system of our politics and economy, as Mahathir did in the early years of his premiership. Before Malaysia developed like this, Mahathir had to make many changes to the Malaysian system itself. And on top of changing the system itself, our country also needs to heal the deep divisions in our society. We have the MILF, we have the government; we have communists, we have democrats… Pro-democracy; we have EDSA 2, we have EDSA 3. But in the middle, probably your relatives, the ordinary Filipinos, don’t want communists, they don’t want pro-democracy. They don’t want the MILF, they don’t want the government. They don’t want EDSA 2, they don’t want EDSA 3. They just want everyone to come together. And that is what we need to do. And that is what I am striving for.

I always say, it is my duty to be the president of EDSA 2 and EDSA 3. Our country needs to unite. From what I see in your applause, you want that too.

So, from here you can do a lot, as proven by those we have given awards to here. So I ask you again, my friends, help me make the changes that our country needs. You are already doing the classrooms, the skills upgrading, the savings. Thank you, exemplary Filipinos in Malaysia. May your success continue.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141430/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7385&Itemid=38