Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina for your very kind introduction of me.

Troop commander General Delfin give “Tikas Pahinga.”

His Excellency former president and former chief PNP, President Fidel Ramos; General Ebdane and Mrs. Ebdane, and the other officers of the PNP; former chiefs of the Philippine National Police; AFP Chief of Staff, General Abaya and the other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; members of the Cabinet; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; officers, men and women of the Philippine National Police; ladies and gentlemen:

Sabi nga ni General Ebdane lucky 13th. What I can say is as protectors of the people, I have much to congratulate you for today.

Teaming up with other NAKTF units, you closed down an unprecedented number of clandestine laboratories and warehouse, with a total drug haul of an unprecedented amount of billions. You have an unprecedented achievement in the fight against drugs. Congratulations to you!

You have made more than 20,000 arrests among drug lords, big and small, but including the biggest drug lord of them all, the number one lord, William Gan.

Aside from your fantastic achievements in the fight against drugs, you have made equally spectacular achievements on the anti-kidnapping front. Because of you and your other partners in the anti-kidnapping task force, headed by General Reyes, Secretary Reyes, the top kidnap gangs have fallen. Congratulations for the spectacular achievement!

That is why despite all the sound and fury of the political season, even despite the misadventure of some military captains, our nation is safe. The AFP Chief of Staff is on top of the situation as far as the latest AFP incident is concerned. That incident is an isolated incident. No untoward developments have been monitored, and a widespread plot is not indicated. This is another case of partisan exploitation of military adventurism. The AFP will impose the commensurate level of discipline against its err members, and the Department of Justice shall file charges against those found culpable. We will deal sternly with violations of the chain of command. This administration upholds military and police professionalism.

I congratulate the police for your united defense of the republic not only against terrorists, kidnappers, drug lords, but also against those who adventured to fight the government like what you did beautifully during the Oakwood mutiny. Thank you very much for your loyalty.

I know that the ordinary police officer is an ordinary Filipino who wants to be professional in your actions. I know that while you strive to be very good professionals in your work, you are also preoccupied as ordinary Filipinos with your livelihood. That is why early in my presidency, I already looked for funds to make the police salaries the same as the salaries of teachers.

Sulit naman ang pagtaas ng inyong sweldo because of the great strides we have made during the short time I have been president in fighting kidnappers, drug lords and terrorists.

But this is only a down payment. Much more remains to be done. And that is why I formed a PNP Reform Commission last year made up of non-PNP government personnel, private sector personnel and PNP officers. And they will be submitting their recommendations soon regarding the fundamental reforms we need to make in the police institution.

We have come together through many hardships and many trials. We have also come together in achieving many successes. Let us come together now to truly improve the institution of the police. Let us follow up on the down payment. Let us make a good next installment for the good future of the police and the entire Filipino nation because the peace and service you offer to the ordinary Filipino is what will bring peace of mind.

Maraming salamat.

Long live the police! Congratulations!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 13th Anniversary of the Philippine National Police (PNP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091020/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5486&Itemid=38