Thank you very much, Secretary Teodoro. Thank you.

Her Excellency Kristie Kenney, His Excellency Makoto Katsura, other members of the diplomatic community, Senator Richard Gordon, members of the House of Representatives. And I would like to acknowledge them individually: we have Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa; (applause) we have Majority Leader Art Defensor; (applause) we have the Representatives of Bataan, Herminia Roman (applause) and Abet Garcia. (applause) I’d like to greet also Abet’s father, Governor Garcia. (applause) And I’d like to greet the Vice Chairman of the Committee on Veterans Affairs of the House, Joey Solis (applause) and Buhay Congresswoman Iyay Coscolluela (applause) who together with Congressman Solis, both of them, were the principal authors of the Veterans Law of 2008 as Dick Gordon was the principal author in the Senate. Thanks to all of them. (applause)

I’ve greeted Governor Garcia, I’d like to greet all the people of Bataan; General Esperon and the other officials of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. I’ve greeted Secretary Teodoro, I’d like to greet all other government officials and above all, our veterans and their families. (applause)

On this day, as our speaker earlier did, we pay tribute and remember the heroism and greatness of our soldier heroes, as well as the soldiers of our allies who bravely fought and sacrificed their lives during World War II. We also commemorate the heroism of other Filipino soldiers in other wars and even those who are fighting terrorists and rebels today in various parts of the country.

The greatness of our soldiers, including you, our esteemed veterans, is what we owe for enjoying freedom. Therefore, our beloved heroes, thank you very much. (applause)

In our history, Filipinos bravely fought for our liberation and for the freedom and peace of the world. It is not enough for the nation to thank you, our veterans. It is also important to ensure that your needs are met.

As they say, it's not just about money, but that is very important, especially for the age of our veterans now. So even during times when we were short on funds, we started paying the debt to the veterans in 2005. And in 2007, almost two billion in pension debt was paid to the elderly for more than 12,000 veterans and millions in benefits to more than three thousand veterans. The debt for the schooling of more than five thousand students, children of veterans, was also funded.

Since last year, thanks to our Congressmen, we have doubled the budget for the payment of arrearages, the debt to you our veterans, to three and a half billion pesos so that hopefully all outstanding old age pensions can be settled by the end of this year 2008. (applause)

The government, the PVAO has also reduced claims processing time and it’s delivering faster the pensions through bank payments. Today, I understand from Secretary Teodoro that nearly all pensioners now get pensions through ATM.

We also continue working for the Filipino Veterans Equity Bill in the United States. A joint Philippine Executive-Legislative delegation including Senator Gordon and Congressman Solis will leave this month to lobby for its passage. (applause) But of course, we will begin our lobbying with Ambassador Kristie Kenney right here in Mt. Samat. (applause)

And in the meantime, today at the end of my remarks, I will sign before you the “Filipino World War II Veterans Pensions and Benefits Act of 2008.” (applause)

The courage and patriotism of all war heroes live on. You are bequeathed to today’s Filipino soldiers who battle lawless violence to protect citizens and brave deadly calamity to rescue disaster victims.

Courage and patriotism also shine through our efforts to forge lasting peace, shown by peace advocates who persevere in building trust and restraining violence despite years, if not decades of strife.

Ambassador Katsura talked about the peace process. We thank Japan. We thank the U.S. We thank all our allies represented by the ambassadors here for this help in the peace process.

Courage and patriotism are manifest also in the determined toil of farmers who are doubling their efforts to produce more food for our people.

Our near-term objective is to focus on putting food on the table for our people. The global rise in the price of basic commodities like fuel and rice is putting a strain on all hardworking Filipinos and veterans, and others who live on fixed pensions and especially our very poor.

We aim to prevent these strains on individuals and your families by preventing these strains from becoming a crisis by taking decisive action.

Concerning rice, it is essential that the people of the nation understand exactly what the situation is and what we are doing about it. It would be unfortunate if panic overtook logic, because we will endure and survive the moment and come through it stronger, the way we endured Bataan, survived the war and came out stronger.

In the meantime, however, just like Bataan, it will take unity and hard work.

Overall, our strengthened economic situation gives us the ability and flexibility to respond forcefully to make sure we maintain control of the situation. Specific to the rice issue, we have an Action Plan, comprising three phases, to make sure our rice situation remains stable: First, is to secure supply; second, to ensure proper distribution; third, is to guarantee enforcement to protect of our people against price gouging and corruption.

The Philippines is not alone in seeking to manage this challenge, just as the Philippines was not alone in the Second World War. There is a convergence of global forces that are buffeting the Philippines and every other nation at this time. This includes an economic slowdown in our allied countries; it includes a surge in the price of oil, a surge in the price of important food commodities such as rice.

In anticipation of time such as this, we have been working every day since I came to office to rebuild the Philippine economy to weather this kind of storm. We have increased our foreign reserves, raised revenues, stimulated investments, diversified our export base. Regionally and globally, we have developed strong partnerships with our allies, some of whom used to be our fiercest enemies in the war and now are among our most ardent allies in our war against poverty. Most importantly, we have been able to turn our strong economic gains into investments for our people in terms of jobs, education, health care and roads, bridges and ports.

With this newfound stability, we are in a much better position to weather these economic and price pressures than ever before. That does not mean it lessens the pain on our poor when rice and gas prices increase, but we are able to help ease this burden.

I thank Governor Garcia for saying that the provincial government will provide rice subsidies to the veterans of Bataan and their families. That is a great example. (applause) It is essential for our political leaders to join hands and close ranks to meet this challenge. This is no time for political posturing. We need food on the table, not headlines in the newspapers.

We must invest, not just investigate. It is time for action, not political wrangling. The people deserve that we focus on a positive agenda, not get wrapped up in political jockeying.

No endless investigation will put rice on the table, a computer in a classroom or a health clinic in a barangay. We must put the interests of the individual Filipino above all else and make sure to reassure our people that we are providing steady and strong leadership at this critical point in time. To repeat: We must put rice on the table and not politics on the front page.

As we manage our way through the fuel and food spikes, we must not lose sight of advancing the long-term interests of our nation. We remain focused on the essential building blocks: economy, education, environment.

While we invest in our people, we will also not lose sight of the economic gains we have made through fiscal discipline. We will not only meet the near-term investment needs to prevent any type of food crisis, but we will further reach for a balanced budget. This means to put greater pressure on revenue collection through enhanced use of technology and some of the administrative measures that were proposed by Governor Garcia as well as the political will to get the job done. The revenue is there to bring us to the threshold of first-world in 20 years; we just need to ensure that we collect it.

To answer all these challenges, the people will draw strength from the example of courage and greatness shown by our veterans. (applause) Our beloved veterans, you bravely fought before, it is only right that the current generation of your children and grandchildren are also brave in facing the threats to development.

You Filipino veterans are truly a guide to the people towards unity, peace and development. We thank you for your greatness. Fellow citizens, let us reciprocate the heroism of our veterans through united action to overcome obstacles to the national goal of lasting peace and development.

And now, in consideration of our beloved veterans, I invite our senator, our congressmen, some representatives of our World War II veterans to come here around me to witness our signing of the new law for your benefit. (applause)

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the Observance of the 66th Anniversary of “Araw ng Kagitingan”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122150/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1354&Itemid=38