Thank you very much, Secretary Durano, you seem to be an idol to the teenagers here in Camiguin, (Applause) for your introduction.

Our family patriarch, Congressman Loloy Romualdo, thank you for your continued support for me in Camiguin and in Congress; (Applause) Governor JJ Romualdo and all the provincial officials; Mayor Romualdo and all the officials here in the capital town; my colleague who was invited, Congressman Pancrudo who is also enjoying your fiesta; all our brothers and sisters, Camiguinons, congratulations on the Lanzones Festival again! (Applause)

As I was saying, because it seems like Secretary Durano said, the President has been coming to your fiesta every year. (Applause) Last year, Camiguin was the second favorite destination here in Northern Mindanao. Your place is already famous, that’s why in 2007, your tourism increased by almost two hundred percent. Congratulations! (Applause)

The reasons why tourists want to return here, together with your ‘buahan’ which is the sweetest in the world, (Applause) is the almost non-existent crime here, almost zero crime rate and 100 percent crime rate solution, congratulations! (Applause) And there are so many different kinds of tourist spots and especially now through… through the RORO, it is now cheaper to travel here from different places in the Philippines and of course an important reason, the warmth of the people of Camiguin. (Applause)

These positives are further enhanced by the quality basic services provided by your local leaders, led by Mr. Camiguin himself, Congressman Loy Romualdo; (Applause) and his son, Gov. JJ; and your other officials. Congratulations to all of you! (Applause)

It seems like the Congressman is saying that you know there is an economic crisis around the world which is causing the increase in the price of food, oil, and rice here in the Philippines and in other parts of the world. We, it seems like our officials are also saying, do not yet have a crisis but we are facing strong challenges. In times like these, it is the government's duty to help the people so that you are not too burdened by the effects of price shocks and economic pressures.

Your government has done everything possible to ensure there is always food on every table, and as Governor Romualdo said, he came here to protect your income during this time when goods are expensive and inflation is high. We will continue to invest in our systems for good health, education, and other social services. And JJ reported earlier that our share of the VAT has arrived in Camiguin.

And so, the Philippines appears in relatively good shape, thanks to our tax reforms and government funding supported by JJ when he was still a congressman. (Applause) This strength was seen in the 7%+ GDP growth we achieved last year, along with a 200 percent increase in tourism here in Camiguin. If we hadn’t implemented those difficult reforms over the past seven years, we would have been hit even harder by this global economic problem, like what other countries are experiencing now. Standard & Poor, an important credit rating agency, said, “In a very stormy sea of global economic uncertainty, the Philippine economy is a relative island of calm.” And I must add, because we have islands like Camiguin. (Applause)

But even if the people and the economy are strong, and we have resilience to adapt to whatever happens, this does not provide comfort to the ordinary Filipino suffering from the high prices of goods. They know the burden you carry from the high cost of goods and rapid inflation. We know that… you are worried about your jobs and whether your livelihood, your income, will be enough. I too am worried about you. Therefore, we are really working hard to lower the price of rice, other food items, and oil so that we can continue to generate new jobs and so that more investors will come in, which will provide more jobs for our people.

And here in Camiguin, tourism is really the future. The government assures that there is enough rice for everyone until the coming months. Our system for distributing rice seems effective. There is rice for the people whenever you need it.

Let us provide our farmers with the capital they need, together with you in your area. Our rice production has increased. Thank you to God and our investments in agriculture. Because of this, inflation has slowed down. The price of rice and gasoline has decreased. We expect that you will be able to buy more with your income.

Our economic team is working hard to control inflation, monitor prices, and put the price manipulators out of business. We will continue to inspect markets to ensure that no one takes advantage of the Filipino people during this difficult time.

And now, we are celebrating the Lanzones Festival. Then, Christmas is almost here. As the Christmas season approaches, we should be joyful for the blessings we have received. We should look to the future with greater hope, confidence and optimism. (Applause) People should come together during our Holiday Season. Here in Camiguin, the holiday season has already begun since the Lanzones Festival and goes straight to Christmas. And during this holiday season, let us celebrate faith and families. Communities should unite.

For me, since my first candidacy for senator in 1992, I have always been amazed by the unity in Camiguin. Because I have benefited from your unity since 1992, my victories here in Camiguin have been significant. Thank you all. (Applause) And I would say, Cong and Governor, when he was still a congressman, the support from Congress has always been with me. (Applause) I am grateful for your continued support. If we always unite, we will successfully face the economic storms in the world, and the rapid progress of Camiguin will quickly continue. Because I cannot forget that before I became president, Camiguin was number what? Six of the poorest provinces in our country. Now, you are middle class because you are number 36, far from the ten poorest provinces.

So, life is good here in Camiguin. (Applause) And we want your progress to continue, because when Camiguin progresses, it will greatly contribute to the progress of the entire nation.

Therefore, to all of you, congratulations still and more power to the people of Camiguin! (Applause)

[MOCK TRANSLATION] So, maayo ang kinabuhi dinhi sa Camiguin. (Applause) Ug gusto nato na padayon kining inyong pag-uswag, kay kun mauswag ang Camiguin dako sab ang matawang sa kauswagan sa tibuok nasod.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 29th Camiguin Lanzones Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134951/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1740&Itemid=38