Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Puno for introducing me.

Thank you very much, Mayor Guico and all the officials of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines. I also greet Governor Aumentado and the other officials of our government. To all of you, first of all, congratulations! Mayor Guico for your leadership in the League of Municipalities these past five years, congratulations! And to all of you, our mayors, I am proud of what you are collectively achieving as allies and my partners.

And as always, I will continue to expect your upholding of the banner of change for the future of the Philippines while I and the national government will continue to support your leadership under the banners of good governance and progressive building of our country.

As Mayor Guico said, the national government draws its strength from local governments — that is very true. First of all, as Mayor Guico said, you are given the IRA in full and because you are spending your IRAs on the priorities of the national government, our country's debt is also being reduced. So thank you very much for helping to reduce our debt.

The reduction of our domestic borrowings is not only proof that we’re sailing in the right direction in terms of our fiscal reforms but also a good omen on our goal of achieving a balanced budget very soon. Government’s growing capacity to raise funds on its own to finance the budget will reap greater confidence and propel the cycle of investments, growth, more jobs, broader prosperity. We would not have been reaping these gains had it not been for the local government’s leadership and the people’s cooperation in biting the bullet, improving our tax collections, and pushing aside political noise. So thank you very much to all of you.

All our economic gains are a tribute to the Filipino. Economic take off is now attainable even with political noise and the global oil crisis. The stock market has reached its highest since the 1997 Asian crisis. Before I came here, I checked the stock market monitor, it went up 50 points this morning. Proof of the growing confidence of the international community. Development and peace reforms are being implemented because you, at the local level, are always there to support your servant. Thank you very much for the support.

In the past five years, we have all quietly struggled amidst political turmoil to remain afloat in the fight against poverty. And I would like to express my gratitude for your steadfastness and loyalty to the people.

Just recently, the United Nations congratulated the Philippine government's firm steps towards the U.N. Millennium Development Goals. They say we are early achievers in many of the indicators there. And we congratulate the ten local governments identified by the United Nations along with the Galing Pook Award for leading efforts in the localization of the Millennium Development Goals. And among those LGUs, municipalities, three are municipalities — and we congratulate them — the outstanding municipalities regarding the Millennium Development Goals: Concepcion, Iloilo, congratulations! There! Mayor Banias, congratulations! Malalag, Davao Del Sur and Maitum, Sarangani

Now your leadership will be tested in the implementation of the super regions and cyber corridor. The local officials like you have a big role to play in these programs. For example, in North Luzon and Mindanao, if we are talking about agriculture, it is devolved. So the mayor and the municipal agricultural officer are very important. If we talk about Central Philippines, tourism, beautifying the different towns, taking care of the bays, that is also in the local government. If we talk about the urban beltway to strengthen small and medium enterprises for a good investment climate, the places where investors go for permits are in your municipalities, that's you too. So your role is very important in the growth and development of our super regions and cyber corridor.

And according to the law of local government, not only agriculture is devolved, many are devolved — social welfare is devolved, health is devolved, so it is devolved to the local level. That means the local government is responsible for health, and included in health is reproductive health, and reproductive health covers programs related to population. And that is the reason why, because health including reproductive health and population services are devolved to the local governments, I have been advising our funding agencies — and I advised our U.N. population program — to deal directly with local governments as far as population assistance is concerned.

Now, on the part of the national government, you can expect the help of the Department of Health in matters of natural family planning because that is what the national government is pushing.

The performance of the National Summit on Sustainable Upland Development is also a good place to address the problem of hunger, especially since we have a program to open up uplands for agriculture, including this two million hectares that we want to open up for agri-business including upland agriculture. So the other day we had a meeting with officials of the League of Municipalities and sent the draft institutionalization of upland sustainable development. I gave this to Secretary Reyes of DENR to include the other inputs of other government agencies and the lawyers, and once this is completed — and I expect it to be completed soon — I will sign the Executive Order on sustainable upland development.

It's good that Romy Neri is here because he brought the concept of upland development to our Cabinet so we could accept it, and he also created our masterplan, comprehensive masterplan against hunger. So, I expect I saw in your program that Secretary Romy Neri will discuss our comprehensive program against hunger.

That's why we've accomplished so much in the past five years, and we can still accomplish so much in the coming years. So, in closing, allow me to thank you once again for helping our economy grow despite the noise in politics and the global oil crisis. You are there in the forefront, facing the people.

Congratulations! And more power to our municipalities in the Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 16th League of Municipalities General Assembly and the National Summit on Hunger and Population. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203817/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3004&Itemid=38