Thank you very much, Secretary Blas Ople.

And I would also like to greet our Ambassador here in Vietnam, Ambassador Willy Wong; thank you also to Mr. Joel Mermida, the president of the Filipino organization here in the North part of Vietnam. Thank you for your kind words; and thank you also to Gerry Paglinawan. Sorry, I couldn't make it to Ho Chi Minh City today. Thank you for coming here instead.

I would like to reintroduce the members of the Philippine delegation. Here is Secretary Ignacio Bunye. In addition to Secretary Ople whom we have already greeted, Secretary Ignacio Bunye is our Press Secretary; Secretary Silvestre or Yongyong Afable, he leads the Presidential Management Staff; and then the president of the Philippine International Trading Corporation — he's not here at headquarters — that's Tony Abad. And… Because here in Vietnam, state trading is what's being done, so I also brought the president of our state trading company in case you can find opportunities for trade, contact Tony Abad as the counterpart there in the Philippines.

And to all of you, my dear compatriots here in Vietnam, good afternoon to all of you.

I understand if you're not all from here. Many thanks, a lot of thanks.

That's an Ilokano greeting. Fellow countrymen, my mother's province is Pangasinan, a good greeting to all of you, sir.

And if there… Yes, are there people from Mindanao here? Ah, okay. Where I come from, good afternoon to all of you.

And regarding my husband's province, if there are any? Ilonggo? Oh, Tony is here. Good afternoon to all of you.

And to all of you, I thank you for coming here. There are five hundred Filipinos here in Vietnam. Almost one-fifth of Filipinos are here, all together. Thank you very much.

And although the Philippine community here is small, as far as I know, Overseas Filipinos make a good contribution here in Vietnam. Almost all Overseas Filipino workers here are professionals, you hold high positions in management, in executive positions. So I congratulate all of you and I thank you also for your help to your families and to our economy.

I came here because I was invited by the president of Vietnam, President Tran Duc Luong because he also visited the Philippines. And I passed through here from Cambodia where I attended the ASEAN meeting.

I went to Cambodia for the ASEAN meeting for the same reason I went to Mexico for the APEC Leaders’ Meeting, and that is to ensure the economy and the security of our country, the Philippines. Because, whether we go to fight those who have allied against global terrorism or visit here where Vietnam is one of the largest suppliers when we import rice. All of that is for the economy and how to improve the lives of our citizens.

My administration's goal is for the government to truly serve our citizens. Whether they are in the Philippines or abroad.

So when I was still a senator, I was with Senator Ople. We, even then, believed that Filipinos abroad should be able to vote in our country. We authored the Overseas Voting Bill when we were both senators. He just had those bills — not just what we filed, but others too — didn't pass the committee on suffrage. So when I became president. I told our senate and congress, I have five laws that are most needed. I mentioned those laws and one of them was the overseas voting bill. So now, finally, after so many attempts to file — for example, Secretary Ople and I — only now has the proposed law reached its final stage and passed Congress and the Senate. Now, Secretary Ople just reported to me that the senator and Congressmen are meeting now in what is called the bicameral conference committee, and there they are debating their two different versions. So I expect and let us pray that they will unite soon, agree on only one version. Because if they agree, within twenty-four hours I will sign it so that Filipinos abroad can vote.

Because I expect that when you have the opportunity to vote, you will be even more interested and even more helpful in the needs of our country even if you are abroad.

Perhaps if you remember, because many of you are not long-term residents here. You might have been in the Philippines when I became president or before the Filipino channel was closed, you could watch it. When I first became president, the country I inherited had four million Filipinos unemployed and the poverty rate was 40 percent.

Earlier, I was talking with the Secretary of Health of Vietnam, the woman. She is my minister-in-attendance. And she said that in Vietnam, 12 million Vietnamese are poor. Their population is 78 million. We, our population is also 78 million but 30 million Filipinos are poor. So the challenge I inherited is greater than the current situation in Vietnam in terms of our country's poverty.

But with our efforts, there are also some results emerging. Now, you probably don't feel it much here in Vietnam because Vietnam's growth is strong, but in other parts of the world there is a real global slowdown. But we, the Philippines along with Vietnam, are among those with the highest growth rates here in Asia. And we are also striving to further improve what we need to do to achieve our macroeconomic fundamentals.

For example, we are continuously striving to keep our budget deficit low and what we want to do to lower our deficit is: one, control government spending; and secondly – more importantly — increase our tax collection through better efforts and efficiency, and also fighting corruption.

Let's talk about the corruption in our country. It is important because if we are to truly progress, we need good governance. And I believe that if we want to fight corruption, the example must start at the top. That's why I, even my wife is not exempted. I believe that those who attack her, that is politics. But even if it's politics, I still tell her, “okay, if you want to investigate, get investigated.” because the goodness of that even if it's politics is that she humbled herself and faced the investigations, now my moral authority has risen to investigate anyone.

So I want to assure you that we are doing everything to give the Filipino people what we call a professional and clean government. Because that is what you truly deserve.

For example, we now have e-procurement in the government. So, we have many savings and corruption in bidding is decreasing. And I have a Presidential Anti-Graft Commission. They examine and investigate high-ranking appointees. There are government board corporations, there are bureau directors. Ah, if there is strong evidence or a big scandal, I say even if it is still being investigated, take a leave of absence, and while being investigated… So someone else will serve.

And now, the corruption in the judiciary. We have a separation of powers. Nevertheless, including the Supreme Court under the leadership of Chief Justice Davide, they are prosecuting erring prosecutors and prosecuting even the… The judges. And what I did, the BIR as I said is now increasing their collection because of this anti-graft drive. Customs is also what I want to make a showcase in our fight against corruption. And this is still ongoing. Its purpose is to improve our economy, to provide jobs for our people.

As I said earlier, along with Vietnam, we are rising high compared to the whole world. And what is boosting our economy is our services. It's not surprising that you are here because services are your specialty. Services are also boosting our country now in the Philippines.

Included in the services that are rising in the Philippines, the fastest growing is the telecommunications sector. Then trade, commerce and private services including tourism.

You know, Prime Minister Mahathir asked me the other day, “how is the growth rate of your tourism?” he was surprised when I told him that our October figures, October last year to October this year, the tourism growth rate is 40 percent.

Then the insurance and other financial institutions, excluding banks, are rising now, the highest growth rate in the last four years. In industry last year, our industry growth rate was negative. But now it has recovered, especially because our exports have recovered. And our… This is also surprising. They also asked me — who was it? — Thaksin of Thailand, how are our exports. I said 20 percent growth. He was surprised. Even in Silicon Valley, Andy Grove of Intel, I said 20 percent growth, he was surprised. He said, “why?” I said, because of electronics exports. He said, “why, Silicon Valley isn't rising.” The explanation of the manufacturers in the Philippines is that… It's not because the market has grown, but because we have gained market share in other countries because our workforce is efficient.

Private construction is also recovering. And in agriculture, fisheries and forestry have strengthened. And I hope what I read in the newspaper yesterday or was it earlier, that we had a bumper crop is true. I don't know, maybe Mr. Co can tell me if that's true or not. Because if not, he's here to buy rice here in Vietnam.

The… And of course… And also our inflation, I read it in the newspaper earlier. Again, our inflation rate has gone down, 2.9 percent or 2.7 percent. So the increase in prices is weak. I hope the people feel that the price of rice is not increasing. I mean 16 to 18 pesos for the poor… No, 14 to 16 is the rice for the poor, 18 is the rice for the well-off. Then of course our big saver. If the GDP growth rate is four or four-and-a-half, the GNP growth rate becomes 5.2 because that includes the remittances of Filipinos like you.

Last year, you Filipinos sent 6 billion dollars to the Philippines. Now, for the first three quarters of the year, you have already sent 6.4 billion dollars. So thank you all very much.

And the government, as I said, is not increasing expenses so that our… All of these developments I mentioned to you are private sector led. These are macro statistics. But I want to say, what does an inflation rate of only 2.7 or 2.9 percent mean? That means, as I said, rice, and it also means there are other benefits for the poor. For example, 200,000 families of squatters in Metro Manila have already acquired the right to buy the land they are occupying. That means they are no longer squatters. And we also have schools being built in far-flung barangays that didn't have schools before. We counted one thousand barangays that had no schools before. We are building schools there now. And three million poor Filipinos now have health insurance. And all that I'm telling you has been achieved in the last 21 months of my administration, even though the world situation is difficult.

Because for me, the main goal is to win the fight against poverty within a decade. But we also need to have a stable republic if we are to achieve this. And we also need to have peace. Because that is the most basic need of the people – law and order.

We are addressing law and order through a holistic approach consisting of political, economic, security components. We have an anti-crime program that I started in July, during the second session of congress, which includes additional resources for the police, more coordination in intelligence activities, and we have rewards for criminals. For example, Abu Sabaya was captured because someone responded to our offer of a 5 million-peso reward for him. That's how we were able to trace him. In kidnapping, five ransom gangs have been neutralized. In fact, they criticize me for posing with the corpses. But how will we know, how will the people know that they have really been neutralized? They need to see it. I don't want it to be on page 20, and they still think there are so many kidnappers roaming around. No. I hope that Joji Co will confirm this, but the Filipino-Chinese community, who are their favorite victims, say that it is now peaceful in Chinatown.

When 9-11 happened, I immediately worked to suppress terrorism in our country both militarily and economically. And I moved aggressively to challenge the Abu Sayyaf in their own turf militarily. Now, they are in the mountains where the Abu Sayyaf started, in Patikul, Sulu. Our soldiers are there where they have never reached before in all these centuries. So the fight is tough now, but I think because we have reached there, we will win. Before there were thousands of Abu Sayyaf, now they are only a couple of hundreds. But of course, when there is a bomb, when there is a rifle shot, the people are afraid again. But I want to assure you that we are making progress in this effort.

He only needs a president who can build a strong republic alone. I can only do this well if I have the support of our fellow Filipinos, including Filipinos abroad like you. Because you are part of what I expect, the network of Filipinos around the world. So let us continue our unity. And in the Philippines, self-effort continues because the whole world is still difficult.

So I ask you even more, help me even as you are contributing to the development of Vietnam with your expertise, help me build a strong Philippine republic.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Vietnam. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210534/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8481&Itemid=38