This Peace and Security Assembly follows one of the most historic events in our country – the first time a person from Mindanao has sat as Speaker of the House of Representatives.

I remember that at the Peace and Security conference in Cagayan de Oro, last July, the people of Mindanao, through Cong. Rufus Rodriguez, requested that I allocate thirty percent of our national budget to Mindanao each year, if possible. I immediately instructed the heads of the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), Department of Agriculture (DA) and Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) to ensure that this is immediately followed in their programs.

Peace will bring a new era of economic development to Mindanao. Coupled with our increased budget for Mindanao is our new paradigm for peace in the island. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with the flashpoint area of Mindanao has focused on a unique combination of soft and hard power to promote peace. We have been able to meld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness; investments in economic and basic infrastructure development; and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

Congratulations to the region’s military and police in their joint efforts with the military in curbing terrorists and rebels.

The terrorists stand in the way of bringing peace, stability and order to Southern Philippines. We have decided we must wipe them out once and for all. They are a menace to peace.

Recently, six of our soldiers died and eight were wounded in an ambush by the New People’s Army (NPA) in Davao Oriental.

We commend our armed forces for their heroic efforts. We regret and mourn with the families of those soldiers who have been caught in the line of fire.

The communist rebels have spent years as a low-level threat. It is time for their disruption of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. They impede the progress and development of a number of rural areas and they are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. If we are to become a First World country, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all.

I have specified a timeline – 2010 – to end armed rebellion.

Together with the need to suppress the thirteen guerrilla fronts here, especially those entrenched in Compostela Valley and those on the boundary of Davao del Sur, Agusan and Bukidnon.

I extended the term of AFP Chief of Staff General Hermogenes Esperon for three months because I want him to continue the AFP’s current initiatives in fighting terrorism.

I hereby announce the Investment Defense Force function of the military to give protective shield to power assets, other infrastructure, and mineral development projects.

We have made peace with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) a cornerstone of our Administration. We have made great progress thanks to the commitment of the parties involved and to the support of our friends and allies including Malaysia, Libya, Brunei, Japan and others. We are close to an agreement. Our negotiating team has just created a new draft paper on creating a homeland for Muslims in Southern Philippines. We are hopeful this will help restart the talks with the MILF and equally hopeful that it will result in a definitive peace agreement.

However, even as we have achieved a great deal, the island is vastly improved in terms of safety, security and economic growth, our paradigm for peace in the island is really making things better; it will really take off if we achieve lasting peace and the millions of foreign aid promised comes pouring in.

We take the issue of human rights seriously. We have followed the roadmap laid out by the Melo Commission. We have been meeting with success in the fight to put an end to the legacy of political violence in the Philippines.

We deplore any and all killings of political activists and journalists. No person is above the law in this nation. Whether a former president, member of the military or an average citizen, all men and women are equal before the law. The death of any Filipino citizen in pursuit of their right to political expression violates human liberty.

We will continue to bring perpetrators to justice, work with Congress to enact the law on human rights compensation, and exhort the nation to leave behind the terrible legacy of political violence and clan vendetta. Thankfully, political killings were down 83 percent last year but we will not rest until we reach zero.

Our campaigns against terrorism and rebellion must be connected to our fight against poverty.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macreconomic fundamentals in 30 years, including a 7.3 percent growth rate. Seven years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget close to balance, lower our debts and raise employment, but we have.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights and we have created seven million jobs in seven years.

The global economic situation is a key issue for us because the more interconnected we become, the more we need to manage through the ups and downs of other nation’s economic imbalances. This is true with any further volatility in the US economy. The good news for the Philippines is that we have matured and diversified our economy so much the last few years that we are confident our economic turnaround is permanent and our economy resilient.

I have ordered a surge in infrastructure projects. We have allocated almost 200 billion pesos for these infrastructure projects. These funds will come from the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and other concerned agencies.

Many infrastructure projects have been placed here in the Davao and Compostela Valley regions, such as the Davao-Surigao Coastal Road which I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address, and the expansion of the Sasa port which is almost finished.

These infrastructures include eighty-seven Farm to Market Roads in your four provinces, including seventeen built here in Davao del Norte.

There are now more than 500 Botica ng Barangay (Village Pharmacies) in your region. The provinces of Davao del Norte and Compostela Valley have the most outlets because these are the provinces in the region with more needs. Almost 400 are the number of Tindahan Natin (Our Store) selling affordable rice.

Let us focus our efforts so that we can achieve lasting peace here in the region and throughout the country while continuing efforts for progress.

Through your help, with the support of fellow Filipinos and with the mercy of our Lord, our efforts to achieve our goals will be successful.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech at the Local Peace and Security Assembly for Region XI. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123552/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=999&Itemid=38