Thank you very much Secretary Montemayor for your introduction. Greetings to all of you, my fellow countrymen, please.

To our Governor Gani Amatong; our mayor here in Dipolog, Mayor Uy; our congressmen: Congressman Barinaga is here now, who was formerly mayor here in Dipolog; also here is Congressman Angel Carloto, my singing partner. We sometimes sing after my speech; our various mayors here in our celebration today — there are many listed now, Mayor Albos from Sindangan; Mayor Jamora from Leon Postigo; Mayor Te from Godod; Mayor Josue from Gutalac; (SIC) Mayor Carloto from Kalawit; Mayor Caballero from Manukan; Mayor Tenorio from Mutya; Mayor Olvis from Polanco; Mayor Catane from Rizal; Mayor from Piñan isn’t here, Mayor Carreon? Because I was with him earlier in Manukan, right?; Mayor Feras from Roxas; Mayor Edding from Sibuco; Mayor Tolentino from Sibutad; and Mayor Uy from Liloy.

Also here now is the Congressman from Negros Oriental but the father-in-law of someone from Dipolog, Mayor Herminio Teves; there are also various in-laws in Dipolog and Zamboanga del Norte, my Cabinet member who is a son-in-law from Dipolog, Secretary Ed Ermita; and our Senior Undersecretary of Finance who is a daughter-in-law from Dipolog, Nitz Amatong. Her husband is Former Congressman Amatong; those of you who recognize our various Cabinet members: Dinky Suliano from DSWD — oh, Juliano-Soliman. Dinky Soliman, yes. Dinky Juliano-Soliman, okay; our emcee, Mike Defensor; our Secretary of Planning, Dante Canlas, another son from region 9 from Zamboanga, Cito Lorenzo; our various officials from the national government together with our officials from the Armed Forces under our new Southcom Commander General Ernesto Carolina; all of you, my fellow countrymen from Dipolog and Zamboanga del Norte, happy golden anniversary to all of you!

I thank you especially Governor Amatong, for your invitation for me to be with you this week of Zamboanga del Norte.

I am very happy to return to Zamboanga del Norte because I feel very “at home” here in Zamboanga del Norte. Why do I feel very “at home” because I have many relatives here like the members of the Guico family from Manukan.

And why am I a relative of Zamboanga del Norte? Because back in the 1920s, like many who came from Luzon, my grandfather — father of my mother, Juan Macaraeg — came to Zamboanga in the 1920s as a manager of Santa Clara Kumber, with his family, my mother who was still young then, his family with his wives… Ah with his wife and his relatives. One of his relatives was Evaristo Guico, so my grandfather, Juan Guico Nacaraeg. And Evaristo Guico, his relative, married someone from the Sagario family in Manukan. There’s a story that my grandfather, as the head of the clan, was the one who chose who would marry his relative. He really chose Ms. Sagario from Manukan.

And my grandfather, he loved Mindanao very much, because when he retired, he retired in Mindanao, on a farm there in Iligan, and when my grandmother became a widow, I grew up in her house there in Iligan. Therefore, I am a child of Mindanao, a relative of Zamboanga del Norte.

Therefore, I am sentimental every time I come here to Zamboanga and Mindanao. Memories of my childhood in Mindanao come back to me. I even went with my father to visit him here in Zamboanga del Norte. When he was Vice President, we have a photo there now in your photo exhibit. I was probably nine, or eleven, or ten years old in that photo. So I circled my photo and I autographed the photo, saying, “nice to be back again in Zamboanga del Norte.”

The province of Zamboanga del Norte has come a long way and has reached fifty years. From nine towns when it became a province on June 6, 1952, nine towns perhaps — Dipolog, Dapitan, Siocon, Katipunan, what else? Maybe Polanco, Sindangan, just nine. The province now has two cities and twenty-five municipalities. And it seems that the city of Dapitan really became a city during that time under my father, former president Diosdado Macapagal.

And as Governor Amatong said, with the good work of the officials and residents here in Zamboanga del Norte, your income has really increased. They say that the estimated income of the province in 2002, will reach 730 million more or less. So congratulations to all of you for the very high income of the province of Zamboanga del Norte.

Another great development is the increasing number of barangays in the corners of the province that have been reached by electricity. I am happy that Governor Amatong launched his own barangay electrification program since 1999, which has connected 39 new barangays to electricity. This is in line with our “o ilaw program” in our administration now.

Earlier this year, my administration, to help with its barangay electrification program, loaned 10 million pesos for the construction of a solar energy system in twenty barangays here in Zamboanga Del Norte. The province contributed 2 million pesos, while the 800 household beneficiaries also contributed another 1.2 million pesos as a counterpart to the project.

Our local leadership also upgraded the port of Dapitan which serves the people not only of Zamboanga del Norte but also including Misamis Occidental, Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga Sibugay.

And in support of this upgrade, I approved eighty-eight million pesos for the “rehabilitation, widening, extension” of the Pulauan Port under the locally-funded project of the Philippine Ports Authority.

More than this, the national government continues to implement the “Trans-Visayas Intermodal Network,” especially the “Roll-on Roll-off Ferry Network project” which includes the port of Dapitan and Nabilid, Toxas.

This project aimed to connect the islands of the Visayas and their provinces to the Philippine-Japan Highway, which originates in Luzon and extends down to Mindanao. And Zamboanga Del Norte, through Pulauan Port, will soon be connected to the highway in Bais, Dumaguete and Zamboangita on Negros Island, under this “Roro Ferry Network Project.” Perhaps Zamboangita was really named Zamboangita because that town is a smaller Zamboanga. And Zamboangita really—so we saw Congressman Teves, his wife is from Dipolog and his son Garry Teves is half Negros, half Zamboanga—that’s really Zamboanga, it’s very close because the sea is small, in the middle. So, it would be good if we had a ferry like the ferry from Liloan to Surigao.

This project will expedite “Regional Socio-Economic Development,” not only for passengers who want to visit relatives or tour the Visayas, but above all for our products, industries, and tourism where many of our people will really travel by boat. Our people will surely benefit from this.

This “Roll-on Roll-off Ferry Network Project” is just one of the projects that will spend 67.6 billion pesos from the “yen package” from Japan. I approved this last year as chairperson of the NEDA board.

And because of… Well, if we talk about the importance of sea travel, we can also discuss air travel, our airport here in Dipolog. Last January, the Asian Development Bank came to examine their pending projects here in the Philippines, and the airport project and the Asian Development Bank, it seems, the Dipolog Airport has been without development for five years. So, the Asian Development Bank said they will cancel all these airport projects from the ADB. But thankfully, we had a regional development council meeting yesterday, and one of our homework for the regional development council meeting was to resolve the problems of the Dipolog airport. The biggest problem really is the purchase of the land needed for the runway. So, because the ADB saw that there was a solution – even other projects in other areas of the Philippines were likely to be cancelled – here in Dipolog they said they will extend it until October. So, it hasn’t been cancelled yet.

But my request to all of you is, let's ensure that all the lands needed are purchased before October. All residents, please help those landowners to sell their lands at a price, and through expropriation if necessary. Because if they don't sell to the government, our airport project will not proceed and will be cancelled by October. So, it is important for all of us to cooperate so that our airport project in Dipolog will push through.

In agriculture, due to the abundance of agricultural resources in Zamboanga del Norte, coupled with a favorable climate, industrious people, and a good government, your province is now in a good position to adopt agri-industrialization as a development strategy.

You have many new products, like mangoes. Mangoes from Guimaras can now enter America. Perhaps after Guimaras, which is now officially in America, the best mangoes in the world – the second contest will be – Pangasinan and Zamboanga del Norte. So we will also work – and Secretary Montemayor can speak Visayan because his wife is from Bohol – my instruction to him is that we have already won the struggle to get Guimaras mangoes into America, now we will negotiate to get mangoes from Zamboanga del Norte into America and other lucrative markets around the world.

More than mangoes, you also have your bottled Spanish sardines, they are very delicious. ... Because on my previous visit here last year, I went to the factory of Spanish bottled sardines there at the port of Dipolog. It was good, the factory was beautiful, world-class, and the sardines themselves were very delicious. And earlier when I went to the eatery, I visited my aunt who is now invalid, we had breakfast — oh, the bottled Spanish sardines from Zamboanga del Norte are still very delicious. And these sardines are truly world-class. General Carolina said she sees the sardines in Manila but in specialty stores, and these sardines reach as far as Malaysia. But if it's only in specialty stores in Manila, the problem is the supply. But I think the demand is not a problem. So, I think if we can expand, if we can expand Secretary Montemayor, my instruction is still to expand this bottled sardines that come from Zamboanga del Norte because they are very delicious and very special. I am sure it will have a good market even in Manila, even in Malaysia and in the various markets in our region. I urge the “producers” to use these opportunities and let us unite.

And also, our coconut industry. Because we have so many coconut farmers here in Zamboanga del Norte. Our coconut industry is close, especially last year, the price is better now but the price in the coconut industry fluctuates. We cannot be sure year after year. But perhaps a solution is near, because the government is now with the United Coconut Planters Bank, which through various corporations will now drive the dividend and coconut levy fund. Perhaps on June 12, our Independence Day, we will announce the first projects that can be done under this great accomplishment of my administration that will reach our coconut farmers with the coconut Levy funds.

Therefore, I am pleased that the provincial government leadership continued to coordinate with the Philippine Coconut Authority to establish one of the Integrated Coconut Processing Plants here in Zamboanga del Norte. This is a solution that will help our coconut farmers. My instruction to the PCA through Secretary Montemayor is still that you be given support for this processing plant under the Coconut Levy dividends which may be released on June 12 so that this project in Zamboanga del Norte will truly be born as soon as possible.

While there at the poultry farm, I used the occasion to listen to the feelings and concerns of our ordinary farmers here in Zamboanga del Norte. And because of good governance, peace and order, and the people here, Zamboanga del Norte is a surplus agricultural producer. Production is even higher compared to consumption. Therefore, we need buying stations here in Zamboanga del Norte, but how will we construct these buying stations? Because… Have you already talked to our regional director? It seems they don’t know the regional director of the D.A. because he left his post in Zamboanga City. That’s why I saw one of their shortcomings, especially these grassroots-oriented Departments, which need to be closer to our farmers.

Therefore, I told Secretary Montemayor that hopefully the D.A. — the Mother Unit, you know — the D.A. proper would move to Pagadian so they can serve the farmers here in Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga Sibugay and so farmers here in the Zamboanga Peninsula would no longer need airplanes every time they travel.

Your programs to help our poor farmers and fishermen have not escaped my attention. I welcome our provincial, city, and municipal officials in their efforts to encourage our farmers to adopt what is called an “integrated approach in farming.” Buying stations are important in this “integrated approach.” The Turno eco-park in the province demonstrates the determination to make this “integrated approach in farming” campaign successful.

I also understand that “inland fishing” is already being programmed in landlocked municipalities, including multi-cropping and livestock production, so that our lands here in Zamboanga del Norte can truly be utilized. I am sure of your diligence in utilizing anything, no matter how small, that is given to you, sirs.

I am happy to learn that many projects we recognized earlier have been completed here in Zamboanga del Norte, such as the Kalawit and Lomogon Communal Irrigation System, and the Kalawit-Marcelo Road Extension project.

We really distributed Certificates of Ancestral Domain Claim to 32 beneficiaries, and another Certificate of Land Ownership to 197 (SIC) Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries. They are now the owners of their own land. This is included in my target that I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address last July, that every year we will distribute 100,000 hectares of private land and 100,000 hectares of public land under land reform, that was the reason.

Yesterday, Congressman, Governor, Secretary Soliman, Secretary Lorenzo, Secretary Alvarez — who is now in Manila — we came here, we went to Siocon in Zamboanga del Norte. Not to give a decision on a mining claim because that decision still needs to go through, or that case needs to go through the due process of the DENR. I went there to give a Certificate of Ancestral Domain to our Subanen people there. Because I told them, even if there is mining or there isn't mining, the important thing is the ancestral domain, the owners are our Subanen people there in the mountains of Siocon.

The theme of our celebration today, “50 pioneering years for purposeful decades ahead” is very fitting, because I see that the next fifty years in Zamboanga del Norte will be prosperous. It is the same outlook of your leaders and at the national level. Let us continue our good cooperation and unity.

We must continue to reach out for peace in this region, an honorable and just peace based on tolerance, understanding and a common sense of nationhood.

Peace will bring us more development and progress. Peace will bring us security and a brighter future for our children.

And that is why, in ending my message to you, the people of Zamboanga del Norte, I would like to inform you that even as we speak, there is an ongoing military offensive operation in SSSB. And I hope that the officials, municipal and barangay, will support our soldiers. Do not protect the bandits, the terrorists because in those cities, in the mountain barangays, the various lairs of the bandits are together with Abu Sayyaf. Let us all help each other so that we can win this war against the bandits and terrorists in the western part of Zamboanga del Norte in SSSB. Once we finish this war there, perhaps we can finally start the development there in SSSB.

Because as I saw yesterday, there are many area integrated plans — the one Dante Canlas showed — there's one here, one there, various valleys, Sibugay, there's one in Salug valley. But looking at the map, Dante, there is no integrated area in SSSB, in Sibuco, Siraway, Siocon and Baliguian because there is no peace, it is difficult to have progress if there is no peace. Help, my fellow Zamboanga del Norte residents, help so that peace can reach there, help so that in the end progress can also reach Zamboanga del Norte.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 50th Founding Anniversary of the Province of Zamboanga del Norte. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225303/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8341&Itemid=38