Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Philippine Infrastructure Conference

[ Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hotel Intercontinental, Makati City, May 23, 2005 ]

BUILDING THE INFRASTRUCTURE OF OUR DREAMS

I always believe that the Lord’s timing is perfect. And I think this conference has perfect timing. I was about to tell Dave Balangi that this is perfect timing because it would have keen meaningless if we had done this conference before we finished Phase One of our economic reform program. Now, we have just finished Phase One and we’re starting Phase Two in which infrastructure plays a major role. And not that we talked to each other because we didn’t, by God’s providence the timing is perfect.

Our nation is poised for growth, and we cannot grow without strong healthy people on the one hand and strong modern infrastructure on the other. And so that defines my economic and social plans. My economic and social plans anchored by my ten-point program are designed to deliver both strong people and strong infrastructure.

Everyone in this room is here because you know that if our nation is to meet its development goals and create new employment opportunities we must invest in the hard infrastructure that will make that possible. We need new roads, new bridges, new airports, new port facilities that will expand trade and investments throughout the country. And our infrastructure investments are already paying off in the I.T. sector with over 65,000 call center and outsourcing jobs created during the last three years. Thanks to the world class I.T. infrastructure that provides cable, internet and energy across the Philippines.

I remember very well, and I hope some of you do, my first state of the nation address in 2001 when I said that the growth sectors of the future are our human resource intensive service sectors like tourism and ICT. And when I talked about ICT then, in 2001, I said we need to do three things — make the policy framework friendlier, gear our training towards sources that will feed that sector, and bring down… Do the infrastructure that will bring down the cost of connectivity. At that time, the cost of connectivity was about 30 plus thousand pesos. Now, it’s four thousand pesos thereabouts. So, we succeeded in what we said in 2001. I hope we will succeed just as well with what we’re saying today when we examined ourselves a few years from now.

With the tough reforms completed as a result of the first phase of our economic reform agenda, we 11 now nave the additional capital and funds needed to invest in even more fundamental infrastructure investments.

The second phase of our economic reform agenda has already begun, just started. In this phase, I will press forward by continuing aggressive economic and fiscal reforms. My focus this time will no longer be on legislation hut to crack down on tax cheats, increase initiatives against graft and corruption, launch an energy conservation and energy independence campaign, and mitigate price increases with the consumer watch programs of Johnny Santos and Vice President De Castro to ensure no price gouging.

Most importantly, Phase Two will he defined by bringing the benefits of the tough economic reforms that we did to the people. With more revenue, we can invest more in the vital social needs to lift our poorest citizens out of poverty. I can now invest in the pro-poor agenda that includes job creation, better education, improved health care, electrification, water in the waterless towns, transportation and infrastructure to name but a few areas.

Well, there are many things there and I’ll talk about the other things in other times — the BIR collections and so on, education. I’ll talk today about our topic which is a major component of Phase Two and that is infrastructure.

The rebuilding and modernization of our nation’s infrastructure as Bill indicated requires a public-private sector partnership. That’s why I’m glad you’re all here today. To those businessmen that want to participate in this process I’d like to assure you that your investments will be commercially sound. I’d like to assure you that the government will be a good partner in this process. Working together we can create the infrastructure that will be the backbone of our new development efforts.

Just as we need a strong physical infrastructure, so too do we need a strong moral infrastructure to ensure that not one peso of the infrastructure projects goes to graft and corruption as we a new modem Philippines. I’m aware that major infrastructure projects have been accused of being opportunities for the corrupt to enrich themselves. I want to assure you that we’re putting controls in place. They’ll closely monitor all projects to ensure that our taxpayers get their money’s worth and our projects are finished on time and on budget. Our people deserve nothing less.

As I was entering the hotel I asked Bill Luz, “how’s the project on this coming along?” Because wearing his other hat as NAMFREL, NAMFREL entered into an agreement during the anniversary of Edsa that they would monitor infrastructure procurement suck as that being done in DPWH. And I hope that that ill indeed make it more commercially viable for you the private business to participate in our infrastructure program.

The ten-point pro-poor agenda that’s the platform of my administration call for significant investment in infrastructure throughout the country. These investments will create not only jobs for tens of thousands involved in the infrastructure development itself, it will also bring new opportunities to communities who’ve been isolated from new markets and new source investment.

Indeed, there is a strong connection between infrastructure in my pro-poor agenda because if you want to create jobs we have to have the infrastructure that will entice you the businessmen to put up your shops here in the Philippines. If we want to build agri-business to open new lands for agri-business we need you the businessmen hopefully to start building the ports, the airports and the farm-to-market roads that will improve the logistics requirements of these new lands for agri-business.

And that’s why the privatization of the country’s power sector and the development of key infrastructure are two of the priorities embodied, by the medium-term Philippine development plan as well as the medium-term public investment program.

Energy independence requires implementation of critical and strategic infrastructure projects across a mix or natural, renewable and alternative energy sources that would contribute to reducing the cost of electricity without sacrificing adequacy, reliability and quality.

Our Energy Reform Program aims to strengthen the power sector in order to secure electricity for all. Napocor’s rate adjustment will approximate the true cost of electricity which in turn will ensure a viable generation sector that’s able to attract new investments in power generation to meet the country’s growing energy requirements.

What’s my timetable for this? I’d like to be able to do the privatization by the end of the year. That means a lot of phone calls to Allan Ortiz over here. Because we need the privatization completed so we can work on the open access and the wholesale electricity spot market which will then provide the competitive framework to make our power cost competitive.

Meanwhile, I’m encouraging greater infrastructure all over the country suck as investments in the Clark-Subic corridor to make it the best logistics hub in the region; investments in expressways and ports in the urban beltway of Luzon that stretches from Clark-Subic through Metro Manila to Batangas port; the opening of the Ninoy Aquino International Airport; a modern rail transport system through this corridor and then going up to Bicol in the south; agri-business infrastructure for Mindanao and Governor Ortega’s Northern Luzon suck as farm-to-market roads, roll-on/roll-off ferry and road systems from Mindanao to the Visayas to Luzon; cold chains which Johnny is going to emphasize in the Philippine Infrastructure Corporation; no frills airports; tourism infrastructure in San Fernando airport and in Central Philippines made up of the Visayas, Bicol and the Northern Islands of Mindanao; and additional digital infrastructure for the cyber corridor from Baguio to Zamboanga.

New modern infrastructure will kelp build and kind our island country together to make one united nation. And you as businessmen know how important it is to unite our divided nation. I’ve never been more optimistic about the promise of the nation and for building a brighter future, especially for our younger generation. We owe it to the young to build up and not just wear out the infrastructure that we utilize today.

And so, in conclusion, I’m looking to everyone here, in partnership with government, to build not only the infrastructure but the most important thing of all — to build the hopes and dreams of our people.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library