Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremonies of the League of Corporate Foundations

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, July 2, 2001]

Thank you very much Vicky, founding president of the League of Corporate Foundations and, now, hopefully as head of the presidential management staff, I hope you feel even more empowered to help the poor than when you were in the NGO world.

Cecille Alcantara and the other officials of the League; chief executives of the Philippine’s leading corporations; ladies and gentlemen:

Let me begin by welcoming you all to Malacañang and greeting the members of the League of Corporate Foundations on the occasion of the observance of the second corporate social responsibility week.

This is only the second time that we are marking this event. But I believe this year’s celebration is especially significant because the times demand that we together send the message loud and clear that Philippine business is unequivocally committed to corporate social responsibility.

The philosophy behind corporate citizenship is the belief that the people, our people are more than consumers, more than laborers, more than hired help. Corporate citizenship acknowledges that we all belong to one society and that we are all responsible for the well being of one another, beyond business and even beyond politics. It recognizes the special role of institutions such as business corporations and being responsible for the welfare of our people beyond their role as consumers and employees.

Aside from celebrating the second annual corporate social responsibility week, I also congratulate you for choosing the theme of volunteerism.

The United Nations general assembly, in its 52nd session on November 20th 1997, proclaimed this year, year 2001 as the international year of volunteers. So it is so appropriate that this year’s theme should be volunteerism.

The main objectives of the year of volunteerists are the recognition, promotion, facilitation and networking of volunteer contributions worldwide. As expressed by the U.N. general assembly, “the choice of the first year of the new millennium is not coincidental. It represents an eloquent message as to the paramount importance of volunteer contributions to the welfare and progress of all nations and through their role in helping address problems of global concern in the future.”

Your theme of “putting volunteerism into action” appropriately guides us in what we have to do to translate this commitment to reality.

The traumatic events of the last 12 months have highlighted the enormous tasks and challenges that lie before us. I hardly need to recite the figures and indices of poverty in our society to remind us of what we are facing. And you, because you are foundations, you know how your resources are being stretched to the limit by the growing demands for programs and services as poverty continues to encroach on our communities and as the poor increasingly find the voice with which to vent their frustrations against their poverty.

When I became president last January, many of you who are here today were also there at EDSA. And many of you heard me say that we should win the battle against poverty within a decade.

This decade brings in the 21st century, truly a new economy where relentless forces such as capital market flows and advances in information technology create both peril and opportunity.

In this setting, our government’s blueprint for fighting poverty has four components.

First, to tap the opportunities we need an economic philosophy of transparency and free enterprise. For these are the catalysts that nurture the entrepreneurial spirit to be globally competitive.

Second, to extend the opportunities to our rural countryside, we must create a modernized and socially equitable agricultural sector.

Third, to address the perils, we must give a social bias to balance our economic development, and;

Fourth, to ensure that our gains are not dissipated through corruption, we must improve our moral standards.

Corporate social responsibility is the business embodiment of the third aspect of our blueprint, the social bias to balance our economic development.

On the part of government, the social bias to balance our economic development is embodied in safety nets for sectors affected by globalization, safeguards for our environment, and a national anti-poverty strategy which consist of five core strategic thrusts: asset reform or redistribution of physical assets to the poor, provision of financial and institutional requirements of human development services, provision of security and protection from violence of the basic sectors, increasing employment and livelihood opportunities for the poor, and strengthening of the capacity of organized groups to participate in social life.

I would especially like to seek your support for the thrust of increasing employment opportunities for the poor, not only in the work of your corporations but also in the work of your corporate foundations, particularly for out-of-school, out-of-work urban poor youth in Metro Manila. I want to put together a visible outreach program for this special sub sector under the operational implementation of the department of the interior and local governments and the Philippine national police.

This program will consist of providing emergency employment for the out-of-work, out-of-school urban youth in Metro Manila. Now, their number is estimated to be about 300,000. We are talking here about the kanto-boy-types who, if we cannot provide them with emergency employment, will always be available as cannon fodder for political adventurists.

And so even as we work on structural reforms through the four components in the blueprint to fight poverty, and give them lasting employment opportunities, someday, hopefully in the near future, as we are working on structural reforms which take some time we need this instant-gratification-type of emergency employment to pacify a social volcano.

We need to organize these out-0f-work, out-of-school urban youth of Metro Manila into brotherhoods or gangs, not the sputnik gang type, who get-together to do drugs and to rape and to hold-up and to kidnap, but rather work gangs to repair the leaking roofs or broken railings of their community’s tenement houses, or clean the drainage canals of their slum neighborhood, or act as sentry in the school premises of the community public schools.

This is similar to the emergency employment program of my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal and also the Tennessee Valley Authority of Franklin Delano Roosevelt during the great depression. The difference is that, we are not doing this for the whole country, we are doing this for a very particular sub-sector of our society — the out-of-school, out-of-work, urban poor youth of Metro Manila.

In closing, let me once more commend the League of Corporate Foundations for consistently leading the business sector in addressing your social responsibilities. Vicky told me that you were barely ten when this was founded about ten years ago, and now you’re 50, you have grown about five-fold.

And while we have been through some very trying times, your commitment to maintain, if not enhance the level of your exposure in various social development programs, provides our government with the flexibility it needs to focus its resources on other equally urgent national priorities, or provides our government the flexibility it needs even with our own priorities because you are there to support us.

Your continued support for our common agenda of winning the battle against poverty will give our people hope, strength, and faith in themselves. If our people see that other Filipinos care for them, then they will realize their own worth, and appreciate their own possibilities. In the process, they will be empowered. We build, in the process, a truly just and cohesive society, in whose progress all of us have a vital stake.

I can only hope that your good example, the members of the League of Corporate Foundations, will inspire other sectors of our national community to likewise make meaningful contributions to advance our nation building efforts.

My fervent wish is that you will continue to be actively involved in corporate social responsibility work, and tailor that work to partner with the government in our special outreach programs.

Congratulations and good wishes on all your activities. And may the League of Corporate Foundations grow by leaps and bounds even more as we go deep into the 21st century.

Congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the League of Corporate Foundations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213441/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8671&Itemid=38