Thank you, Secretary Romulo, for your introduction.

I’d like to thank the cabinet members and all the other officials who are here. I’d also like to thank our Commissioners Bambam Aquino, Mark Gastrodes, Ariel Arcilla, and our other commissioners who took their oath of office today for being the prime organizers of the event.

To all of you members of the youth organizations, student leaders who are here today; distinguished guests; fellow countrymen.

The National Heroes Day – that is what we are celebrating today. And we are also celebrating the birth of the great working man, Andres Bonifacio, and remembering, reliving, and visualizing in our minds the rise of freedom in our country from two seeds: the desire to break free from oppression and the hope to rise from poverty.

Indeed, the birth of our nation saw the start by Andres Bonifacio of two struggles: one for freedom from foreign control and the other for freedom from poverty.

We have one weapon here in these two struggles: a strong Republic, ready to defend the country and bring about significant improvement in the lives of so many Filipinos still mired in poverty more than a hundred years after liberation.

A state is weak if dominant classes or sectors control it or shape its policies, especially those dealing with the economy. This is our decades-old fundamental weakness, from Bonifacio at Balintawak to Cory Aquino at EDSA, we have struggled to correct this weakness bringing power to the people.

No nation has led the world in the pursuit of self-deception and deceiving others. No nation has risen on the wings of merely wanting to exceed its true capabilities.

And so, I do not and will not make policy on the basis of baseless fears.

Take the Meralco issue. I tell our people again: “If the Supreme Court orders with finality that the refund will be implemented, I will make sure that you, the consumers, will get your refund.” Our concerns will be exclusively: justice through full restitution for Meralco’s consumers as the Supreme Court rules, but without undermining the stability of the nation’s leading energy company.

On the PEA issue. Arising from another of its controversial projects began in the previous administration. Let me make myself very clear: “I am abolishing the Public Estates Authority.” I’m abolishing it through a bill I will submit to Congress next week. All its assets, mostly public lands, shall be transferred to the appropriate agencies which will hold strictly to account the officials concerned.

I had already accepted the resignation of all the current members of the PEA Board, including the general manager. Now, I’m dismissing the deputy general managers, the assistant general manager, and the senior corporate attorneys. I’m referring this latest controversy to the Ombudsman for the filing of the appropriate charges against all officials involved, including the old PEA board members.

On the PIATCO issue. The solicitor general has submitted to the Supreme Court the government position that all five agreements covering NAIA 3 are null and void.

I’ve received preliminary reports that a significant chunk of the airport’s cost of the $657 million didn’t go to actual construction costs. No wonder the necessary access tunnel connecting terminal 3 to terminal 2 is still missing, there’s not even a road.

I’m sworn to uphold the law, how then can I honor contracts contrary to law. What I can do is to order a criminal investigation into the PIATCO project with a view to the prosecution of the parties responsible for the gross irregularities. Let me, however, assure the stakeholders: your legitimate claims will be honored to the last peso and the terminal will open early next year.

On the budget deficit. Following the 1997 Asian crisis, public revenues steadily declined from 19 percent of GDP in 1997, to 17 percent in 1998, to 16 percent in 1999, to 15 percent in the year 2000. This trend has robbed us of the resources to spend on important initiatives.

In my first year as President, we were able to arrest the decline and sustain the ratio of 15 percent in 2001. However, the decline has resumed this year as terrorism added its toll to the global recession.

In this country, people don’t pay the right taxes, especially those who can afford it. The Customs, the BIR, the New Anti-Smuggling Intelligence and Investigation Commission, now led by new commissioners, must work harder so that whether you are big business or small – forget the accounting tricks, just pay your taxes and duties or see you in court.

The two million-dollar man. If the charges are true, all that money is not reflected in anybody’s income tax return. If charges are true, everyone involved is going to jail at least for tax evasion in addition to bribery.

To the man who claims to have blown the whistle I say, “Time to show the evidence and file the case in court, and hurry up before you are extradited.”

With what I’ve learned, I face the future with a deeper grasp of the problems, a better sense of the way to go, and a confidence that together we shall overcome The next six months will show this.

To raise funds for a strong Republic of the Philippines, we are forming an efficient group of officials who will increase tax collection and tariffs. Meanwhile, we will mobilize banks to finance housing, small businesses, and agriculture. We are also creating policies to encourage the private sector to invest in the very important electricity industry.

The passage of the Special Asset Management Company bill or SAMC, now in bicameral conference committee in Congress, should free up more bank resources for housing and other developmental projects that the government is not in a fiscal position to fund.

We need to sell TRANSCO, the NAPOCOR operation for electricity distribution, to utilize the money currently being spent on its losses. The government will also earn at least P3 billion from the sale of TRANSCO, and more than P100 billion from improving electricity service. We are hopeful that the Senate will pass the TRANSCO Bill to bring this about as expeditiously as the House of Representatives did.

To improve the quality of the government workforce for a Strong Philippine Republic, we shall have time for substantive improvements – first, in affordable housing where the needs of teachers, soldiers, policemen, and other government employees will be addressed in a specially packaged project. And with the construction of new government centers, new opportunities will open up for the improvement of their lives and work.

For the immediate benefit of city dwellers, we will begin integrating modern transportation systems and new government centers to grow cities outside of Manila. We will begin building a new way to improve life in the city. For example, reliable and affordable mass transportation between Metro Manila and neighboring provinces. Extensions of the north and south expressways and the rail link to the north will be underway, and my dream of a roll-on/roll-off port-linked archipelago has broken ground with funding from the Development Bank of the Philippines.

For the immediate benefit of farmers, modern transportation systems will reduce the cost of bringing products from the province to industry and urban areas. Meanwhile, thanks to the law on mortgaging agricultural land, which was passed by the House on Thursday, a major obstacle to the entry of investment in agriculture will be removed.

I thank Secretary Leony Motemayor, who came from the NGO ranks, for having amplified the voice of small farmers. That’s how we got laws for them: Executive policies for them. Now, the new law on agricultural land as collateral will open up a whole new world of vast opportunities for the farmers to graduate from subsistence-living advocates to modernizing agri-business practitioners. And to initiate this graduation, this transformation, I am appointing agri-businessman Luis Lorenzo as the new Secretary of Agriculture.

Sonny Alvarez sacrificed a lot to enforce his beliefs about natural resources. In the next two weeks, he must firm up initiatives on environment, especially toxic and hazardous waste, watershed, and the social justice program of the Macapagal-Arroyo government to build a new Diwalwal. Then, on December 15, he will move on and turn over the Department of Environment and Natural Resources to his successor, the noted environment expert Elisea Gozun, whom the environmentalist know as Bebet Gozun.

The other initiatives, including a program for youth empowerment, will soon reveal themselves in their implementation. I know that people have become cynical and will believe only what they see.

Trust me, you will see what serious government can do as opposed to what a merely popular government just promises.

I thank the National Youth Commission for initiating this National Heroes Day celebration. Our national heroes were young. Rizal was 26 years old when he wrote the Noli Me Tangere . Aguinaldo was 29 when he became President of the First Republic. Bonifacio was 33 at the Cry of Balintawak. Ninoy Aquino, our modern-day hero, was 22 when he first entered politics.

The youth remind us why we have to strengthen the Philippine Republic. The institutions we build will survive beyond us, for the youth now and the youth of the future.

The things we need required time to get started. They will even need more time to get finished and felt. But they are there quietly and surely beginning. Don’t let impatience throw it all away. Stay the course. Stay with me.

Who else will lift up the nation, from the poverty of Filipinos, if not the strong Republic of the Philippines?

Thank you all very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.