POVERTY IS NOT A BARRIER TO LOVING MOTHER NATURE

This morning, we were together, Mr. Belton and Secretary Reyes at Smokey Mountain, where the poor were shown that poverty is not a barrier to loving Mother Earth.

Now we are here, with N.G.O.s and some people from the nature business who also want to show that loving Mother Earth is part of our weapons in our war against poverty.

The government can start advocacies, start programs like what my administration did that passed the Clean Water Act, passed the Solid Waste Management Act, and vigorously implements the Clean Air Act. But you N.G.O.s, businessmen, private sector, you have the commitment, you have the ability, you have the knowledge in technology that will really give substance to these programs.

They are not here now, but I want to mention, for example, the huge investment of the private sector in Clean Air Fuel. For example, coco bio-diesel, or for example those putting up ethanol plants, this greatly shows that the private sector can really find a way for a clean environment to be the path of our fight against poverty. The policy of your servant’s administration regarding the environment is greatly related to one of the ten points of my 10-point pro-poor agenda, and that is the delivery of water throughout the country.

We are working hard to be able to send clean water to communities and to ensure this we need a lot of water. So the Clean Air Act is very important, but the clean… Ah, the Clean Water Act is important, but the Solid Waste Management Act is also very important.

The Clean Water Act is one of the most important parts of the administration that was made into law. But so is the Solid Waste Management Act, which you are implementing. Because we need good solid waste management so that solid waste does not go into our water and contaminate our water. And so that we can send water to all communities for them to drink, we also need to take care of our watershed. That's why logging is prohibited in most of our country. Only a few provinces were allowed when Secretary Reyes’ predecessor, Mike Defensor, chose these provinces after consulting with various N.G.O.s.

And not only that, prohibiting logging, we also need to strengthen our capacity to revive nature through human intervention through industrial tree plantations and reforestation. So I expanded what was once called the Bukidnon forest — Angie, right? — but you have reached the name now is Philippine Forest Corporation and we gave it a corporation under the DENR with the mandate to create a vast reforestation. And this is one area where the corporate sector can help and make a difference either investing in industrial tree plantations or contributing to massive reforestation.

This global warming has made our job more difficult. Because global warming, the totality of several past years, is now bringing heavier rains and more ferocious floods around the world — didn’t you see Katrina in America too? — as well as in the Philippines. So we are investing in geo-hazard mapping along with the ecological restoration I mentioned earlier, the reforestation. This is a big project of Secretary Reyes now, the geo-hazard mapping.

In the past, this was done by namria inside the office, but it took a long time to finish. So Secretary Reyes has plans to perhaps outsource it, perhaps even sell the property of namria which is now very valuable, in a prime property, to pay for those who will do the geo-hazard mapping faster so that we can use it immediately for our nature defense programs.

Whenever… This has happened to us many times, we have been flooded many times, there have been landslides many times due to the rain. I can’t help but think of the old saying, “water, water, everywhere and not a drop to drink.” All that water coming in, instead of killing Filipinos, should be used to make Filipinos live.

So flood control masterplans in our major river basins are very important, this is one of the elements of the environment chapter of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. So I also created a River Basin Task Force — right, Angie? — under the leadership of Secretary Reyes so that these river basins instead of always being flooded can use the water of these rivers, and the rains that go to those rivers, or the water coming from the mountains can be used by people to provide water to our communities — an adequate source of community water supply.

Meanwhile, until we can do that, until we fulfill the reforestation, until we can use the floodwaters for our drinking water or irrigation, we need to balance the use of the water we have now from various sources between the needs of the community and agricultural requirements.

There is an agency there in the DENR — actually, inter-agency — called the Water Resource Board. The problem with the Water Resource Board… I don’t believe in committees. When there is a committee, a lot of debates just happen. Especially this Water Resource Board, who are the members? Those representing those who drink water, those representing farmers to irrigate their plants. How will they make a decision on where the water will go? Well, they argue with each other because each one has his constituent. So there are often stalemates, there are often delays, it is not productive. As Angie said, what she noticed because of that system she inherited, when she goes to the Water Resource Board meeting, the high-ranking officials who are decision-makers no longer go.

So, I said: — I said it before and I say it again to Angie — “Angie, make me an executive order. Let’s change that Water Resource Board. Let’s make it a Water Resource Office under the DENR so that there is one director responsible for his decision-making. He neither belongs to the agricultural sector nor the Manila Water Supply or LWUA. He will calibrate how much will go to drinking, how much will go to irrigating the farmers.” In other words, he will calibrate two important points in our 10-point pro-poor agenda. One is providing water throughout the country and the second is developing two million new hectares of land for agri-business.

Perhaps you see in my story of our policies, that all actions to defend nature are connected to our fight against poverty. And this recycling, that is one of the best proofs of this truth, that if we win the fight against poverty, it means we also win the fight against the squandering of our nature.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].