Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 45th Anniversary of Angeles University Foundation and the 100th birth anniversary of Dr. Barbara D. Yap-Angeles

[Delivered at the Main Campus, Angeles University Foundation, Angeles City, Pampanga, December 12, 2007]

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Manny for your introduction. Thank you for inviting me to be here for the 100th birthday of your beloved and much respected mother. Thank you for changing the date of the celebration because I had to be in a state visit in Europe during her actual birthday. Thank you also for waiting today because having arrived a day later than I was supposed to arrive, I had to compress two days of activities in one day. But maybe it’s all worth it because we were able to save the life of a Filipino in Kuwait. (applause)

Our beloved Archbishop Aniceto, Chairman of the Board and our champion of pro-life policies in the church and to the government; Mr. Pama, President of AUF; our cabinet members who are here with us today: We have Jing Lapus, Ed Pamintuan and Medy Poblador; I see mayor Boking Morales of Mabalacat; I saw Mayor Gerry Pelayo of Candaba, and if there are any other mayors here, I’d like to greet them; and of course all the friends of AUF and all the admirers of Dr. Barbara Yap-Angeles. (applause)

We celebrate tonight the life of an exemplary woman, Mrs. Barbara Yap-Angeles. “B.Y.A.” to most, as we often call our CEOs by their initials. She was the paragon of the determined Filipina whose values of thrift, hard work, discipline and strong faith in developing our provinces human resources led to the founding of the Angeles University. From the small Angeles Institute of Technology which reopened in 1962 rose the AUF which came to offer multi-disciplinary courses and became a university.

The AUF continued to achieve more in the service of the people of our beloved Pampanga and Central Luzon, establishing a medical school with a base hospital 20 years after its reopening. And may I again thank Angeles University Hospital because you gave my husband first aid when he had a helicopter crash in the Cordilleras many years ago when I was not yet president. He deplaned here in a helicopter, he got his aid here. (applause)

Well, going back to AUF and what you’ve done, you received from the CHED Autonomous Status as a Center of Instruction, Research and Community Service in 2003. You received the ISO-9001 certification. (applause) You’re recognized as one of the country’s centers of excellence in information technology education. (applause)

So, if we will congratulate Angeles University, we must congratulate the Angeles family led by University Chancellor Manny Angeles (applause) for never letting go of B.Y.A.’s or Ima’s goal. Congratulations! Also to AUF’s Chairman, our beloved Archbishop Aniceto (applause) and the board of trustees of AUF for furthering the university’s reach and the positive benefits of quality education that AUF offers.

We know all about your education because my family has been involved in the growth of AUF. My late father, President Diosdado Macapagal, was Chairman of the Board of Angeles University Foundation until he passed away in 1997. And when he passed away, I succeeded him in the board until I got elected Vice-President and I had to comply with the constitutional prohibition of having another job, so I had to resign from my seat in the board. My brother Boboy took my place and now his wife sits as a member of the board. Thus, the Macapagal family is familiar with the endeavors of this university to develop the talents of our Kabalens to world-class levels. (applause) Four of us having sat in the board, we know the sacrifices of the Angeles family to maintain the university’s standards. Congratulations! To the Angeles family for five decades of selflessness. (applause)

Ima’s life leaves many in awe of the person and the drama in her life. But I understand that many more will come to know her story by the way of a book, a book that will teach us how to dream. Beyond the drama of the stage and the printed word, every one of us here should be encouraged by her example. Ima dared to dream big, and she gave her best to attain it.

She had her vision to bring out the best in every Kapampangan through education, and she rallied her family to achieve it. Like Ima, a leader must be driven by a strong vision for the nation and the determination to deliver a better life. I am driven by my faith in god and my faith in the people of this nation.

As a nation we have our own dream similar to the dream of Ima for Angeles University. We dream of a Philippines that’s ready for first-world status in 20 years when we will dramatically have reduced poverty, created a robust middle-class and have all the marks of a modern society in strong, stable institutions. And by the time I leave the presidency in 2010, we will have launched the Philippines to be well on our way to achieving that vision. (applause)

Already we have moved mountains with our macroeconomic condition through fiscal discipline, toward a balanced budget, toward paying off our debts, and investing billions in human and physical infrastructure. One only needs to have a glimpse of our Subic-Clark-Tarlac Highway to be able to see what we mean. (applause) And these fundamentals are paying off in huge increases in investment, six million new jobs — many of them in our Clark Economic Zone where Manny was the President — and a strong peso and strong stock market.

Poverty alleviation is our overarching goal. We will focus on it in the remainder of my term. Balancing the budget is just the first step. Over the next three years, we will translate the positive results of our reforms to real benefits for the people. We will increase investment in our country, in our people to first of all, improve our infrastructure to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty; second, improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food-for-school nutrition programs; third, boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators.

And I am very glad to let you know that in working on our educational reform we have put together a task force to reengineer our educational system. And I am very happy to let you know that in this very small and select task force, one of the members is none other than AUF chancellor Manny Angeles. (applause)

Speaking of the next three years, aside from infrastructure, social services and education, number 4, we’re cutting red tape and continuing to eliminate corruption from the system.

Our anti-corruption advisor, Tony Kwok, the former anti-corruption czar in Hong Kong who was a key player in efforts to clean up corruption there, believes that perceptions cloud the reality of our progress in the Philippines in fighting corruption. The fact is that we have taken an effort to curb graft through criminal justice, administrative controls and procedural reforms. This effort is focused on the revenue agencies, which is why they have improved their performance in recent years; on agencies that are in the frontline of day-to-day public services; and on large infrastructure projects.

For infrastructure projects, we have recently put up a procurement transparency group and a performance monitoring group or what we call an infrastructure monitoring task force projects performance tracking system, and both the procurement transparency group and the infrastructure performance tracking system, both have very heavy civil society participation.

We take the issue of corruption seriously. We believe that perception will match reality sooner or later. However, this is a problem that has plagued the Philippines and other countries for generations. It won’t be eliminated overnight but progress is being made. And we need that also to eradicate poverty which as I said earlier is the central mission of this government and our society.

As we enter the holiday season — and I’m so happy to see all these beautiful lanterns made in San Fernando — it is essential that every person of means helps those in need. Every person of means must aim to be like Mrs. Barbara Yap-Angeles, who was not born poor but her heart was with the poor. She never faltered in her belief, as Manny said, that education is the best way out of poverty. She influenced the lives of thousands of our Kabalens by helping them acquire quality and affordable higher education.

The social impact of the institution she founded is just as laudable as she was: becoming a foundation; pioneering in the “study now, pay later plan” which opened windows to a better life to thousands of poor but bright Kapampangans; achieving a faculty-student ratio of 1:16, way above the average ratio of most Philippine colleges and universities; (applause) and keeping Barbara Yap-Angeles’ missionary zeal alive by offering scholarships and financial grants to 16 percent of the student population. (applause)

Ima understood only too well that education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. She understood that the hardworking men and women of this nation put their family first. And the best gift any family can give to a child, and indeed I must say any nation can give to its people, is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, justice and self-worth. That is why in the government, we will continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level and bolster our college scholarship program for those high school students ready for higher education.

Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women, our children would fall short of their dreams and aspirations. We’re deeply indebted to the hard work and dedication of all our teachers. Their work is noble and patriotic. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino.

That is why on the occasion of the 100th birthday of Mrs. Barbara Yap-Angeles, we are passing on to Angeles University, providentially, a contribution made to me this morning by the Philippine Chinese Chamber of Commerce of five million pesos. (applause) Because I asked earlier how much is one year’s tuition, and so I calculated this five million would provide one year scholarship for 100 education students. (applause) But because of our discussion in the task force on education yesterday when we said we have to improve English teaching, I would like this to be for scholarships of education students majoring in English. (applause)

Indeed, much needs to be done in our country to improve human rights, secure budgets for health care and education, invest more in peace and order, and advance our national interests with other nations on trade, economy and security issues.

Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress.

The preoccupation with politics, past and present, does not promote stability or policy continuity or security or the peace and order our country needs to continue to move forward. Through the end of my term, we aim to provide increased political stability, sustained economic growth and lasting peace and order. We will not let the nation slip into instability. We want this to be an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

Our goal is to leave this nation stronger and more stable; to provide more jobs and build more schools; and to lift the poor up through investments in infrastructure, health care, better housing and improved social justice.

Be assured that we lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election and new leadership. We will not falter in keeping our hand steady on the tiller of the ship of state. And so, I would just like to say that in making sure that we keep our leadership steady, we are inspired by the leadership of the founder of Angeles University, Ima Barbara Yap-Angeles. (applause)

As we exercise leadership and as we promote education, on this 100th birthday of B.Y.A., we remember the lessons that she gave us.

Thank you to the Angeles clan, once again, for perpetuating the memory of Ima Barbara Yap-Angeles, a great Kapampangan and a great Filipino.

Thank you and merry christmas to everyone! (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech During the 45th Anniversary of Angeles University Foundation and the 100th birth anniversary of Dr. Barbara D. Yap-Angeles. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135613/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2323&Itemid=38