Senate President Franklin Drilon and the other members of the Senate; Speaker De Venecia, oh! he’s not yet here; the members of Congress; Ambassador Ricciardone who was just my host together with President Bush in Washington; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; Secretary Romulo and the other members of the Cabinet; the distinguished members of the Senate and the House of Representatives, principally the sponsors of this Republic Act 9208 led by in the Senate: Senator Estrada, Senator Flavier, Senator Legarda, Senator Villar, Francis Pangilinan, Senator Osmeña, Senator Oreta, Biazon, Pimentel and Lacson.

The members of Congress who passed this law especially the sponsors: Congresswoman Joson, Angara-Castillo, Joaquin, Luistro, Custodio, Masa and Eric Singson; officials of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao and other Mindanao local executives; officials of the Armed Forces and the Philippine National Police; leaders and representatives of the various NGOs representing the women and labor sectors; leaders and representatives of the business community; honored guests; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, I congratulate and thank our legislators for the passage of this law that provides our people with protection against the trafficking of women and children. I thank you on behalf of all women, on behalf of all mothers, and also on behalf of the DSWD where this initiative began. This law embodies a moral decision, because the trafficking of women or children is immoral, it is exploitation. It is immoral and exploitative even if the woman or the child's parent is paid. This law provides a warning that the economic well-being of our women and children will improve not through their exploitation but through empowering women and educating children. Not through distributing to them the proceeds of a lucrative but evil trade.

Through this law, we show the world and ourselves that the Filipino is not confused by exploitative commerce and free commerce because we know the difference between criminal livelihood and legitimate livelihood. We show that we know how to create a nurturing environment for our women and children by defending them from those who seek to make them instruments.

This law strengthens our Republic. Because a strong Republic is an effective state that has a duty to help its most vulnerable and weakest citizens, empowers them, and dismantles the structures that oppress and weaken them. Effective government is based on the rule of law.

This law is affirmative action. A characteristic of this law is that it recognizes that even though there are already general laws prohibiting various aspects of trafficking, it demonstrates that women and children have the right to have a special defense unique to them above the general provisions of criminal law.

Let us be thankful for the progress towards a more just and humane society.

I spoke about effective government. Effective governance is also based on delivering basic services to the people – such as safety in travel. That is why I am dismayed by the incident of the ship collision yesterday.

I deeply sympathize with the families of those who perished in yesterday’s tragedy. I’d like to issue a warning to our maritime authorities about the strict enforcement of navigation rules and the fitness of pilots of commercial vessels. These perennial accidents can and must be stopped. I’m directing the maritime authorities to get at the bottom of this incident and submit a complete report within 15 days. We must pinpoint responsibility and mete out the necessary sanctions. Let’s make sure there is just compensation for the victims. And we must take preemptive measures so that this won’t happen again. This is another black eye in maritime safety and it’s ironic because sea transport is a fundamental aspect of the economy.

Despite this tragedy, we also have things to be thankful for. We have blessings that we should be grateful for. Let’s give thanks for the blessings of God and the support of our people for a safe, productive, and satisfying visit to the United States of America.

Despite the tragedy that occurred yesterday, the Filipino people have much to celebrate. We’ve just strengthened the protection of our women and children with this law. Our country has just become the third country to be declared by the World Health Organization as having succeeded in preventing further local transmission of SARS. The punitive military actions against the terrorist attackers of Siocon, Zamboanga Del Norte and Maigo, Lanao Del Norte have been dislodged from their bases and dispersed into ragtag groups being run to the ground by the gallant troops of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. The investigation into the Davao and Koronadal bombings is bearing fruit with the arrest of the perpetrators of this and even previous terrorists attacks arrested by the capable operatives of the Philippine National Police. Despite the war in Iraq and the SARS outbreak, our economic growth in the first quarter of 2003 is turning out to be stronger than anyone expected.

The Philippines is demonstrating to the world our national traits of respect for women, care for children, strength of will, and intelligence to succeed against exploiters of women and children, and against viruses, terrorists, and economic malaise. These national traits of respect for women, care for children, strength of will and intelligence to succeed are the characteristics that the people of America honored during my state visit to that country.

Respect for women, because I am the first female leader to be honored with a state visit by the Bush administration. Care for children because one of the fruits of my trip to America is aid to help our children in Southern Mindanao – assistance for child survival in Southern Philippines – and the value of this aid is 96 million U.S. dollars or five billion pesos.

At EDSA we proved that our people are capable of making moral choices. The success of my state visit is about recognizing that moral choices in moments of crisis must be backed up in day-to-day life by unified action, sustained vigor, and effective prosecution. We’ve shown to the world that the Filipino is not confused between terrorism and demand for justice because we can distinguish between naked hate and justified grievance. We’ve also shown that we know how to create and defend a secure peace on the basis of law and not allow ourselves to be lured into the illusion of peace through avoiding hostilities by ignoring threats. We will secure our peace and harmony as a nation through the strength of our will and our intelligence to succeed, not through concessions by our enemies or restraints of our attackers.

In my state visit, President Bush and I articulated a new partnership based on a range of mutual interests that now includes a vision for the strategic role the Philippines plays in Asia and on the global stage. the partnership between the Philippines and America is mirrored in the amity and cooperation between our two governments, which in turn reflect the historic and social bonds between the Filipino and American peoples. The high points of my visit were about honoring how many Filipinos have achieved so much in America which in some measure was reflected in how much America appreciates what Filipinos have done.

The honors and courtesies accorded to our Philippine delegation were extraordinary and special. But I believe the improvement in our official relationship with America is only the most recent, full and faithful reflection of the enduring bonds of friendship, alliance and common interests between our two sovereign nations.

I’m not the first nor will I be the last Philippine President to make a state visit to America. As in all past and likely in all future such visits, some of our people will ask about material gains, while others will seek expressions of respect and recognition of our dignity as a people. I’d like to report to our people that America has been generous with our political (practical) needs, and America has also been warm and wise in honoring the uniqueness and humanity of our nation.

Before critics devalue this achievement, before political contenders cast partisan doubts on the advancement of our nation, and before controversy confuses the high-minded purpose of this national enterprise, let us pause and join our people in congratulating themselves for a state visit that truly honors respect for women, care for children, strength of will and intelligence to succeed of the Filipino.

America recognizes and appreciates a friend with such sterling qualities, but those qualities are primarily for our nation’s benefit and are resources we can rely upon in facing the many challenges of the future.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Ceremonial Signing of the Anti-Trafficking of Persons Act of 2003 and State Visit Arrival Report. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200932/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6257&Itemid=38