Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Manila Overseas Press Club Gala Night 2005

[ Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 12, 2005 ]

LET’S BUILD OUR NATION TO LAST

Good evening and welcome to Malacañang. And from me and every Filipino concerned about a strong, free and unfettered press, Happy 60th Anniversary to MOPC.

It’s the beginning of the rest of your life, 60 years. But it’s also the beginning of a new year, and as is the custom, you expect me to talk about my plans for the year. And I do thank you for this opportunity to talk to you about our agenda for 2005. I say “our” agenda because we’re in this together, as you’ve been a central pillar of Philippine society and the democratic way of life for the past 60 years.

And I know that everyone in this room who loves this country wants me to succeed. And I thank you for that.

As I said in my speech during the Vin d Honneur for the diplomatic community, 2005 is a year of urgent change and fervent hope for the Philippines. And that’s what I’d like to elaborate on tonight. The urgent change is within our grasp, but I need your support.

To get the economy back on track from the high debt regime and high unemployment that has been plaguing our country for many years now, we will improve tax collection, pass a budget that will support our 10-point plan and pro-poor agenda and take executive action to break the culture or corruption.

For decades, the Philippines has been operating on a fiscal deficit, except for the years 1994 to 1997. And even then, we posted budget surpluses mainly because of privatization. Otherwise, all these years, our total expenditures and debt payments have been more than the revenues we could raise. And we can t go on this way. That’s why we need our tax reform measures. They will provide the additional revenue needed to reign in our deficit and support the important programs that are part of our pro-poor agenda, namely, more jobs and more investments in our people. It will send a signal to the international community that the Philippines has turned the corner and is a place to invest and tap the vital talent pool that exists in our nation. We face sharp scrutiny of our fiscal status, and if we hurdle the test, we can have one of the best opportunities for a strong economic take-off.

Our tax reform measures will also importantly demonstrate to our creditors that the Philippines has the political will to build a strong, transparent and stable economy.

I’ve never said that we are a strong republic now, max. In fact, in my speeches in 2003 I would always say, we are a weak republic and we must make ourselves strong. And we need political will to be able to do that. The political will we have. The taxiways of the new international airport terminal are already being used by the airlines. Congratulations! Ed, Mercy, Cesar and Raul, and all of the lawyers who worked to enable this to happen. In time, the stake holders will be compensated as determined by the courts.

And the political will reigns not only in Malacañang, but in the legislature. We have a strong political consensus in the multiple corridors of governance.

Our revenue raising train is moving forward. I sit down with representatives and senators frequently to tighten the knots and bolts that put our fiscal house in order. My meetings with Congressional leaders have pruned down and consolidated our priorities into a few hills that will raise 80 billion pesos a year. As the bills go through the legislative mill, they undergo improvement, requiring a smaller number of laws to raise the target revenues.

For instance, the final version of the alcohol and cigarette tax bill meets, will raise about 16 billion pesos. That’s more than 50 percent more than the original version that was going to raise 9.5 billion pesos. And just as I was entering, leaving my quarters to come to this celebration, I got a word from Gabby Claudio that the house has just passed the fiscal incentives hill on second reading. I must express my gratitude to the legislature for their admirable commitment to the national interest.

We said that we would do reforms in the legislature up to 80 billion pesos or at least 80 billion pesos. But we will bear the bigger burden in the executive. We will work for administrative measures that will raise a hundred billion pesos.

For instance, as a result of the ERC ruling on Napocor rates, from October last year to November last year, Napocor increased its revenues by almost 9 billion pesos. That means that the projection of 30 billion pesos for one year will be overshot and it will be closer to 35 billion pesos for the year 2005.

As president, I’m mandated to bring our country to such a level of creditworthiness and competitiveness that will allow us to ensure that the most pressing day to day needs of the average Filipino are provided for. And I’m also expected to lead our nation to a labyrinth of political, economic and social pathways that can only meet a dead end if one does not keep up with the competition.

Keeping up will enable us to survive. Let’s keep up, let’s survive, but let’s also work hard and work together to excel because given the high debt that we have and the reduction of creditworthiness that it entails, we have to excel just to keep up. Just like being a woman, you have to be superior just to be treated equally.

Working to excel requires not only vigor or persistence, it requires a vision that is clear and unwavering. I outlined my vision I believe very clearly in a 10-point agenda in my inaugural address last June, and that vision is undiminished and consistent.

The passage of the 2005 budget will accelerate the implementation of the 10-point program of action including our pro-poor agenda by creating 6 to 10 million jobs in six years. The 10-point plan will fund important programs for the nation including the fight against terror and the pro-poor agenda. This is the peoples budget designed to bring to life the pro-poor agenda that will create jobs in micro, small and medium size and agri-businesses, bring clean water and electricity to the entire country, a school for every barangay and computers in every high school.

Most of these plans are already being pursued. The investments from public and private sources have been lined up and many of the contributors are rig ht here in this room. They are being delivered. We have started.

Promises and targets have been met. The Filipino-Chinese community is here, and they will be the first to tell you that kidnapping has been neutralized. Drugs have been neutralized. As promised in the beginning of my term, we’ve been spending 20 billion pesos a year on agricultural modernization, haven’t we, arty? Eighty one percent of the people have health insurance which is considered in many other countries, for all intents and poses, universal health insurance. We have energized all but 3 500 barangays. And we’ll be able to energize those early in my administration. We constructed 6,000 classrooms in 2004 as promised. Roll-on/roll-off ports and roads are in place. And we have the lowest incident of strikes in almost 30 years. We have the momentum.

But we must guard against the doomsayers and skeptics for their vision can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. There are clouds to be sure, hut there are many silver linings and outright sunshine breaking through over the Philippine economy: the 6 percent growth rate — that’s the growth rate right, nits, in GDP? — which is a pleasant surprise in the region; the 20 percent increase in exports in November; the stock market which was one or the best performers in Asia in 2004 and which expects another year of double digit growth in 2005. The increase in capital inflows testify to our nation’s stability, resiliency and enterprising spirit.

In fact, Tony Lopez was pointing out to me some other indicators. San Miguel which has a table here, I understand, has unprecedented beer sales in its last 150 years of existence, and one of the reasons for that is also the very high price of coconut in the world market because the coconut farmers like to drink beer when they are very prosperous. But they also like to send their children to school. So, enrollment is up in the coconut regions. The other indicator that Tony told me when we were sitting together is that the number two consumption item now in sari-sari stores is not suka, it is cell cards. Silver lining. You don’t buy cell cards unless your basic needs have been met.

But we must see to it that our investments in the nation and in our people are not tainted, delayed, eroded or overwhelmed by corruption.

To create more jobs and bring prosperity to the people, we must stop the culture of corruption that holds back our pace of development. For the first time, lifestyle checks led to the dismissal of 45 senior officials, including a DPWH undersecretary, a deputy customs commissioner, other high ranking B.I.R. and B.O.C. officials, and they led to the filing of charges against high-ranking officers or the armed forces.

Tonight — I don’t have it here — I signed an executive order directing timely and complete payment of taxes as a precondition for entering into and as a continuing obligation in contracts with government, its departments, agencies and instrumentalities. On the first, about the lifestyle checks and the 45 officials, what I mean to say is that I will exert executive authority to fire unscrupulous government officials who rob the nation. On the second, the new executive order requiring tax payments, complete tax payments before getting a contract and continue enjoying the contract, what we must do… Well, before that, on the senior officials in the military who are now facing trial, yes, I will restore integrity to our military leaders and soldiers who put their lives at risk and defend the honor of the nation. And for the other one I talked about, the executive order, it means that I will cancel government contracts with corrupt companies as I will prosecute illegal loggers. And I call on Congress, the private sector and civic leaders to join this effort.

And there is nothing more corrosive to our democracy, I agree with Max, than the murder of journalists in pursuit of truth. I stand before you tonight deeply committed to protecting the health, life and safety of every journalist who plies his or her trade in the pursuit of truth and justice. Where is General Aglipay? He has a table here, yes. I’d like to congratulate him, out of 12 killings of journalists last year, 10 have been solved by the police. The 10 guys are in jail, right, Egay? And I will not rest until those guys who have been caught and other assassins are brought to justice. You, the members of our media which we want to keep free and vibrant deserve no less and the nation deserves no less.

Again, I ask for your help. Help me spread the news that will get our people on hoard the express coach of our economic reform.

As many of you know, our economic reform is embodied in the acronym “beat the odds.”

Tonight, Tony said the book that they gave me is called “built to last.” Let’s build, let’s beat the odds and build our nation to last.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library