Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you all very much.

Thank you, Governor Maliksi for introducing me and allowing me to crash your discussion.

Thank you, Congressman Pedie Barzaga, our host congressman, because in Congress, you are one of those I rely on.

Thank you, Mayor De Sagun for hosting this discussion of local governments and NGOs.

Thank you, Mayor Roy Loyola for your statement on behalf of all the town mayors of Cavite province.

Thank you, former Congressman Del Abaya, and thank you also for having a representative of the family of General and President Emilio Aguinaldo.

Thank you to all the provincial officials, officials, mayors from various parts of Cavite; thank you to our NGO leaders who are here; thank you to Ms. Liabres, the president of the chamber here in Cavite; I am pleased to hear from you how agile our small and medium enterprises are here. And thank you also for your statement from the large investors, Filipino or foreign, that a long-awaited infrastructure is none other than the Coastal road which four presidents have already broken ground on, I am the fourth there but I will be the one to finish it because it will be completed according to Governor Maliksi, the schedule is the end of this year 2008.

Thank you, Ms. Caraan, who represents the women of Cavite. It is very important that you are here to speak on behalf of women because on March 8 we will celebrate Women's Day and we have many activities for the run-up to Women's Day and one thing we should celebrate is how the human rights and economic rights of our women are strengthening.

It is a great honor for me to have helped those partners in progress and I remember the big problem we had when we met in 2005. The problem of our farmers. But now, Governor Maliksi will tell the story of how prosperous the farms here in the province of Cavite have become.

Thank you very much to Mr. Sarmiento who represents our athletes and those with disabilities, and we really want the youth to always be healthy and if there are health problems like disabilities, it should not be a hindrance to their opportunities.

Thank you very much to Mr. Alvarez and I am happy to hear that the legacy is one of the millionaire cooperatives that we nurtured, with P51 million in assets today. And the young woman there who has been shouting, how are you? Thank you very much, ordinary citizen, I greet you, I greet you all, a warm celebration of the Edsa People Power revolution.

Our supporters are having a celebration of Edsa People Power at Liwasang Bonifacio this afternoon. But I thought that instead of going to a celebration of speeches, I would go where we can celebrate the true spirit of People Power where the ordinary citizen is present.

Earlier, I was in Caloocan helping to build a school and starting to provide cash transfers to the poorest of the poor. Caloocan is far from Cavite but the other day, Bert Gonzalez told me that you would have a discussion here: local government, NGOs, so Bert Gonzalez said it would be good to drop by for a moment. That's the reason, that's the story of my gate crashing your discussion. And it's good to drop by in Cavite because when we talk about People Power or when we talk about freedom, where was the freedom of our Philippines born? Nowhere else but in the province of Cavite.

As they say, just as important as June 12, 1896 was in the 19th century, so too are the four days of Edsa in 1986 important in the 20th century.

The world celebrated Edsa 1. The world allowed Edsa 2. The world will not forgive Edsa 3. The world will say, what is the Philippines? The best workers in the world so they are sought after all over the world but always shoot themselves in the foot and are unstable? If so, who will come to invest here? And Cavite, you have a very big stake in political stability because Cavite is one of the most industrialized in our entire Philippines.

Cavite is one of the most with investors either small and medium enterprise or foreign investors. And the foreign investors get nervous when they see that our politics are unstable. That's all we do: Governor; Congressman; mayors of different places where there are investments; the DTI; PEZA who always tells investors here that whatever another country will give you, we will give you too but we can talk about discounts on taxes like Governor Maliksi does, we can talk about discounts on electricity like the Department of Energy does, but the stability of politics is in your hands — the people of Cavite and the Philippines.

The Coastal Road, the most important infrastructure for Cavite, we will finally fulfill. The one you are looking for – the LRT which is pending due to threats of investigation is now in your hands, those who say they love Cavite, do not put the LRT that will serve passengers from Cavite and Metro Manila in danger. That is the great responsibility of Cavite. You did a lot in the 19th century for our freedom, you will also do a lot for our progress. Bring your voice to the Senate. What you said today, yes! We are all against corruption but what Emilio Aguinaldo fought for was the rule of law, democratic principles, let us fight for that.

Trials are not based on gossip. Trials are based on evidence. There is sufficient, there is a proper court for that. So if we talk about freedom, if we talk about democracy, let's talk about the rule of law and I am happy that I passed through this gateway of our freedom so that we can remember the true spirit of People Power – democracy and the rule of law.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). PGMA’s Speech during the Peace Rally at the Capitol grounds. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123306/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=962&Itemid=38