Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you, Secretary Roque.

Vice-President De Castro, other Cabinet members, Congressman Guinigundo, business leaders, labor leaders, ladies and gentlemen:

We’ve just been around the world in eight days; Peter and I, and compared to many parts of the world, we can truly say that we in the Philippines have weathered the worse of the global crisis thus far.

This is because we “rebooted” our economy several years ago. We took our economic medicine through fundamental reform by raising taxes, cutting down on smugglers and reforming our tax collection system and banking laws. Our reform moves have paid off with revenue for investments in human and physical infrastructure. I think you all recognize that it only takes about half an hour by car now from Monumento to Clark using the North Luzon-Clark Expressway. And that you can travel by car from Aparri to Jolo, island hopping on our Roll-on/Roll-off ferry Nautical Highway System. We are likewise investing unprecedented amounts in expanded social services.

As a result of our investments, our GNP grew 8.0 percent in 2007. And in 2008 when two-thirds of the world went into recession, our GNP still managed to grow by 6.0 percent. Nonetheless, this is a time when government, business and labor must join hands against the global crisis so that it does not become a crisis in the Philippines. In doing this, we must not neglect those who feel the hardships of the global downturn, especially firms under strain and workers facing layoffs.

We are here to follow-up initiatives from the tripartite meeting two weeks ago with specific measures and actions on concerns raised. So, may I therefore review some of the concerns raised two weeks ago as summarized by Secretary Nitoy Roque and givesome of the responses to those concerns.

Number one.  SSS to condone penalties and surcharges on loans of affected workers. (Applause)

In response to this concern raised two weeks ago SSS is already implementing such a program for one year.

Number two. DOLE and OWWA to establish a stand-by fund for displaced seafarers and land-based OFWs.

As a matter of fact, a program is being carried out to help expatriate workers who might return home from their host countries that are now being buffeted by the economic crisis. This program is being made available as well to workers being laid off in export-oriented industries.

The DOLE is the lead in carrying out the government’s program for thereturning expatriates and the retrenched export workers. The first component of this program is an Expatriate and Export Workers’ Livelihood Support Fund in the amount of one billion pesos financed by OWWA for the OFWs and supported by government lending institutions such as the Development Bank of the Philippines, the Land Bank and the SB Corporation. Displaced expatriate and export-oriented workers can access the fund to help capitalize start up businesses or finance further studies and training.

I have told Secretary Roque that the rules and mechanics of accessing to this money must be simple and hassle-free. Returning expatriate workers and retrenched export workers should not be subjected to irrational rules and red tape.

Number three. Implement training programs, training interventions specifically targeted for workers displaced as a result of the global financial crisis at the community level. And Secretary Buboy Syjuco and I have been talking, and TESDA will do this starting in CALABARZON, then Subic, Clark and Mactan.

Two weeks ago, one area that was suggested to be explored is the TESDA and its accredited training institutions tap as trainors skilled workers, both local and OFWs, who have been displaced, either permanently or temporarily. And TESDA will specifically seek in-bound returning workers and domestic retrenched workers with experience who will become trainors of TESDA.

Number four. Reduce the cost of doing business. One suggestion given two weeks ago was to provide fuel subsidy to firms operating in the export processing zones that transport their workers to and from the zones. Another is to lower the costs of business licenses and permits. Secretary Favila who was with me in the trip, instructed PEZA’s Lilia de Lima to implement the fuel and transport subsidy, right, Peter? And the forthcoming standardization of the city business registration and permit process in Metro Manila which will be launched on eighteenth of February, I believe during the meeting of the League of Cities of the Philippines will also reduce red tape and therefore the cost of doing business.

In addition, due to difficulties currently encountered by some firms in accessing credit from the private banking sector, the government financial institutions will provide loan facilities, such as working capital, to creditworthy firms. We have requested the BSP also through the national government’s representative in the Monetary Board, Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Favila, to provide liberal terms for rediscounting windows and allow the banks particularly the GFIs some flexibility on regulatory financial ratio compliance.

Number five. Stimulate domestic production and product demand and consumption by addressing smuggling. Our Anti-Smuggling Task Force has been working hard on this. I ask business and labor to join the task force. And we have here in front Jess Arranza of the Chamber of Philippine Industries, whose very mission is to help stop smuggling. And I reiterate my instructions that the Chamber of Philippine Industries as well as the PCCI should be an integral part of the task force.

Number six proposal or concern raised, was study the possibility of imposing a moratorium on wages and other economic benefits for a limited period. The issue on moratorium on wages can be discussed when wages are due for annual review between July and August. As for the benefits, that’s why we have business and labor here with us together because those are better left to labor and management to agree on among themselves.

Number seven. Mainstream and expand training partnerships between government and private companies such as that being done in San Miguel and Max’s. And TESDA will handle this, so Secretary Syjuco will be in touch with San Miguel and Max’s on what they are doing, how they’re doing this, expand that partnership with them, and expand it to other firms who are willing to do this.

Number eight. Government and industries to share information on industry employment, number of companies affected, number of workers affected either through retrenchment or flexible work arrangements, and other related information in order to come up with an accurate and reliable picture of the actual impact of the global financial crisis on employment and business and allow both government and industry to develop appropriate responses and interventions. Because when we are abroad we have heard strange, huge numbers that just depressed the people but really are very far from what it really is.  So, Secretary Roque has already had a discussion I understand with Jun Ortiz-Luis who is the President of the Employers’ Confederation, and it is with the Employers’ Confederation that the DOLE will coordinate and share information. And it’s through them that DOLE will coordinate and share information with major industries and the business sector. And let us emphasize on what government, business and labor are doing to save and generate jobs.

Even before this tripartite consultation started, our Economic Resiliency Plan has already been put together. In fact, I presented the first draft to the PCCI in your annual conference way back last October. And under this Economic Resiliency Plan which is our stimulus program, we will continue our unprecedented investments. I direct key agencies to show solid progress in bidding out and/or implementing major infra and social projects under the 300 billion pesos stimulus plan. We consider this the most important government initiative this year. And the agencies, you should start seeing the agencies rolling out tangible results. This will be part of our subject matter in our Cabinet meeting tomorrow.

Among other items of the resiliency plan, we will put all budget-funded energy independence and environment jobs in one box called “Green Collar Jobs.”

This will include those who will be hired under the two billion-peso reforestation fund, whether in the re-greening of logged-over uplands like the mountains of Bukidnon, Cagayan de Oro, Lanao del Sur or in the regeneration of mangrove areas; under the GREET program of Tourism, coastal cleanup and Baywatch groups; jatropha planting and the replanting of coconut farms to ensure stable and sustainable biofuel feedstock; LPG retrofitting of tricycles and PUVs; Barangay electrification using solar panels or connecting them to hydroelectric powered grids; designating bike lanes using OYSTER labor (“OYSTER” stands for Out-of-School Youth Serving Towards Economic Resiliency); installation of solar-powered street lights, and other clean energy initiatives that the newly signed Renewable Energy Act can unleash. So these are part of the Green Collar Jobs that are part of our Emergency Employment Program.

Also, some 6,000 short-term jobs have been opened up in the government’s 650 million-peso poverty mapping project which the DSWD will undertake once the 2009 budget takes effect in about six weeks, just in time when school is out. This project will be a major component of the government’s Youth Employment in Summer or YES program.

Also, we are launching NARS or Nurses Assigned in Rural Areas. Nurses who have low overseas demand for their services due to lack of training – because there’s a big demand for trained nurses but those untrained that’s their problem — they shall be mobilized in their hometowns. These warriors for wellness shall do three I’s: “Initiate” primary health, school nutrition, maternal health programs, first-line diagnosis etc.; “Inform”, inform about community water sanitation practices and do health surveillance; and third, “Immunize”, immunize children and mothers. They shall also serve as roving nurses for rural schools. How much will this cost on the nurses? If they’re paid an allowance of P8,000 a month, and you have two 6-month tours of duties of nurses, five nurses for each of the 1,000 poorest municipalities, that will cost less than half a billion pesos. And I’ve talked to Nonoy Andaya about this (program) this morning. The stipend can be increased if — and I call the attention here of the President of the Mayors’ League of the Philippines, Monching Guico — if the host LGUs offer a counterpart of say 2,000 pesos, which is the official cell phone bill of a town official. (laughter)

I ask Corporations to chip in as well – shirts can come from manufacturers, insurance, vitamins from pharmaceuticals, cell phones that will make the program truly a national enterprise with private equity.

Truly, if anything, a tight economy should prompt people to yearn for greater stability and harmony and working together; not working apart. So let us all pull together to make sure the country puts jobs and the economy ahead of political and costly conflicts. Let us focus on “Joining Hands Against the Global Crisis.”

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Multi-Sectoral Jobs Summit “Joining Hands Against the Global Crisis”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105408/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=20056&Itemid=38