Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Romulo, Executive Secretary.

Please, everyone, take your seats.

First of all, I congratulate my fellow provincial mate, the Director General of the TLRC, Rico Laxa. In fact, it was the first time I heard him speak Tagalog earlier. You are good at Tagalog, Rico.

You know, I will tell you about Rico Laxa before he became mayor in 1998, a very large housing developer, one of the biggest. But he wanted to enter politics and became mayor of Macabebe. But when I became president and because of his very good successful experience as a housing developer before he became a politician, I asked him to be secretary… Director-General of the TLRC so that his entrepreneurial skills could also be extended to our countrymen. That's why he is there now and a belated happy birthday to you.

I would like to greet Secretary Manolet Dayrit of the Department of Health. He is here because one of the livelihoods we want for entrepreneurs is pharmacies that sell affordable medicine, and the DOH is the main one making that program. Also here is our new secretary of Anti-Poverty, Secretary Camilo Sabio, one of my many Cabinet members from Mindanao. And the reason why the Secretary of the Anti-Poverty Commission is here is because they are organizing the Kalahi or Kabalikat program against poverty, where the TLRC's participation is very active.

Here is my student, Anthony Abad, the president of the Philippine International Trading Corporation. He is also here because of those who will earn a living selling affordable medicine. Well, to get affordable medicine into other countries and to avoid being deceived with fake medicine, the one who makes the import for you, will be the Philippine International Trading Corporation. So, they are partners.

I greet the various mayors who are here. If there are any I didn't see earlier, I apologize. But here in front of us now is the mayor of Taguig City, Mayor Freddie Tinga. When I see the women of Taguig, I remember Mrs. Marichu Tinga, Freddie's mother, because she organizes the women and they are so beautiful… Are you those? Oh, well! So you are the Entrepinay now, the… What's that called, Kabalikat? Balikatan was the name of Marichu's ladies before. And also here from Metro Manila is my lawyer when I was vice president who helped defend women who were oppressed or exploited, this is Mayor Rosendo Capco of Pateros. There! People from Pateros.

Now what we are celebrating is not the defense of the human rights of the women of Pateros but the existence of your livelihood rights under the leadership of Endo Capco. Our fellow provincial mate of Rico Laxa, my Casiping Balen, it is difficult to go to his town if you don't first pass through my town in Lubao, the mayor of Sasmuan, Mayor Catalina Bagasina. Truthfully, Mayor Bagasina is also a very successful entrepreneur. So when she has a birthday party, I recognize not only those from Sasmuan but also her employees because her business is also big so she is very successful too. Almost like Rico Laxa before he became mayor. And I was glad I saw her when I came in, look how many awardees her constituents have, so I called her up here in front, Mayor Bartolome Ramos of Santa Maria, Bulacan.

To all of you, good afternoon, especially to the women entrepreneurs we call Entrepinay, good afternoon to all of you. We also have some men here. Let me greet those who love and respect the Entrepinays.

I am happy that we are here because what our country needs is jobs if we want to eradicate poverty, and not all jobs can be found in large factories. Many jobs in our country can be found in self-employment, that's what we call entrepreneurship.

And you, many of you were helped by TLRC to gain a livelihood. That's why many of you no longer need to work in factories, you are entrepreneurs. And some of you, sometimes entrepreneurs have their own businesses, one… themselves or maybe two of their children are their employees, that is self-employed. You have self-employed here, that's called a micro-enterprise. You also have small businesses that can provide jobs for ten people, that's a small enterprise. So whether you are employing yourselves or others, you don't need to look for employment, you are entrepreneurs, Entrepinay, successful entrepreneurs.

And that, the industry of the whole world weakened since 2001, when the U.S. economy slowed down and bought products from everyone, so the whole world slowed down. Before that, Asia also slowed down due to the Asian financial crisis, so many people lost their jobs and women were the first to lose their jobs, right? Did you notice? So what happens, when a woman is unemployed, she will just stay at home with the neighbors, gossip. But now, because of your being Entrepinays, you no longer need to waste your time, hang out and gossip with the neighbors because you have something good to do with your time, these businesses you are taking care of. You are Entrepinays, actively earning a living.

I was informed by Director General Rico Laxa that TLRC is helping women in more than two hundred areas under the NAPC program, Kalahi. And earlier, I heard that 20,000 Entrepinays have benefited from this program.

Entrepinay is one of the microfinance programs, 20,000 is the contribution of TLRC so far. To all those who want to benefit, perhaps we can call them all Entrepinay. Because even if they are not members of your movement, as long as they are women entrepreneurs, they are already Entrepinay.

So we want to have one million women to become Entrepinays in our country. Whether it's through TLRC or other microfinance programs like the livelihood support fund, like the various microfinance programs. And I am happy that when I said we would provide livelihoods through microfinance to 300,000 women a year, we have far exceeded this target. You are included, Entrepinays.

I mentioned before that Mayor Endo Capco was with me when I was vice president to defend the human rights of women. Your servant truly had two programs in my administration for women. One was defending the human rights of women. For example, those who are battered by their husbands, victims of rape, victims of prostitution and others, and the other, promoting economic rights. And what we are doing here, this Entrepinay program, this is part of our program to promote the economic rights of our women.

Lydia Pedernal mentioned that. There, Lydia, we've been with her in Pampanga for a long time because she was also handling the livelihood program of the Mt. Pinatubo Commission back then, right Lydia? You gave us a lot of criticism back then, huh? It's good we're friends now. Because when I'm a senator, when you're a senator, you tend to have a not-so-good attitude of constantly criticizing the executive. But now I'm in the executive branch, and I'm working with her. So, I apologize, Lydia, if I criticized you back then.

Anyway, as Lydia said, I've visited some Entrepinay members who are benefiting from microfinance in various parts of the Philippines. And the outstanding Entrepinay chapter—or, what was it, they've received three awards, four—the Holy Spirit barangay, I've visited that. And there they are making various cakes, pastries, juice, siopao, puto pao. When we went there, we even ate delicious cupcakes and puto, it was delicious.

But when we were talking there, some were complaining and in other places too, they said… Didn't we all see the training here? Some… are lucky because there are direct buyers for your products, but others are trained there, they learn to make things, but no one buys their products in their areas. And because they are new to that skill, it's not yet export quality. So, there's a marketing problem.

That's why I told the TLRC, my advice to them is don't teach products if sales aren't certain. And I said, I know a product that is really in demand, especially by the elderly, that's affordable medicine. So, we are now promoting pharmacies that sell affordable medicine. And where will this affordable medicine come from? One of them is constantly coming from India through the Philippine International Trading Center. Others are herbal and generic medicine which pass through the Department of Health. So, they should be involved in organizing these pharmacies.

In fact, I told Secretary Dayrit earlier, because I'm also being complained to by other people setting up pharmacies that according to the BFAD, they can't set up a pharmacy if they don't have a full-time pharmacist there, doing nothing all day… Their money will be used up on the salary of one pharmacist.

So, I said, Manolet, a pharmacist doesn't need to be there all day because it's very small scale. So, there should be a common pharmacist for several groups of pharmacies. One supervising pharmacist who goes around several pharmacies. That's what I want to remind… That's what I want to remind our three agencies that made this Memorandum of Agreement. And this will help us because one of our big programs is we want affordable medicine for the people, especially the medicine bought by the poor. And often they buy this for illnesses that the poor often get sick from.

I have great hope that through your organization, you will create a foundation. This will create additional jobs in your community. Because whether you’re an owner, if you were jobless before, now you have a job. Or if you gave jobs to two relatives, two people have jobs. Or if you became small scale, at least ten. Because I want there to be food on every table. How will we have food on every table? We need to have jobs.

So, you who have already been trained, have some capital, help me put food on every table in your communities. You are my hope for creating jobs in your communities.

Earlier, many of you received awards. Do not stop striving. Strive to grow your businesses further.

If you are micro-entrepreneurs, you should become small-scale already. And if you are small-scale, I hope you become medium-scale within two years. In that way, even though you are called small entrepreneurs, your contribution to the strengthening of our republic is great.

Congratulations! And thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Gawad Parangal sa mga Entrepinay (A Tribute to Women Entrepreneurs). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140840/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7490&Itemid=38