General Villanueva, the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and the other officers of the Armed Forces, other officers of the PNP, our guests, my beloved countrymen.

Fifty three years ago in 1948, the nations of the world gathered together and declared their commitment to human rights, this year we celebrate human rights day and human rights week with the theme “Ang Karapatang Pantao ay Buhay, Ipaglaban Natin.” May this day remind that us that life is worthless without the protective embrace of human rights, but of course those who are here, our public servants, need not be reminded of our duty, it is our duty to guarantee human rights not simply because it is a constitutional mandate but because it is part of our historical struggle for dignity and freedom. Long before the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights more than a hundred years ago, our national heroes and martyrs were already laying down their lives and treasures for our cherished freedoms. One of our beacons today is the Commission on Human Rights. This is the national institution mandated to uphold and respect the dignity of every human being, and to advance his well being, the community welfare, peace and national development. But human rights is a cause not only of the CHR but of everyone in our democratic society. And we who are here are here to renew our commitment to that cause.

His eminence Jaime Cardinal Sin once said and I quote, “All of us have an important role to perform. We are called to be guardians of human rights in society. That is what the world needs now.” I have faith in the institutions represented here that they will keep the cause alive. It is fitting and special that our soldiers and policemen are here with us on this occasion. Their presence here reminds me of a great moment of Philippine contemporary history — EDSA one — when human rights was the rallying cry, and the military and the police were on the side of the people. And so therefore, with them on the side of our people, today our human rights are secure. Today the system of accountability in the military and police is firm. We have no room for human rights violators in this system. Our soldiers fight and our policemen enforce, conscious of the ethic that human rights violators will be booted out, prosecuted, and jailed. I will be candid and say, and as they count, that at the time we decided to crack down on the Abu Sayyaf and their followers at the time when there was a big advocacy in Zamboanga and in western Mindanao for martial law to be declared, we discussed it with our soldiers and policemen, and they said we have enough constitutional tools, short of martial law, to be able to increase the enforcement of the law ok go ahead, crack down on them. The soldiers on the ground said, they reminded me that we have to be very careful about protecting human rights. It was not I who reminded them, but they reminded me. And that is why I am glad that they are here today. I want the world to know that our soldiers and policemen have internalized that devotion to the protection of human rights.

Indeed, there is no inherent conflict between national security and democracy there is no inherent conflicting between enforcing national stability. On the one hand, and protecting human rights, on the other. We, in this administration have the will, and together with you, the resources and the solidarity to protect human rights. A memorandum of agreement signed today forges the resolve of the Human Rights Commission and the various groups that are here today — Armed Forces, Police, DECS, CHED, DOJ and Civil Society — to carry on the vigilance for human rights. This instrument of solidarity which is important, especially now when there are forces that try to undermine our efforts. These forces pretend to be champions of human rights when they are violators. They pretend to be paragons of freedom and liberty while they engage with force, deception and violence to attain their ends. They use the guarantees of democracy to try to destroy democracy. We who are protectors of democracy must show the world that we are respectful of human rights; and that under us. Human rights are secure in a way that they cannot be secure in a dictatorship, whether a rightist or leftist dictatorship. Wherever it is in the spectrum of ideologies, in a dictatorship, violations of human rights are a function of … And habit.

Our human rights today are secure in a way they can never be secure in a government run by fanatic extremism, like the a government that has just collapsed in Afghanistan. Today, our human rights are secure in a way they would never be secure in a world lorded over by terrorists, indeed today, the more formidable threat to our liberties is the threat of terrorism. The Secretary General of the UN declared that the September 11 attack struck at everything that the United Nations organization stands for – peace, freedom, tolerance, human rights. By now we all understand the terrorist message. If you don’t obey us, you will die, if you do not surrender your belief in favor of our own, you will die. If you do not renounce democracy you will die. You cannot be free until you capitulate. Terrorism aims to take away the core of our existence, our right to live with our dignity and liberty. Thus, the war against terrorism is a war we must win. For the consequences of losing it are a return to the dark ages when barbarians and wolves were at the gate and human rights were unheard of. I don’t know if the future belongs to our side. But I know there will be no future if our side does not prevail in this fight against terrorism. At least no future that any of us will care to live. In fact, it will not be a future in which most of us will be allowed to live in. It will be a future where happiness is suspect, delight is blasphemy, beauty is a cause for shame, and independent thought is a capital crime. We can only succeed in beating terrorism if we refuse to succumb to our fears, if we refuse to surrender the belief we hold in society today, if we keep faith in democracy and humanity.

These days I am focused on what needs to be done to address the war against terrorism. And in winning the battle against poverty in the Philippines. The 2 priorities are very linked, as human rights and development are very linked. Development facilitates enjoyment of human rights including freedom from want and deprivation. Democracy empowers people to defend their rights. The Philippines today is a fully functioning democracy with a free and untrammeled media. And it is almost impossible for any infraction of human rights to go unnoticed for an extended period. We are fortunate too that our people as a whole are more enlightened, that we have a broadened middle class, and that the global revolution and the dissemination of information and knowledge has provided a fertile ground for the development of a national concern that we have to be more protective of human rights to keep pace with the universal standards of democracy.

Good public information, as mentioned earlier, is one of the major keys to promote and protect the rights of every individual. And I hope that the programs and projects of the commission, the subject of the agreement today, will serve this purpose. The CHR has developed an extended information campaign for all students in the secondary and colleges levels called human rights schools, college and universities linkages, or hr schools, where they will become information desks where all students willing to participate in the dissemination of human rights information.

The second program is called Huriguide, which stands for human rights government unified information dissemination system. This program will cater to Filipino citizens through the respective government agencies and local government units. The DILG is included in our agreement. With these projects, the information, education and communication fund per agency may be used for our human rights desk and other related projects.

The masses are entitled to be deeply aware of their rights and liberties as well as their responsibilities as citizens. In this awareness, they will be adequately equipped to…tyranny and repression of yes, terrorism. The people should never again live under the cloak of dictatorship here in the Philippines. The beauty of democracy is that the liberty you have in your hands is the same liberty that I have in mine, .no more no less because human rights is a birthright. And as long as these are people like you who are in this hall today who believe in and work hard for the cause of human rights, our democratic way of life will be secure.

Finally, on the occasion of human rights day, I hereby declare a Unilateral Cease-fire with regard to the New Peoples Army starting today until the 6th of January.

Thank you and let us all continue to protect the human rights of our people.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Human Rights Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212016/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8772&Itemid=38