Thank you very much Secretary Dayrit. I think I saw Secretary Pagdanganan earlier, Secretary Pagdanganan, Cesar Jaime, the president of AFP-RASBS, Winston Garcia, the president of GSIS, wow! Winston, you have a lot of friends here, Elmo Juridico, the PHILSA Vice Chairman and ECC Executive Director, hey! Many also. Miru Kimlo, president of HDMF, Honeygirl De Leon, chairman of PCSO, Cora Dela Paz, president of SSS, our moving spirit behind the Universal Health Insurance, Congressman Boboy Syjuco, speakers and resource persons led by Mr. Warner Blenk, the sub-regional director of ILO, other members, participants of this first National PHILSA Convention, distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen.

This gathering represents the dreams of the ordinary Filipino. For a better life, a life without fear, without uncertainty, without suffering, without hopelessness. That is what social security seeks. Social security addresses the important issue of poverty where the poor are financially assisted. The elderly are helped by the young and the sick are helped by the healthy.

The majority of Filipino families are now covered by Philhealth, by health insurance, congratulations to Philhealth. The Employees Compensation Commission has also reduced the processing time for case decisions from 70 days to 45 days, congratulations ECC. Oh, is that true? Why is there murmuring?

GSIS computerized the pension and loan management system, good luck. Hopefully, this computerization will soon help clear the backlog. PAG-IBIG increased the loanable amount from P500,000 to 2 million for housing, congratulations. RSBS, when I first assumed the presidency, the weight of the losses I inherited was heavy. But in a short new presidency, it has already recorded a profit of 39 million pesos, congratulations.

And today, I would like to announce the launching of the SSS Pensioners Day. This is a project to reach out to always a million social security and employees compensation pensioners. Because while we are waiting for SSS to fix their actuarial soundness after the bad investments we inherited, this is help for the pensioners.

The pensioners day project provides free medical and social services to SSS pensioners. For now, it is once a month. It started last Friday and it will be held at the SSS head office every last Friday of the month and will soon be replicated in all the other branches of the system. If this is successful and our pensioners value it, maybe we can do it more often.

Today, so thank you SSS for finding a way to help our pensioners even as you are fixing the actuarial soundness.

And today, everybody knows about this. We are also launching a new service for the Filipino family, Universal Family Health Insurance.

Because in my short presidency, we have reached a majority of families covered by health insurance. Of course, that is a down payment. The next installment, we will now try to make it universal. We go for universal. Why? Because many of our countrymen remain sick because they cannot afford treatment, hospitalization, especially they cannot afford a downpayment in the hospital. So, many are not accepted. And for the head of the family, one day of illness is one day without food for the family. We borrow from neighbors to pay for the hospital, medicine, and doctor. If surgery is needed, the patient is often brought home if they cannot pay. This should not be the case. The desire of the ordinary Filipino is health. That is why I signed Executive Order 276 which directs Philhealth, PCSO. That’s why Honey Girl is here, even though she is not an insurance company. DBM, DILG, and other agencies to work together to identify poor families who may be included in the program.

All those covered by family health insurance or Philhealth will be given either free or subsidized hospitalization. Depending on how much the expenses are. This includes payment for the room, doctor, medicine, laboratory, x-ray, up to surgery if needed. To strive to graduate from majority coverage to universal coverage, we will allocate P3 billion for it. Half will come from PCSO. So, Honey Girl, this isn’t organizing, she’s a guest of honor. The other half will come from the national government with a budgetary outlay that we will expand in 2004, what is called financial assistance to local government units, as a subsidy for the health insurance premium of indigents. The truth is hard to face about the lack of availability or access to health services, but now, we are now facing it squarely.

This, as we said, is a downpayment on changing society. But we must follow this with some more installments to complete it. And the best way of helping the poor through social security will be by shoring up the finances of all the social security agencies. And how do we do that? By pursuing our investment and employment programs so that more employees can pay the premium. We have made a strong start in just a short period of my presidency.

To undo the economic and political mess that we inherited. But I am happy to report that now we have made a strong start. Just last year 2003, foreign investments surged 23 percent. And this last month of January 2004, investments in the economic zones, surged 400 percent. P1.8 billion on January 2003, P.5 billion January 2004. A strong positive support of our economic platform. In the coming months and years, this will create many jobs. So many will be able to pay the premium. Then the day will come, hopefully not long from now, that the actuarial soundness will be able to add benefits. But even now we must address the needs of the ordinary Filipino. Health insurance must be brought to all families.

In this, I hope to be able to count on your support health insurance, and other social security agencies and human resources of our country. And in turn, you can count on my support as well. Together, let us secure the future of the average Filipino.

To all of you, congratulations for the good work done. Good luck, for the good things planned. If we all succeed in your program, this is a victory for the ordinary Filipino family.

Thank you very much, congratulations to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching of Philippine Universal Health Insurance. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090929/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5652&Itemid=38