Thank you very much Ning-Ning for your very beautiful introduction. It's good that women support women. Thank you very much Ning-Ning. Are there any women among the Guardians? Ah, okay. And I also want to greet, Secretary of Interior just arrived, Joey Lina. Joey, you weren't late. It's only 10 o'clock, we just started early, right? And you can all sit down now.

I also want to greet the one who gave us the welcome, who turns out to be a Guardian, Mayor Cesar Perez of Los Baños; and the master founder of the Guardian, Liborio Jangao. Thank you very much for founding this organization; I also want to greet my very capable recently retired CIDG, Nestorio Gualberto; and of course to Bernard Corella, congratulations again; and to all of you.

I also want to greet the director of our area where we are, Patricio Faylon. Thank you for welcoming us here; and our leaders of the soldiers and police — here is Sol Commander, General Roy Kyamko; here is also PNP Regional Director Ike Galang; and he came from over there, from the 7th Division but he loves you and us very much, General Boysie Braganza; here are our city mayors of the big cities in the province of Laguna — Mayor Lajara of Calamba, Mayor Aquino of San Pablo; and also our handsome Vice Governor, Dan Fernandez; all of you, friends:

I am happy to be with all of you today. (There! There are female Guardians.) Many of you have come from far provinces and traveled here to attend the Guardians Convention as an anti-crime organization. This is proof of your sincere desire to fight crime, which is a serious plague in our society today.

I commend you for your theme: “New Perspective, New Feelings, New Meaning.” because before, your desire when you started the guardians organization — meaning, be relevant to the reforms in the uniformed services. Now, new meaning because we have new challenges in our society so you still have meaning in our society today. So I congratulate you on that.

I believe in your sincere desire to participate in the government's efforts and cooperate with most of our countrymen to accelerate the reign of peace and progress in the country.

I know you are sincere because I know the work of some of your leaders because they have been with me for a long time in the work. And you too, when I go to the provinces, some of you I know and I see your sincerity to improve our community.

Change is really needed if we want our lives to continue to be meaningful. A lot has changed since the guardians started so many, many years ago. More than a decade, right? Now, there is modern technology, our communication with the whole world is getting faster. It's the age of information technology that didn't exist before. It's the age of globalization that didn't really exist before. We have it because there is technology, there is globalization, we have mobile phones that reach other countries, the Internet reaches other countries, other means of communication. It's also easier for most people to travel to other countries. So it's great that you have an international network.

But along with the benefits of technology, the spread of evil has also accelerated, such as terrorism and other international crimes. Now, even terrorism is multinational. Even crime is multinational. In the words of police jargon, transnational because of technology and globalization. If you have good intentions, technology helps, globalization helps. But it also helps bad guys so that's our challenge.

For this reason, we need new ways to fight crime. And we especially need a new perspective for everyone who wants to join the fight against criminality.

So I commend you for your initiative to cooperate to defeat terrorism and other types of crime in the country.

I greet, first of all, because he just retired, I want to greet General Gualberto. He was my very good CIDG chief. Because I can't forget, on top of his good work over his career, his last hurrah he was still able to accomplish something. He suppressed the syndicates of fake videos, he shut down the biggest fake video factory just a few years before retirement. He suppressed millions of fakes that were confiscated, a large factory, a billion-peso factory that was shut down, many had been trying to achieve for a long time but failed. But General Gualberto did it.

On that night when they raided the factory, the very large factory, the biggest of them all. Because isn't it, in our country we were already placed on the watchlist for intellectual property rights so there were many raids. Bong Revilla I made chairman, but his… General Gualberto helped him in operations. He said, there were so many raids, so many confiscated in the stores. But according to those in charge of intellectual property rights abroad, including America, I hope you can also get the factories. Ah, that will come. And it came during that time, one night in Valenzuela.

So they called me because it was major, you know. Major accomplishment because we had been trying to do this for years. They called me at the fake video factory they raided. When I went there, I congratulated them, and I said to General Gualberto because he was about to retire, “what a fitting curtain call for your police career.” But even though his career as a police officer is over, I still expect that his role in my administration is not over. He has a second career that I expect will help me build a strong Republic of the Philippines.

And General Gualberto, even as I hope you will continue to serve in my administration in a new capacity, I know that you — Major Jangao, Bernard Corella and all of you here who are leaders — I know and I hope and I’m confident that you will inspire the rest of your colleagues who are all over the country and even all over the world along the road of responsible citizenship.

I know all of you here today want peace in our land, for you played a vital role in making EDSA I the country’s first bloodless revolution. That's why you were meaningful then, you are still meaningful now.

I am grateful that along with your new vision — you gave me your resolution earlier — you pledged full support for my administration. Thank you very much for your support.

The various activities you have undertaken this year indicate your mission of relevance and involvement in nation-building.

As stated in your vision statement, this signals a rebirth towards a more rational, calm, and just pursuit of our goals.

I welcome your advocacy of democracy, unity, peace, stability and progress.

These are the very same aspirations of a strong Philippine republic — democracy through strong institutions of representation, peace through strong institutions of conflict resolution, and stability through strong institutions of law and justice.

Many are saying, “the president said, strong republic. But where is the strong republic?” A strong republic is like a building. These buildings were not built overnight. So I said let us start building this building of a strong republic. And to have a building of a strong republic, we need peace and development. But if we want to maintain peace and development, we also need a strong republic.

And let’s therefore start working for a strong republic by working for peace and development. Peace and development go together, just as the fight against terrorism and against poverty go together. Solutions to poverty are indispensable to the resolution of irrational violence.

We have seen this in our own history of conflict especially in Mindanao where Major Jangao is from and where many of you have been assigned. That’s why whether I am abroad searching for alliances or in our own country, at the end of the day, it’s always about the economy and improving the lives of our Filipino citizens.

You know this because you are there, you are immersed in the field. Poverty breeds the recruits of terrorism. And I think you see it. You can perceive as I perceive the masses need constant and continuing care and concern.

All of you here know that no nation should cower in fear before terrorists for that would mean conceding defeat. We must instead unite and find strength in our concerted actions to vanquish these evildoers, those who use religion and ideology to force their views and their way of life upon the people.

You know this especially since many of you have fought terrorists in various forms throughout your lives and careers.

The Abu Sayyaf remain a threat, but a diminishing one. We have worked to crush their armed soldiers and break up their intelligence cells. Yes, solitary acts of destruction are still possible. What is increasingly more difficult for Abu Sayyaf is extensive, coordinated military attacks.

Even with regard to solitary acts of destruction, our police and military forces have conducted significant raids and intelligence operations that led to the arrest of the mastermind of the bombings in Mindanao and metro manila and the seizure of tons of explosives.

Regarding Mindanao, the problem in Zamboanga was quickly solved due to the cooperation of, first of all, the CIDG for the very first week. Liborio Jangao was also with the CIDG and we shall push forward unrelentingly. The men and women in the field are inspired by the victories they have achieved.

But counterterrorism is a long drawn out war. It is not a campaign plan, a battle off where that is. Not a battle of Abubakar, not a battle of Pulomuhaji. Long drawn out. Terrorism and other crimes will not cease merely with the arrest of today’s terrorists and other criminals.

Nor can we just leave the fighting to the police and military forces in active duty. There is need for a full support from a committed citizenry especially you who have been in these fights before.

I, therefore, welcome your efforts to activate your network against crime and terrorism. The strong republic needs volunteers like you because you have a very high sense of vigilance and civic duty.

There are many ways to distinguish yourselves as active anti-crime volunteers.

The DILG, Joey Lina, recently drew up its 10-point police-community plan which spells out areas of police-civilian cooperation. I am endorsing this plan for the adoption of all your networks.

Specifically, the plan calls on private citizens to report to their own city or town mayors, barangay captains or police officers the presence of suspicious persons or cargos within their municipalities.

The intelligence-gathering process of our police forces depends on the quality and accuracy of the information provided by civilian volunteers. This cooperation has made possible the apprehension of significant amounts of explosives and bomb materials recently.

The plan also seeks the cooperation of the owners and managers of buildings, offices or stores in adopting appropriate safety and security measures within their establishments.

Likewise, the plan seeks the help of NGOs, and you are NGO. It seeks the help of church groups, civic and other organizations to conduct information and education campaigns on dealing with terrorist threats and other crimes.

You can be a special group among our alert citizens. So, I am asking general Gualberto to draw up a proposal and other papers for the conduct of orientation seminars and training for you to be handled by the PNP.

Training should make your members a cut above the rest of the involved citizenry. But you have already proven your discipline. So, just a little technical training regarding these aspects on terrorism, you can definitely do it.

I’m aware of your economic program as well through your multi-purpose cooperative. Didn’t you remember last year, I approved a one million-peso loan from my president’s social fund for this purpose.

I’m sure this fund was used well to improve the lives of your members, especially those who are not so fortunate in their own lives.

I’ve also been informed that Congressman Unico of Camarines Norte has agreed to guarantee a downpayment for a portable ice plant to be operated by you. Congratulations for your resourcefulness.

The strong republic calls for action among citizens in the spirit of volunteerism.

Our strong republic needs the total cooperation of committed civilians to defeat crime.

Our strong republic requires the efforts of all citizens to fortify our economy and win the war against terrorism and poverty.

The strength of the republic lies in unity and cooperation.

So thank you for being here. I think I want to assume that means you are with me.

Join me always. Let us build a strong and stable Republic of the Philippines.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st National Convention of the Guardians Philippines Anti-crime Organization, Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210023/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8467&Itemid=38