Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo, for your introduction.

And to all of you, my friends, thank you very much for joining my birthday celebration today. You may now be seated.

You know, earlier in Pampanga, I said my gift to myself was that I wouldn't have a speech, because truthfully, I don't really like giving speeches. But please bear with me as I simply thank everyone who did something to make my birthday meaningful for my loved ones and for the poor of our country.

Earlier, I started with a mass in Lubao because every year I attend mass on my birthday there in Lubao, and after that, I went to two resettlement sites for victims of Mt. Pinatubo—one built by the private sector and the others by the government. And today, I am happy that 25 families who were victims of Mt. Pinatubo now own their own homes. This is part of what we want to happen in our government: that every year, 300,000 families will have homes. We want 150,000 families, those called squatters, to have the opportunity to own the land they occupy. And we achieved that target for this year in 2001; and we also want 100,000 people employed in housing, and we expect Congress to pass the securitization law and the asset management law soon so that banks will have liquidity again to lend to workers; and for 50,000 families, we want those who are the poorest in our country to have homes.

After visiting the resettlement area, I went to a barangay in my hometown of Lubao, in Barangay San Roque, Dau, and I planted rice there with the farmers of that barangay, and what we planted was hybrid rice. Hybrid rice will give farmers a net income of 35,000 pesos per hectare in irrigated areas. This is help that came from our visit to China, 50,000 hectares is our target for this planting season in April and 80,000 is the target for the planting season in October. That is what we did earlier to announce this program of ours, which is very important for the modernization of agriculture.

And this afternoon, in our modernization of agriculture, one of the things we did today was inaugurate, by remote control, an irrigation project in a remote area in Sogod, Southern Leyte. And that, for eight million pesos, will benefit twelve thousand families, right? Twelve thousand farmers… Oh, hectares… Oh, 112 farmers will benefit because without irrigation, you can't plant these new types of rice or palay. Now, this is a very important thing we are doing in different barangays throughout the Philippines.

And speaking of barangays, earlier we also had lighting installed in a barangay in Lobo, Batangas—a very, very remote town in Batangas because it's on the mountain of Batangas City—and this is because we also want to announce that in our State-of-the-Nation-Address, we said that we want four barangays to have electricity every day. And earlier, to prove that four barangays will have electricity every day, the union of cooperatives throughout the Philippines held their oathtaking here, and while they were taking their oath, Father Francisco Silva whispered to me that these unions, this federation, are ensuring 1,000 linemen to install lights in Lanao del Sur.

Poor Lanao del Sur, Lake Lanao is the source of electricity for Mindanao, but the towns of Lanao del Sur have no electricity for decades. So we are trying to fix what happened to those who were unjustly treated.

Those are some of the things we are doing, and earlier, we also inaugurated some bridges—this is the president’s bridge program. So because I am 55 years old today—I don't know why my age is being announced—55 bridges have been completed, the president’s bridge program. And on top of that, there are more bridges, the Salam bridge programs for our Muslim brothers and sisters. These are help for remote barangays, and as we all know, in Sulu and Tawi-tawi, we are having… Oh no, in Sulu and Basilan, we are having conflicts, but I always say that the fight against poverty is intertwined with the fight against terrorism. People might think that we are just putting projects in areas where there is war—so we should just wage war so we can put in projects, that's what they might say. That's not it, we are also giving rewards to peaceful areas—to communities that are striving to improve the lives of their citizens.

So this display you see here is a bridge in Tawi-Tawi. Tawi-Tawi, they have suppressed the Abu Sayyaf in Tawi-Tawi, so this bridge is a reward—that bridge is worth 71 million pesos—for the people of Tawi-Tawi so that we can give attention to that distant world in Southwestern Philippines where there is a lot of war, but there are also peaceful places and we should reward them if the citizens themselves are bringing peace to their area.

We want our citizens to have affordable medical treatment and medicine. So Honeygirl gave us medicine, but it was a donation, for my birthday, but every day there is medicine available at half price in government hospitals—25 kinds of medicines commonly bought by the poor but we can find in 75 government hospitals. And for medical treatment, I thank the Rotarians, St. Luke’s because they are providing free kidney and heart operations—those who came up here to express their gratitude, but that was because it was my birthday. But every day we are distributing health insurance so that all the poor, starting in urban areas, will have support or a subsidy from the government when they seek medical treatment.

What we are doing now are symbols of what we really want to do on a broader scale, direct service to the poor.

Our Rotarians, whom I thank, adopted the manggahan in Ricardo Ismael. That is a so-called squatter area, it's long, and we will provide for it. Although they adopt it for community projects, those who live there in the frequently flooded area of manggahan will finally—because we are fixing the relocation problem—have flood control. And hopefully, in a few years, they will no longer get sick or have a difficult life because the water reaches here every year during the flood season.

This and other things we are doing today, as I said to Manny Sanchez, list all these gifts, but he couldn't even keep up with the number of people adding gifts. So I just say that what we are doing today is just a symbol of a large-scale program against poverty.

But above all, my friends, if we want to fight poverty, what we are doing today are examples of our direct benefits to the pro-poor. But as I said in my State-of-the-Nation-Address, there are four parts to our fight against poverty. One of those is direct intervention, the examples of what we are giving now. But the first and foremost of those is… And the other is the modernization of agriculture, which I used as an example in Pampanga because most of our poor are in rural areas. But above all, if we want to eradicate poverty in a sustainable way, the answer to that is jobs, jobs, jobs.

Therefore, I am grateful to the investors in our country because they provide jobs.

Yesterday, U.P.S. invested 300 million dollars, and yesterday was also a very wonderful birthday gift to me, even if it wasn't intentional. These different international credit rating agencies used to say that our credit and investment worthiness was negative. First, Fitsche said a few months ago that it was okay, stable, because of the leadership of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Now, after January, Moody’s said it was stable because we were surprised that Macapagal-Arroyo could achieve her budget deficit targets. And now, the third, Standard & Poor said that the Philippine economy was stable, but they all say it's because of the leadership of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

It's my birthday, so let me brag a little because if I don't brag, everything will just be criticism after criticism, and all shortcomings will be targeted.

But they say, what is the importance of these ratings? It's a big deal because credit rating is important for us to get investments in the Philippines, and investments are important for jobs, and jobs are the most important thing of all to eradicate the poverty of our country.

When I assumed the presidency, our unemployment rate was 11.3 percent. Now it has gone down to 10.3 percent because in the past year, one million, five hundred citizens have found jobs. But I am not content with 10.3 percent, there are still many who are unemployed. Perhaps three million or four million are still unemployed. That's why I ask all of you to work together so that those who are unemployed can find jobs.

I mentioned how we are fighting poverty through our program: first, finding jobs; second, modernization of agriculture; third, direct assistance to the poor so that they can immediately feel the blessing of the government's love. But fourth is good governance, honest management.

So when we had the celebration of Edsa 1 and 2, we said that honest governance is the answer to poverty. So friends, join me in making our government honest. Join me in eradicating poverty and providing a good life for our beloved countrymen.

I love you all. Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during her 55th Birthday Celebration and the Opening of the President Diosdado Macapagal Highway. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230100/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7651&Itemid=38