It is an honor and a privilege for me to meet with you all again. First of all, of course, to once again convey to you the recognition and gratitude of our countrymen for your kindness. And thank you for giving a good name to all Filipinos here in Italy because of your generosity. Almost every time we talk to an Italian, they constantly praise the Filipinos.

Then, from what I saw earlier, our next generation of Filipinos, including our former seminarians, and Mr. Concepcion who is an expert artist here in a place with so many artists. By the way, to those from Pyrennes, thank you for coming here, from Naples. You really look at home here in Italian society. Well, why wouldn't you, our perspectives, culture and beliefs are similar. As Cardinal Sanchez said, our faith here is the capital of our faith. We are the third largest Catholic population in the world, but I think that although of course there are many shortcomings in every society, as the Cardinal said, we are number three in Catholic population but number one in the devoutness of our Catholicism.

Look at the policies of our country, we don't have divorce, right? Family is very important. Our policy on family planning is natural family planning, we don't have the death penalty, we are pro-life. And that's why, I think, one reason why Italians have a very good view of our Filipinos. Italians of different walks of life admire you, even when I spoke to the President and Prime Minister last year, or when I spoke to ordinary Italians, they say good things about your good manners. It's not surprising that among all the overseas workers here, you are the ones most liked by Italians, they like Filipinos the most.

So, according to the work of Ambassador Lhuillier, three thousand Filipinos enter and work in Italy every year, and only a few countries are given this privilege. Like when someone sang earlier, we are proud to be Filipinos when we all hear the good things being said about you here.

Last year, your servant was here and some of us met, and one thing we discussed last year was the request we made to the President and Prime Minister, because your servant contacted them, for Italy to recognize the Filipino driver’s license as an important agreement. Do you remember what we talked about? Thank God, congratulations! Ambassador, it has been fulfilled now. Isn't that right Ambassador, the Filipino driver’s license is automatically converted to an Italian driver’s license, so it will be easier for Filipinos to live and work here in Italy and it will also open up new opportunities in transportation services.

In addition to these, we have another good news for our Filipino people here. Due to the recommendation of the Ambassador, we are now instructing the Department of Foreign Affairs, and this is already known, it has been approved by Secretary Romulo, to lower the passport fee. The passport fee will be lowered from 65 Euros to 50 Euros. And the fees for affidavits, certifications, notarials will be lowered from 32.50 Euros to 25 Euros.

Why wouldn't it be? You are great heroes, our overseas Filipinos, with your sacrifices and concern for your work, your family, and your country. Ten percent of our country are overseas Filipinos. This is remarkable. The richer country Portugal has ten percent of their Portuguese working abroad. And New Zealand surpasses us, a first world, first world country. New Zealand has 25 percent of them working abroad but with different circumstances. In New Zealand, where your servant came from with Secretary Romulo, they told me that even if their child is working abroad, the mother and father in New Zealand are still sending money to their child working abroad. But our Filipino people abroad, in Italy, you are the ones sending money to your parents and family.

Thank you and you send 600 million dollars a year to our beloved country. You know, in 2001, when I first became President, I met eight million Filipinos abroad. Now, it's still eight million because while some leave, some return. But the overseas Filipinos, although the total number hasn't grown, the amount they send home has doubled. The seven billion I met before 2001 has become 13 billion dollars now. So thank you very much. As they say, this is because our overseas Filipinos are now investing in our country rather than just sending money for the basic needs of their families. So you should really be called not just OFW or Overseas Filipino Worker but OFI or Overseas Filipino Investor.

You invest in education and health, there are even those donating classrooms. You invest in real estate, buying land, buying houses, buying condominiums. Do you know that now, and real estate is truly flourishing in our country? Forty percent of their market is overseas Filipinos. So thank you very much for expanding our housing market because housing is the biggest multiplier in all industries, creating the most new industries and jobs. And I also know of investors in financial capital such as the stock exchange and mutual funds, and many overseas Filipinos are funding small and medium enterprises of relatives. So thank you very much for that.

But, my dream is the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad. Our dream is that overseas work will be just another career option and not the only choice you often have to earn a living. Like New Zealand, they are rich. If they go abroad, it’s a career choice. They found a good job, better or they were promoted, not because if they don’t go abroad they won’t be able to survive. I hope our economy is like that. So we are focused on the economy, we are improving the regions of our country, striving to distribute wealth so that our people can find work in their own country.

In North Luzon and Mindanao, we are growing agri-business. In the Urban Beltway, that's from Subic, Clark, Manila to Calabarzon, Batangasport, we are putting industry there and call centers and other services. And lately, Texas Instruments of America announced that they will add one billion U.S. dollars in investments in Clark. And they chose Filipinos even though other places, two large provinces in China and Thailand, were courting them, but they chose to put their investment in our Philippines.

Our call centers, business process outsourcing, that's from Baguio to Clark-Subic, Manila, Cebu, Davao. When I started my presidency, two thousand people were working there. Now, there are 250,000, a two billion-dollar industry. So I believe we are breaking the cycle little by little, where you still need to go out to find work. I like to think that as the years will come increasingly we will be keeping our best and brightest right in the Philippines, closer to friends and family, helping our communities, and providing the next leadership of governance.

It's good here in Italy, your children are here. Italy is welcoming to the families of Filipino workers. Italy, along with Hong Kong, has the best laws for Filipino workers. And now the laws are also improving in England because we want you to go there because you prefer to, not because you need to go abroad. So in our efforts, in the first quarter of 2007, the Philippines, our economy, grew by almost seven percent. This is the highest in almost two decades and part of this is the talent, patriotism and diligence of the great Filipino worker who is investing in our country.

Housing really contributed a lot to our GDP. And 40 percent of that housing was a contribution, not actually one-fourth, 40 percent is a contribution from our Filipinos abroad. In 2004, when overseas Filipinos first voted, the highest percentage voted in Europe, the Italians, 62 percent of you voted. And if we look at the top ten in the world, you are among the top ten in the world. Indeed, that was a Presidential Election, I won here in Italy, thank you very much to all of you. Now in 2007 again, the same number of you voted, and it proved to the world that democracy in the Philippines is alive and well.

These are undeniable signs of how deep your concern is for our Motherland and its future. You show in your actions your desire to remain part of our great nation-building work, even though you are far from your home. And although you are far from your home, as I said, we already feel very much at home here. Congratulations! To our compatriots who have been given the extraordinary privilege of sitting on town councils as Consiglieri Aggionte, congratulations! Yes, because according to Italian law you can speak in town councils about matters and issues that affect fellow Filipinos. So even more so, defend the rights of Filipinos here.

Your unwavering love for our country is truly an inspiration to us all. Your deep pride – as our singer said earlier, “Ako ay Pilipino, Taas Noo” – your deep pride in being Filipino lifts up Filipinos everywhere. And I hope we will continue to support all our compatriots in the Philippines and around the world, in effort and prayer because through our faith comes the betterment of our beloved country.

Again, thank you very much for the opportunity to connect with you.

Long live the Filipinos here in Italy!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].