Thank you very much, Chief Justice Davide; Mrs. Davide.

Speaker Belmonte; members of the diplomatic corps headed by his Excellency Archbishop Franco; Members of the Cabinet; Members of the Senate headed by Senator Rene Cayetano; Supreme Court Associate Justices; visiting Chief Justices and Justices; Supreme Court Officials; Judicial and Bar Council; retired Supreme Court Chief Justice Fernando and the other retired justices; Court of Appeals Justices; Sandiganbayan members headed by Justice Garchitorena; members of the Constitutional Commissions on Independent Bodies; Mayor and Mrs. Atienza; ladies and gentlemen:

It is my great honor to join in this celebration of the Philippine Supreme Court’s centennial.

On this occasion, the message we proudly proclaim to all nations of the world is that good governance which is premised on justice and the rule of law is strong in the Philippines, defended by a judiciary that is fiercely independent by any international standard.

We proudly proclaim, as the bible’s reading said today, that the kingdom of heaven is at hand, that god rules the Philippines, because we have a centennial supreme court that enjoys the great respect of our people because of its integrity.

Democracy cannot flourish without a free and credible judiciary. The Supreme Court is an essential pillar of Philippine democracy.

Apart from being the bastion of justice, the interpreter of the law, the official guardian of civil and human rights, and oftentimes, the unofficial government watchdog, the bench, especially the high court, is our people’s conscience, the guarantor of its peace of mind, and our people’s psychological comfort zone. The Supreme Court is the strongest judicial bulwark in our system. As long as the highest tribunal has the respect of the people, democracy will be safe in our country.

Chief Justice Davide was named the Filipino of the year 2000. His role in the impeachment trial and in the call for me to take my oath of office as president last January 20th and the role of the supreme court justices on three 13-0 votes regarding my legitimacy — the legitimacy of my president — have again thrust the supreme court into the highest consciousness of the people, and in so doing, the supreme court has underscored the ascendancy of the rule of law in our country.

The high standing of the Supreme Court in the hearts and minds of the Filipino today underscores our historical record as Asia’s oldest democracy with the longest legal tradition. From Spanish law and American jurisprudence, we have now evolved our own legal culture with a wealth of precedents. The Supreme Court’s ruling on the incapacity of the former to perform the functions of the presidency last January was one of its many landmarks over its hundred years of existence. And as it celebrates its centenary, the Supreme Court now has an auspicious opportunity for building the future of our judiciary. The judicial reform program instituted by the chief justice is bearing fruit and is appreciated by our people.

For instance, the expanded use of mediation which I helped launch last march as we saw in the video is a fitting tribute to the centennial celebration of the Supreme Court. It is an official recognition of mediation as a modern form of conflict resolution engendered by the reemergence of democracies. And let me say that what we have seen tonight, the multi-visual, multi-media presentation and the way that the whole program has been conducted tonight is but an illustration that indeed, the Supreme Court is well on its way to e-justice — electronic justice, paperless justice — bringing the Philippine Supreme Court right into the third millennium.

Of the three branches of government, the judiciary is the one that provides constancy of direction. Members of congress have to face the judgment of their constituents every three years. Holders of the highest posts in the national and local levels of the executive branch must also present themselves to the verdict of the people through the ballot.

In contrast, the members of the judiciary are appointed almost for life. Thus, they reinforce the Filipino sense of continuity especially during changes of administration. Because its members are appointed for almost for life and are more carefully chosen, the judiciary reinforces, indeed, the Filipino people’s sense of continuity because it is important that whenever we have a change of administration we have something that is continuing. We have the civil service but we also have the judiciary. In more ways than one, like the diplomatic corps and the military, it is a model of professional civil service. Its autonomy helps foster an internal culture of reward for excellence and penalty for mediocrity. For this reason, the members of the judiciary must indeed be carefully chosen.

When on January 20th of this year, i took the option provided by Chief Justice Davide to take my oath of office as president at noon of that day, I declared among my core beliefs that:

“We must improve moral standards in government and society in order to provide a strong foundation for good governance.”

Improving moral standards in government and society mainly involves the judiciary. This is so because it is the judiciary which interprets what is right or wrong and what is lawful and what is not. Thus, it is essential that the process of selection of the members of judiciary be in itself a model of high standards. It is essential that the screening process by the judicial and bar council be one of strict adherence to high moral standards, especially because the process is not as public as the screening process provided for Cabinet members, senior diplomats and ranking military officers in the commission on appointments.

I wish to quote Chief Justice Davide’s words in the Davide watch. And he said: “members of the judiciary and court personnel must unerringly adhere to the constitutional precept that public office is public trust and he continues, dishonesty, immorality, incompetence, inefficiency and any form of unbecoming conduct are impermissible. Indeed, wonderful words to hear from the Filipino of the year 2000.

The same requirements of integrity and honesty should be applied to all other public servants. In the executive branch, I have consistently campaigned for the observance of the highest standards of integrity and morality, especially among my Cabinet members, for they must lead by example.

My first administrative order prohibits government agencies from entering into any business contracts with my relatives and those of my husband. I have also banned the use of luxury vehicles by government officials and ordered their immediate disposal through public bidding. These measures will not necessarily eliminate graft and corruption at once but they are essential to set the tone for integrity and a modest lifestyle which are important ingredients of honest and effective governance.

Under the executive order number 12, I have also created a presidential anti-graft commission, a stronger one than its predecessor body. This commission is designed to strengthen our institutionalized measures against graft and corruption. The body is composed of a chairman with the rank and privileges of a presidential assistant ii and two commissioners with the rank and privileges of presidential assistant I.

The commission is empowered to investigate or hear cases against all presidential appointees occupying starting from the positions of assistant regional director up to highest rank of Cabinet member. It has the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas and it can also call upon and secure the assistance of any office, committee, bureau, agency or department in the executive branch including government-owned and controlled corporations. It can conduct studies on its own and in cooperation with other government agencies or NGOs, on new measures to prevent and minimize the opportunities for graft and corruption at all levels of the bureaucracy. And to ensure its administrative efficiency, it is exempted from the prohibition against hiring of new personnel as prescribed in administrative order number 100.

The presidential anti-graft commission will put more teeth in our campaign against crooks and thieves in government.

In close partnership with other government agencies and non-government organizations, it can, and it will make the goal of good governance hopefully, a clear reality for our people.

I am also developing the concept of a governance advisory council to be composed of respected leaders from the private sector. I view this body as a key strategy for demonstrating that our country is transparent in governance and that it does not and will not tolerate corrupt practices.

The council will be a body of private sector industry statesmen and women appointed by the president for a fixed term. It will be advisory to the president on a range of governance issues. It would use its stature to reform corporate and government behavior using such instruments as codes of conducts, awards programs and policy round tables. It would seek system-wide solutions to the governance and corruption issues it is tasked with advising the president on.

Its members will be private and will receive no emoluments from government. It will be advisory to the president. Its secretariat will be funded privately.

Under the terms of reference of the council, governance shall be defined as the manner in which power is exercised in the management of a country’s resources for development and in an organization’s resources for growth and profitability.

The holy bible, which states in proverbs 21:3: “to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice. Justice is the primary service delivered by the judiciary.

I am strengthening the anti-graft commission and forming the governance council because I am inspired by the leadership of the Supreme Court and its drive towards integrity.

There can be no nobler initiative than to ensure that all the courts are able to deliver justice efficiently, effectively and quickly. Justice is inseparable and indispensable to good governance and democracy.

Hopefully, the presence of an anti-graft commission and an advisory commission on governance will demonstrate the seriousness in which my administration takes good governance to heart because that is the least i can do with the Supreme Court rulings on the legitimacy of this government.

The scope and coverage of the commission will be the promotion of corporate governance within the private sector and industry, facilitation of reform among regulatory agencies, and the projection of a strong anti-corrupt practice of this government though the development of a strong code of ethics for organizations and individuals of all types.

Programs that may be developed and promoted by the council would include:

1) the promulgation of a Philippine code of corporate governance; 2) the development of a Philippine corporate governance awards program; 3) the promulgation of a code of ethics to guide anti-corruption practices; 4) a study of tax evasion and reforms in the area of tax process simplification; and, 5) a study of how to strengthen the judicial system in dealing with graft and corruption.

I commit the full support of the executive branch to the judiciary’s worthy endeavors, especially the Supreme Court. We in the three branches of government have common aspirations, and our nation and people can only benefit from whatever cooperation we can extend to each other in the course of providing public service of the highest quality.

I proudly reaffirm this administration’s commitment to justice and the rule of law. Nothing less than democracy itself has been on trial in this country, and I submit that it has survived stronger than ever, thanks in no small measure to the integrity and the probity of such men as Chief Justice Hilario Davide.

Tomorrow, we celebrate our independence day. It is providential that the Supreme Court’s founding anniversary is so close to our country’s commemoration of independence. An enduring judiciary, bound by the rule of law and not of men, is required of a truly independent and democratic nation. A high court with the highest integrity and capability guards not only the nation’s sense of justice but also its freedom and liberty. I am heartened that the centennial Supreme Court is one that enjoys a reputation of the highest integrity and capability.

I celebrate with the Filipino people the centennial of one of the proudest judicial traditions in Asia. It is a tradition that produced some of our noblest statesmen.

In behalf of the Filipino people, I thank the Supreme Court for standing by the side of freedom, constitutional democracy and good governance in the finest traditions of Chief Justices Cayetano Arellano, Jose Abad Santos, Jose Laurel and Justice Claro Recto. I am one with the Filipino people in felicitating the members of the Supreme Court on its glorious centenary.

Long live our Supreme Court! Long live justice in the Philippines! Long live the Filipino people! And people, let us unite in respecting our Supreme Court, our judiciary.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 100th Anniversary of the Supreme Court of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213624/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8643&Itemid=38