Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 79th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Women’s University (PWU)

[Delivered at the PICC Plenary Hall, Roxas Blvd, March 8, 2002]

I am very happy to be here today with the community of the Philippine Women’s University, especially on this very important day, the day for women. It is appropriate to begin the celebration of Women’s Day by being with the Women’s University. And on a personal note, being with the Philippine Women’s University on this very important day for women, makes me feel that I am with a woman whom I love very dearly, even up to today beyond her life, my mother the late first lady Evangelina Macaraeg Macapagal, herself an Alumna of Philippine Women’s University.

Actually, even I did some studies in PWU, not academic studies but I learned some lessons with the Bayanihan being taught by no less than mommy Urtula, herself. This was when my father was president of the Philippines and there were occasions when, specifically for the king and queen of Thailand, and the Crown Prince and princess of Japan who are now the Emperor and Empress of Japan. My mother decided that the cultural presentations would be done by me, and so I took lessons with Bayanihan, and I was very happy that at that time, I learned much about the repertory of Bayanihan, and the dances that mommy Urtula taught me were new dances that she had just discovered from her research all over the Philippines. And so it made me very familiar with how Bayanihan works, not only by making everybody a skilled dancer, but also by doing research and therefore bringing out many hidden treasures of our culture and making them part now of our public property. I appreciate Bayanihan for all the things that I learned then.

And of course, you my dear graduates, I congratulate our graduates of this year. You are the pride of family and kin. You are the pride of your institution, you are the pride of our nation. And as we have been saying today, today is International Women’s Day. Today, the world honors women as the pillar of the home, the workplace and society.  As women, our historical struggle is steep in glory and achievement, sacrifice and heroism. But sadly, millions of women around the world still struggle for emancipation and freedom, we must continue to embrace their cause with fervor and zeal.

Until every woman is liberated from the shackless of oppression, ignorance and poverty, there will be no real peace, no real justice, no real progress for mankind.

I sincerely thank the PWU for the Hiyas ng Pamantasan Award presented to me. I humbly accept it as part of the continuing honor bestowed upon my family by this institution.

In his time, my father, the late president Diosdado Macapagal – I believe in this very hall – also received the Conrado Benitez Centenary Heritage Award for being the shining exemplar of the finest virtues, and the noblest tasks that make a man and president of his people, a truly great Filipino.

My mother – that was in this hall for sure, because I still have photographs of that – was awarded in 1992 the Francisca Tirona Benitez Medal of Merit. I am awed by these honors and I thank you with all my heart.  After all, as I said earlier, my late mother was a Philwomanian, a graduate of PWU’s High School – she was an intern, even her piano was an intern and some of her best friends then became her best friends all throughout her life until the end of her days. She was always proud of her days at the Philippine Women’s University.

The values inculcated – diligence, achievement, the quest of good and decency – continue to guide me and my family. These values were nurtured and reinforced in the very halls of the institution of Philippine Women’s University.

The hallmarks of achievement are abundant in your great university. As mentioned earlier, yours is the oldest women’s university in Asia. And one of its founders was the legendary Francisca Tirona Benitez, a champion of women power. Even in the male dominated early 20th century, she saw. The value of education in shoring up women’s awareness of their rights. She also founded, not just the PWU, but the civic assembly of women in 1946, the forerunner of the national commission on the role of Filipino women.

The graduates of your institution were molded by the illustrious former senator Helen Benitez. And Tita Helen is the only Filipina who has served as the chairperson of the UN commission on the status of women. And under her stewardship, the Bayanihan Philippine Dance Folk Company which I spoke about, because I had a chance to dance with them or learn to dance from them, again, won the gold temple trophy at the festival of international folklore in Italy, early in February this year.

The Women’s University counts among your graduates, national awardees. Dr. Luz Belardo for Science, Dr. Lucrecia Urtula for dance, and of course, our Dr. Lucresia Kasilag for music and happy that she is still with us today.

PWU was also one of the first proponents of the integration of our various cultural communities. It enabled Christian women to understand Filipino Muslim Culture dating from when the sultan of Sulu. By personal invitation of Francisca Tirona Benitez, sent his daughter Princess Emily Kiram, and her cousin Mrs. Rada, to study at the Philippine Women’s University.

Many peace – loving Muslim Filipinas have gone through these halls Among them, Dr. Emily Marohomsar, a peacemaker in her own right. And when I was learning how to dance at the PWU, the daughter of my father’s secretary for general services, Tomas Sinsuat, was also friend, who was studying at PWU at that time.

PWU is also a trailblazer in distance education. Enabling many Filipinas to pursue learning without leaving their jobs or homes. It is one of the few universities that require the learning of both academic skills and moral values through its social and civic education courses. You, indeed, have upheld a tradition of excellence that must be sustained and preserved.

I am glad that you have also stepped forward into the information age as mentioned by Dr. Benitez. You have been at the helm of e-Learning , eBusiness and e-Commerce you have developed a system approach to gender and development programs and projects. You have set up a star learning network which puts together modules on governance, leadership and peace and order management. All these are relevant to development, progress, good government to a just and progressive society.

It is my policy to encourage schools to tap information technology to provide more students access to higher learning. This is in line with my commitment to make education more accessible and affordable to the broad masses of our people.

In this light, I take note of your suggestions to hasten accreditation of your Masteral Distance Education courses.  The pertinent standards for this are now being hammered out by a panel of experts within the Commission on Higher Education. This panel is coordinating closely with the information technology and e-commerce council, and urge you to team up with the CHED in this effort with common standards and norms we can and we shall create an irreversible impetus for distance learning as a tool for national consolidation and development.

Nevertheless, I am directing the CHED to review your proposals in consultation with all other affected institution of higher learning. I would like CHED to submit to me its findings and recommendations by April, 3rd of this year.  Let us do this consultation and consensus so that we can move forward as one, undivided force for education and development.

Education for every Filipino is the key to stability and progress. The underpinnings of a globally competitive workforce are an empowered and literate citizenry. Education will bring comfort, security and peace into our lives. Education will strengthen our democracy. We are promoting various modes of delivering quality and relevant education. We are implementing measures that open new educational opportunities for the poor. We aim for better relevance by strengthening our foundations in science and mathematics. We are improving the physical institutional and social infrastructure that allows information and communications technology to flourish. We shall pursue these aims unswervingly. We cannot relent because to do so will only breed more poverty, social injustice and conflict.  The empowerment of Filipino women is vital to the overall quality of our human resources. We have a long way to go before we can truly say that our women are fully empowered. Even as I speak, poverty in the Philippines still has the face of a woman.

Many Filipinas continue to suffer from physical and emotional battery. Values have to be changed. Social and cultural structures have to be unraveled and transformed.

Last year, I instructed the national council on the role of Filipina women to draft a framework plan for women to incorporate existing and the emerging women’s concerns. And after this graduation ceremony, I shall launch these plans. It will provide a more concrete basis for agency planning and budgeting on gender and development. It will address the gaps in present gender mainstreaming activities. The plan pays special attention to women’s economic empowerment and human rights. These are my two causes as far as women are concerned.

Women economic empowerment in my administration. We want to enroll one million women over the three and a half years that I am President in the micro finance program, so that these women will be able to employ themselves and, therefore, be economically empowered. That is my flagship program for women’s economic empowerment. On the matter of women’s rights, yes, it is very important that we protect the human rights of women as head of government, head of state, a commander-in-chief of the 16th most populous country in the world. And being a woman head of state, woman head of government and woman commander in chief, it is a great opportunity to be able to promote women’s human rights: right against abuse, right against exploitation.

Earlier, Dr. Benitez acknowledged that I have gone all over the world to preach the philosophy, that the battle against terrorism is interlinked with the battle against poverty. Let me add also that in those societies where terrorism is the rule, those societies also have exploitation of women as a primary characteristic and in those countries where democracy is the rule, those are the countries where women’s rights are most respected. And therefore, the battle against terrorism, the battle against poverty is also a battle for protecting women’s human rights.  One reason why I am very adamant that we must defeat the Abu Sayyaf by all constitutional means within our power is because the Abu Sayyaf, being the ultimate terrorists, are also the ultimate abusers of women’s rights. The women hostages, one after the other, have become more brave in recent times during this administration. And one by one, they had given us their horror stories of physical rape and abuse that were inflicted on them by the Abu Sayyaf.

And so if we are going to talk about the US soldiers coming here to train and we fear exploitation of women, they’re here to prevent exploitation of women by the Abu Sayyaf. They are here to prevent rape and physical violence by the Abu Sayyaf. And while we are at it, we have also made sure that soldiers will also respect the human rights of our Filipino women. That is why the visiting forces commission has become very very small now. From so many members in the previous administrations, there are only three now: Secretary of Foreign Affairs, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Social Welfare. And that is to make sure that women’s human rights are protected even when there is a war, even when there is a partnership among strategy allies, and the rules used to be couched in very very diplomatic language. They used to say that the soldier should be confined within the camp. And I say, whether they are confined or not within the camp doesn’t really tell us what you want them to do. Because they can be confined within the camp and bring the women in. So I would rather that they not be confined within the camp necessarily, but I would rather that the rule be very clear that visiting forces are not allowed to procure the services of prostitutes. And that is how we have been open about the rules of the visiting forces in this administration. Cuentas Claras.

Under our very forthright statement of rules, statement of principles, and the program and the plan for women, the very poor women and rural women shall be our primary beneficiaries. We are currently, as I said earlier, pushing for the grameen bank strategy to cover one million women, which means 300,000 very poor women every year.  We also hope to improve the implementation of measures that uphold women’s human rights. As I mentioned earlier, as an example of today, very graphic, the women raped by the Abu Sayyaf, and the rules against the acquisition of prostitutes, services by soldiers. But we shall also focus on more generally abused women, violence against women, the protection of the girl child , and measures to combat trafficking of women and children.  On another horizon, we must recognize child birth and child rearing as vital societal functions. Our framework plan shall propagate awareness of responsible parenthood, which includes awareness of reproductive health issues and advocate that parents should be responsible, meaning, they should determine between themselves how many children they can afford to raise. And having determined how many children they can afford to raise, it is important that their choice of implementing their decision he made in accordance with their religious and cultural beliefs. This, therefore is our general policy regarding women, their economic rights, their human rights and their role in responsible parenthood.

I am very happy to have the opportunity to give these principles today before you, the community of the Philippine Women’s University, because this university has been in action, not only in works; a leading promoter of women’s rights and opportunities. And I trust that this university through its administration, through its faculty and through its graduates, will continue to promote women’s economic and human rights into the 21st century. Graduates, congratulations. I am a very proud to be a part of the PWU family. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 79th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Women’s University (PWU). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230331/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7632&Itemid=38