Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the National Day Reception

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, June 11, 2005]

Thank you very much, Governor Aumentado and all the local government officials for your expression of support.

Vice President Noli de Castro, President Cory Aquino, Secretary of Foreign Affairs Bert Romulo and the other appointive officials of the Philippine government, His Excellency Archbishop Antonio Franco and the other members of the diplomatic corps, friends, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Our friends in the diplomatic community are indispensable to the success of the Philippines. Together with our local government leaders present in this gathering, you are as much a part of the fabric of the Philippines as the threads that make up the Philippine flag.

The economic relations between the Philippines and the world are fundamental to the very strength and survival of the Philippines. As the poet John Donne so famously wrote: ‘no man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main.’ nothing is more true for the island nation of the Philippines.

Let me be very clear: we need the world. We need markets, investments, trade, culture, tourism, new and modern ideas. We’re connected to the main and must be. We don’t live nor can we live in a vacuum, separate from reality, in a land of make-believe.

I’ve put my beliefs into action. I’ve led with strong political, economic and diplomatic engagements in the region and in the world. I like to believe they’re a hallmark of my administration. Through trade agreements, military alliances and a focus on macroeconomic fundamentals, I’ve put the Philippines back on the map after a period of drift and retreat.

I take the role of the Philippines in the world very seriously. I believe it’s in the best interests of my nation and our people to learn, grow and prosper with the rest of the world. Oh, Chief Justice Davide, I’d like to acknowledge your presence too. Good evening.

Closer to home, I’ve focused like a laser beam on fundamentally reforming our national economy. I’ve taken the painful but necessary steps to raise revenues, reform collections and present a fiscally responsible budget. I have felt the political heat, but I’m still in the kitchen. I’m still in the kitchen because that’s where I belong: to continue to make the tough choices to turn this economy around. And no one will deter me from that mission.

Unfortunately, there are those in the Philippines who’d like to believe that the Philippines is an isolated set of islands, adrift from the world, unconnected from the main. That somehow the Philippines is nothing more than a private sandbox for political intrigue. Well, I want to tell you: this view is dangerous and irresponsible.

It’s dangerous because we live in a democracy, however imperfect that system might be. It’s irresponsible because it damages the lives of the very poor we’re trying to serve.

We cannot resolve our differences by tossing out the democratic process just because we’re not getting our way — that’s extreme. We cannot help the poor by undermining investment, driving away employers, and not investing in new infrastructure and social programs — that’s madness.

Yet this extreme madness is precisely what the purveyors of instability and intrigue have begun to sow. The global marketplace has already taken note of their destructive behavior. They must be responsible for their actions and understand the consequences for the nation.

I remind those who would believe their actions are unconnected to the fate of the nation to take heed of John Donne’s final words: ‘never send to know for whom the bells toll; they toll for thee.’

In contrast, I thank the union of local executives for joining us in a covenant of unity for urgent change and reform. I thank you local government officials for being earnest partners in protecting the democratic institutions and ideals that have been under siege.

Local executives and ladies and gentlemen of the diplomatic corps, I salute you for being part of the main and part of the strength of Philippine independence in this interdependent world in which we live.

On this note, I propose a toast to all the nations of the world and all the people of the world represented here tonight, that we may all continue to advance the peace and prosperity we all deserve.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the National Day Reception. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412081118/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5083&Itemid=38