Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the National Geographic Society Coral Triangle Initiative Program Stakeholders’ Forum

[Delivered at the Grosvenor Auditorium, National Geographic, Washington, D.C., USA, July 30, 2009]

Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Yap for your introduction.

Mr. Fahey, president and CEO of National Geographic; Madame Weiner; Madame Ellis; Dr. Sala; oh, Mr. Francis Tiu Laurel, president of Frabelle Fishing; Ladies and Gentlemen:

As some of you are aware, I am passionate about the environment and the Coral Triangle. And we were able to share some of our passion on climate change, earlier today, I believe — thank you, Arty during… — not only here with you but also earlier in the White House with President Obama.

And because of our passion against climate change we have our desire to reassemble a stakeholders working group meeting on the Coral Triangle. And in this action, we could think of no host better than the National Geographic Society, thank you so much. Actually, this organization should be called the International Geographic Society rather than a National Geographic Society because children from across the globe have grown up reading the famous yellow-bordered magazine, learning about the exotic and glorious world in which we live. I was one of those children. And our Senator Miriam Defensor Santiag, who’s here with us today, was also explaining how she was one of those and at least one of my children is also that way.

But I was also saying that now in this generation, you don’t even have to be an avid reader, you don’t even have to be especially interested because you turn on your cable TV and you watch the National Geographic Channel and I know a lot of people who are not intellectuals, not environmentalist, not conservationist but they love to watch National Geographic. So you’ve done a lot to make people aware.

The Society’s mission resonates loudly: Inspiring People to Care about the Planet.

During times of economic hardship, the pressures are greatest to abandon our obligation to the environment or to loosen the rules. This is why at this point in time we must come together in the world community and be even more vigilant in advancing efforts to conserve the six million square kilometers that form the resource-rich Coral Triangle.

The Coral Triangle is potentially the world’s most important refuge for marine life. But only if we do, if we all do our part to protect it from further environmental degradation. It’s time to rebalance our approach as we work to develop strong economies, to provide employment, and maintain the sacred relationship between human beings and Mother Earth.

The political will of the governments of the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and Timor Leste, the Coral Triangle six countries to protect the Coral Triangle is high. At a time when the world is focused on bad news associated with the global economic crisis, the Coral Triangle Initiative driven by our six nations is good news. The countries responsible for the stewardship of the waters and resources of the Coral Triangle have created a strong and united force to keep our biodiversity intact, our food resources strong, and our environment pristine.

During a meeting of the leaders of the Coral Triangle held in Indonesia last May, we agreed to a series of new commitments to safeguard the world’s richest marine resources and to ensure the income and food security of millions of people in our countries who depend on the resources of the Coral Triangle for their livelihood.

In our Leaders’ Declaration on the Coral Triangle Initiative on Coral Reefs, Fisheries and Food Security, we adopted a comprehensive plan for the conservation of our marine and coastal resources. The ten-year regional plan of action sets time-bound steps to address not only the growing threats to the region’s coral reefs, fisheries, mangroves, threatened species, and other marine and coastal resources, but also the challenge of climate change.

This initiative also recognizes the urgent need to tackle the poverty affecting the people throughout the Coral Triangle region, especially those in coastal communities.

Climate change and the management of our coastal areas are linked inextricably. A great human tragedy that will arise from climate change will be the migration that will be forced by sinking coastlines and in some cases, such as in Tuvalu and the Maldives, even sinking countries. As more sites are rendered inhospitable to human life and economic activity, as many as one billion people may be affected globally and half of them will come from Asia. As families scatter to upland sites throughout the globe, climate change will spawn global change.

This is something the countries of the world must address together and for us. As a nation of over 7,100 islands, this is something that is of great concern to the Philippines. If the flood waters rise, you may lose Florida; we lose a nation.

So, we the fellow Coral Triangle country leaders agreed that we would bring our collective voices into the U.N. Framework Convention on Climate Change. We want to make an impact on the climate change dialogue. And we want to call on all countries, but in particular the major industrialized developed countries, to live up to the UNFCCC obligations, including affordable and appropriate technologies, and funding for climate management.

Economic development and national stability depend on parallel initiatives aimed at environmental sustainability and social equity. We must aim for this as one living planet.

One of those parallel initiatives is our effort to conserve the marine and coastal resources of the Coral Triangle. Aside from political will, however, to achieve this goal, it will also take the collective efforts of our six nations, our development partners, including the support that is already being provided by friends such as the United States, the NGOs, the domestic and international business, and private citizens around the world.

This is not an either or proposition. We must find a win-win solution to not just stopping the degradation, but also restoring and enhancing our fragile ecology. We rely on the sea for food, jobs and pleasure, and we cannot allow this resource to be further compromised.

One approach to that solution begins with the Regional Plan of Action, I mentioned earlier, adopted by the six Coral Triangle countries with the support of donor countries and such NGOs as Conservation International, the Nature Conservancy, the Worldwide Fund for Nature — I keep calling it Worldwide Life Fund, the old name, but now it’s Worldwide Fund for Nature — among others, and National Action Plans created by each Coral Triangle government. These national action plans are specific programs with commitments of the financial and human resources needed to bring a halt to the practices that have jeopardized the future of their Coral Triangle and resources found there.

For our part in the Philippines, our National Strategy to protect our marine resources is focused on an Integrated Coastal Management approach to the sustainable development of our nation’s coasts, oceans and marine resources. As part of this program, we are working at the community, local government, provincial, district and national level on the twin goals of coastal resource management and climate change mitigation and adaptation.

The National Strategy also includes support for the conservation of important species and the management of several protected marine areas including the Apo Reef Natural Park, the Turtle Islands Wildlife Sanctuary, and the renowned Tubbataha Reefs National Park, which is a UNESCO World Natural Heritage site.

In addition, we are carrying out a program, in cooperation with Conservation International, to prepare a master plan for a second priority seascape in line with the regional plan of action and our own national plan. That seascape is the South China seascape, it covers more than 800,000 square kilometers, so that is our second seascape. The first seascape being the Sulu-Sulawesi Marine Eco-Region. The seascape plans focus on the management of protected areas and networks and an ecosystem approach to sustainable fisheries management.

We are also working on a bilateral basis with our fellow Coral Triangle government partners, especially on the sustainable development of the fishing industry, and tuna in particular, with the help of our private sector who have major investments in our region. Together we want to protect the juvenile and spawning grounds of tuna in our own part of the Coral Triangle. We are also working towards the sustainability of the live reef fish trade in Palawan, which is a major source of livelihood for restaurants all over Asia and beyond.

We have made great strides in engaging the traders and industry players in Palawan with the help of WWF, and we look forward to the day when Palawansourced seafood is recognized as sustainable seafood. We can only achieve these goals on fisheries with the active participation and input of the private sector. So, I look forward to your involvement.

As you can see, the countries touched by the Coral Triangle are not sitting idly by as the marine resources of this vast and rich area are subjected to the challenges of human degradation and climate change. The very valuable work being carried out is being supported by our own resources and the resources of our development partners, NGOs, the private sector, and individuals. But much more needs to be done.

So, in that regard, I call on all who are concerned about the future of our oceans and our seas to share the story of the work being done to preserve the Coral Triangle. Of course, I would be honored if we could find a way to work with the power of the National Geographic Society to bring our story to the world.

So, let me quote in closing the late French undersea explorer and oceanographer, Jacques Cousteau. He said, “The sea, the great unifier, is man’s only hope.” Now, as never before, the old phrase has a literal meaning: we are all in the same boat.

Again, a special thanks to National Geographic and to each and every one of you for your concern about our good Earth.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the National Geographic Society Coral Triangle Initiative Program Stakeholders’ Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100446/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25854&Itemid=38