Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to Dr. Benny Abante, my friend, we have been praying together for a long time. And I thank the Lord that the hero who did a lot to resolve the impeachment crisis, Speaker Joe de Venecia, is also here.

I thank Evangelist David Janney because what he talked about tonight, the story he talked about tonight, by providence — because there’s no coincidence in God — by providence he told the story of Zaccheus. And that is what my Cabinet and I have been reflecting on for three days now, the story of Zaccheus. Because the story of Zaccheus is the story of reconciliation. And that is what we need to be saved and to be surely in the presence of our Lord.

I thank you for being here and not leaving, there are so many of you even though it is raining. Earlier — because the rain was also reaching here, even to me — earlier, some technicians wanted to move my stage. I said, no, because if our brothers and sisters get wet, I should also get wet.

In truth, I have been getting wet since earlier because I came from the province, from Rizal. And there I was walking and it was raining. Because whenever there is an opportunity for sacrifice, I pray and say, thank you Jesus for including me in your sacrifice on the cross. And to everyone, whenever we make sacrifices like allowing ourselves to get wet in the rain, it lessens the hardship of the Lord Jesus on his cross. We share in the sufferings of Jesus Christ by making sacrifice and prayer.

Tonight as we pray, we also sacrifice. Our sacrifice is allowing our bodies to get wet with the rain coming from heaven. Our sacrifice is important. In the Bible, the Lord always asks for our sacrifice for us to be saved. Zaccheus who was called by Jesus, when Jesus called him he reconciled, Zaccheus also sacrificed. He said that whatever he stole he would return four times to those he stole from. And even the wealth he did not steal, half he gave to the poor. That was his sacrifice.

We, our sacrifice is this rain. I remember, this was taught to me when I was studying in the convent, it is called mortification. Because we must have mortification so that our prayer is pleasing and complete and when we are doing mortification, we can ask petitions from the Lord. My question is, what am I asking for tonight and I hope you are with me in asking the Lord, as he returns to us, in our mortification, may he save the Filipino people, Jesus save the Filipino people. Jesus save the Filipino people from sin and evil. Jesus save the Filipino people from those who want to destroy our democracy. Jesus save the Filipino people from those who do not want reconciliation.

Jesus called Zaccheus. Zaccheus was a man of many sins. So the Pharisees said, that Jesus is being nice, look at his companions, they are sinners. That is what we should pray for, that these Pharisees in our environment may be enlightened and see that reconciliation is what the Lord wants for me.

Reconciliation is necessary for us to undertake the reforms that our country needs to eradicate poverty. Because if our society is constantly fragmented, I will have nothing to do as president except defend against those who seek to destroy our society. How can we implement the fundamental reforms for our poor, whom the Lord loves dearly?

Therefore, brothers and sisters, thank you very much that we are together. Thank you very much that we are together in our mortification. We are together in our prayer. Jesus save the Filipino people through our sacrifice in union with the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross.

Amen.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Jesus Saves Crusade Prayer Rally. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140817/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7456&Itemid=38