Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 7th Meeting of the e-ASEAN Task Force

[Delivered at the Oakwood Premier, Ayala Center, April 20, 2001]

e-ASEAN: INTENSIFYING REGIONAL ICT DEVELOPMENT

I would like to thank and congratulate the members of the e-ASEAN Task Force and its members for a job well done; and for the strategy that would define our place and role in the post-Cold War, post-ASEAN financial world crisis, and for helping us mold the e-ASEAN initiative forward. In particular, I would like to commend you on your work on the ASEAN framework agreement on information and communications technology (ICT) products, services and investments. With this agreement, we have signaled to the world that here in Southeast Asia, there is commitment of the highest level to undertake the necessary steps to ensure prosperity in the global new economy.

I strongly support the Task Force’s strategy of complementing policy advocacy with pilot projects. Pilot projects are important to gain widespread support among the citizens of ASEAN for this important initiative. We need to be able to demonstrate that today, even while the infrastructure has not been fully developed, ICT can make a difference in the daily lives of the people of Southeast Asia. I’m informed that the Task Force has already endorsed about 20 pilot projects in information infrastructure development, e-commerce, e-society and e-government. While this is a good start, I hope that by the time the ASEAN Summit in November, if held, there will be more e-ASEAN endorsed pilot projects. In particular, I would like to see more pilot projects in the field of infrastructure development and e-government.

I’m aware that what I’m asking is not easy, particularly in the period when dot coms and text messages have lost their luster and venture capitals are increasingly hard to find, but I have faith in your creativity and your dedication to the task. I know that you will work hard to ensure the continued success of the e-ASEAN initiatives. I am convinced, that the success of the e-ASEAN initiatives to date is largely due to the strength of public-private partnerships that is engendered, and I hope that will continue.

The Task Force has succeeded because it became a mechanism that allowed the private and public sectors to bring their respective comparative advantages together in preparing for the future. This in turn guaranteed that our e-ASEAN initiatives would be responsive to the real world demands, and not to what policy makers or academicians believe the market needs. The ASEAN leaders were indeed wise in creating a task force that is private sector-driven. And, as we move forward with the e-ASEAN initiatives, we must ensure that the private sector is meaningfully engaged in the process of creating e-ASEAN.

The benefits derived from public-private partnership in ICT development are also something that I hope we are able to reach in the Philippines. On numerous occasions in the past, I have spoken on the importance of ICT for the future of the Philippines. I have said that if the Philippines is to prosper in the 21st century, it must find its proper niche in the new economy. I am happy that the private sector has responded to the challenge of creating the new economy by organizing various bodies like the I-Tech and participation by the private sector to the Digital Philippines Foundation. The Digital Philippines Foundation, which has as its leading members business entities and the largest industry associations in the Philippines, the ICT sector, which aims to contribute towards national development, and the promotion of ICT utilization in all sectors of Philippine society, and the promotion of Philippine ICT worldwide. It supplements the work that has been started by the I-Tech, which is what we have inherited from the previous administration and which we continued to do today.

On the part of government, I have created the Cabinet Cluster on ICT, to ensure swift and coordinated government action on ICT concerns. This Cabinet Cluster which is composed of secretaries of relevant government departments will be the lead government body in ICT policy formulation and implementation. This Cabinet Cluster will also harmonize and coordinate all public ICT initiatives, and will attend to cross-cutting issues that cannot be handled by specific government agencies.

In formulating the new economic development strategy and plans for the Philippines, we must focus on the following: first, enhancing the country’s information infrastructure; second, creating and enabling legal and regulatory environment; and third, developing human capital.

For a country like the Philippines, developing the information infrastructure is critical to Our future competitiveness. For this reason, our administration, my administration must pursue as a priority the building of the information infrastructure, or a network of broad-band multipurpose networks that will provide Filipinos affordable access to information and communication services to and from anywhere in the Philippines at anytime. Admittedly, this is a herculean task and we are working at a great disadvantage. Teledensity in this country is low even compared to the leading states in the region. Telephone distribution remains uneven throughout the Philippines. Filipinos in major cities and municipalities have more access in infocom services than their compatriots in the rural areas. But the good news is, we already know the right quality to roll out infocom’s network are in the deregulation and liberalization of the telecom market, which clearly shows that these are the best policies to ensure the rapid and cost-effective delivery of communication services. More Filipinos get more telephones now than a decade ago under a competitive telecom markets than during numerous decades of monopoly. The market, however, is not a cure-all and does not address all issues. Of the 6.8 million telephone lines available to Filipinos last year, only 2.8 million lines were subscribed. Affordability of telephone services, particularly among low-income household living in the rural areas accounts for these deserving situations. It is, therefore, important that we look into how we can establish and use a universal access fund to ensure affordable infocom services in rural communities.

We must also seriously explore the concept of community-based and shared infocom resources, to bridge the information gap between the urban and rural areas. Already, our Department of Transportation and Communications is pursuing a strategy of broadening popular access to basic information and communication services through community e-centers or telecenters as they are popularly known. Unlike existing public call centers, these community e-centers will offer a range of services to local communities including communications facilities like phone, fax, voice messaging and e-mail, and business services ranging from photocopying, word processing and printing services. Eventually these community e-centers will become one-stop shops for online services for citizens. In the future, various transactions in government agencies such as filing of taxes, licensing applications and other similar transactions will be undertaken in these community e-centers. In the more populated areas, the e-centers can provide such ancillary services as Cyber Café, ATM services and other services pertinent to electronic commerce transactions. In remote areas, community e-centers can also function as strategic information bases where farmers for instance can access basic data, statistics and information on weather and meteorological forecasts, farm gate prices, transport schedules and other pertinent information. In order to ensure sustainability, these community e-centers must be managed by local community organizations, cooperatives or entrepreneurs. After the initial establishment of the community e-learning center, the role of the initiating parties will shift to local portal and content development, awareness, creation and capacity-building. I am convinced that the private sector and civil society must play a vital role if these e-centers initiative is to succeed. The establishment of community e-centers will also be facilitated by technological and business development that sees the blurring of the traditional boundaries that made cable TV, broadcasting, telephoning, satellite and new services distinct. Convergence or the coming together of consumer devices such as the telephone, television and personal computer can help make advance infocom services widely available ensuring that the benefits of the information society are eventually availed of by the majority of the Filipinos instead of only by a few.

For government, convergence implies a challenge. As it involves a process of market and industry structuring leading to the emergence of a single economic market based on digitization and networking, the integration of the content and information industries will mean radical changes. It will require a paradigm shift on how policy is made and industry is regulated. Much of the existing laws on communications were enacted with the assumption of single network, for specific services. It is therefore important that our laws are made more relevant to current economic and technological realities. Towards this goal, I will transmit to the next Congress as a priority measure, a comprehensive convergence bill that will define the principle, qualities and administrative and regulative framework that will allow digital convergence to flourish in this country. An important principle that will be inscribed in this proposed convergence law is competition.

Convergence can lead to full service companies that are even bigger than the ones that are currently existing. In the Philippines we are already seeing the merger of two leading cable companies, the telecom companies buying into a TV station, and telecom companies offering convergence services. While this development is in response to market developments, government must ensure that the emergent ‘entities will not engage in anti-competitive practices. The proposed convergence law that I will transmit to our legislature will also include the creation of a government agency that will define policy for the ICT sector, as well as a regulatory body for this sector. The creation of a Department of Information Technology and Communications and the reorganization of the National Telecommunications Commission into a National Infocom Commission are important elements in our national new economy strategy. Beyond building the Philippine information structure and creating a policy and regulatory environment supportive of the new economy, the government should also focus on human development.

The demand for technology-savvy knowledge workers have increased as ICT continue to penetrate and transform organization of market in the workplace. This poses an enormous challenge to all education institutions, to be able to adopt both the contents and the method of the training that they provide in order to prepare their students for the digital economy. I am not talking here only of computer literacy but the development of higher order formative skills such as abstracting, planning, critical thinking and problem solving. For in the digital work places of today, the knowledge workers’ comparative advantage does not simply lie in his word processing skills or his ability to do broadsheet, but in his ability to think strategically in a complex and highly flexible environment. Clearly, there is a purely technical imperative for bringing ICTs into the classroom, but e-learning promises more than technical competence. The essence of e-learning is developing critical, creative and strategic thinking through exchange and collaboration. The potential of ICT to enhance learner’s efficiency, effectiveness and engagement are enormous. E-learning, therefore, cannot only increase the productivity of basic literacy skills but can also improve the planning, problem solving and analytical skills of the learner.

We have already taken the initial step in bringing technology to the classroom and e-learning in Philippine schools. The Government PC for Public High Schools Program will bring computers to a thousand public high schools in the country. This modest step is being complemented by various private sector and civil society initiatives aimed at bringing the power of the Internet into Philippine schools. Undoubtedly, there is much to be done, but I am confident that focus on infrastructure development creating and enabling legal and regulatory framework in human development in the Philippines can now begin earnestly, preparing for the global new economy.

The challenge that the Philippines faces in laying the foundation for prosperity in the new economy is unique. The promise of the information economy remains a dream for the vast majority in the developing world. Access to advance information and communication services is largely limited to those in the developed country, or those in the urban areas of developing country. The skills set required to be employed as knowledge workers is possessed only by a minority in the country. This Great Divide threatens to deepen the gap that already separate the rich and the poor in many countries, but we in ASEAN are fortunate. The governments of Southeast Asia are responding to the challenges of a new economy, from Brunei to the People’s Republic of Vietnam, national ICT efforts are being intensified. At the regional level, we have the e-ASEAN initiative. Our e-ASEAN Agreement remains the only covenant among developing countries on coherent strategy for regional ICT development. We cannot afford, however, to be complacent because we cannot afford to be left behind. Fortunately, if recent events can serve as a clue to the future, there is reason to hope that as an individual nation and as a region, we will prosper in the new century – the century of information – the century of technology, and because we are doing what we are doing in e-ASEAN, I hope it will also be the century for Asia.

Thank you.

Source : University of the Philippines Main Library