Thank you very much Secretary Claudio.

Our leaders of the party, those on the head platform and those of you who are all on the floor welcome to the National Convention of LAKAS KAMPI CMD. Our party is the dominant party of our generation. Our party has been the largest political party in the country for 15 of the last 17 years. Seventy two percent of the country’s elected leaders are part of us. Think of it: almost three out of every four elected leader is a party member. This overwhelming majority confirms that our party is the true party of the people.

We were a coalition of LAKAS-CMD and KAMPI. Now, this coalition is a full-fledged national political party. The Commission on Elections has upheld the validity of our merger. We have successfully hurdled the legal challenges thrown our way by those whose personal interests were prejudiced by the merger. It is now time to consolidate our ranks and fortify our Party for the electoral battle ahead.

Let us transform LAKAS KAMPI CMD from the “Party of the present” to become the “Party of the future.” To that end, I am relinquishing today my position as National Chairperson and handing over the reigns of the Party top leadership to the brilliant young standard-bearer selected by the our National Executive Committee, Gilbert Teodoro.

Our Constitution and By-laws reserve the power of nomination to the National Executive Committee acting as the National Electoral College. Nonetheless, though that Executive Committee have sufficed to choose and nominate our standard bearer, our Party leaders have decided to involve a wide membership of the Party, through this convention process represented by you, the National Council today assembled here.

I congratulate the Executive Committee for this far-sighted decision to share the selection process and made that process truly a process of the party leaders from all over the country. This is a far-sighted decision and it keeps the tradition of free, democratic, and transparent selection of candidates that our Party holds sacred.

Thus, we have convened today to nominate and then to proclaim the Party’s presidential and vice-presidential candidates.

Over and above the legal qualifications imposed by law, what we want to do today is to nominate presidential and vice-presidential candidates who possess the idealism, the confidence and even the youth to move our nation forward to win the fight against poverty and bring our country to the verge of First World within a generation.

In the fight against poverty, in the quest to bring our nation to First World within a generation to bring prosperity to the greatest number of our people, our Party has initiated reforms especially economic reforms that were due in no small measure to the vision and determination of our party members in Congress and across the local governments. Our congressional leaders passed much-needed reform legislation. Our local government leaders using your fully released IRA and also your own earnings of an increasingly active business environment, our local leaders stayed on the course of reform, exercises firm political will, and on top of their own local initiatives replicated the national programs in the countryside and in the urban centers. At a time when others, other parties were succumbing to the temptation of settling for the populist line, our Party sustained the reforms and emerged vindicated by an unprecedented 34 quarters of growth that the country enjoyed on our watch, and further vindicated by the resilience that our economy has demonstrated in the face of the global financial crisis. Our sacrifices to achieve these results attest that indeed our Party is the party that holds the nation’s best interest at heart.

The people deserve, and our party is delivering, investments in three critical areas, what I call the three “E’s” — the Economy, the Environment and Education. These issues are central to lifting up our nation and getting it ready for the next generation of leaders. And that is our battlecry — the next generation of leaders.

With our selection of capable, competent, energetic leaders to lead us into the next generation, our national initiative to fight poverty and reach the First World within the generation can succeed. But, first things first. Let us get them elected, elected with as big a mandate as you our leaders in the countryside and urban centers can win from our people, so that they can go beyond building on the gains of the programs of this administration and lead a new reform agenda on pro-people reforms, ever guided by the institutional ideology of our Party, the ideology of Christian democracy enriched by your interfaith dialogue with our Muslim brothers and sisters.

This is a big and arduous task. But our Party has been challenged many times before and has won. The presence of so many familiar faces, recognizable names, not gathered from just anywhere, all leaders, genuine leaders who are all here as many as it can fit in this room, because many leaders elected can’t even find a seat here. So many leaders here from all over the country with a genuine mandate from their own people demonstrate that indeed our Party is a party that can win. With the hard work of party stalwarts, with the hard work of party grassroots, our Party can win the future for our nation.

To further enable to transform our Party from the ‘party of the present’ to the ‘party of the future,’ even before I made my offer to relinquish my position as chair, our Interim President Ed Ermita and our Interim Secretary-General Gabby Claudio, even ahead offered to step down and give way to other dynamic, capable and young representatives of the next generation. I thank them for the hard work that they have done as party caretakers. I congratulate the National Executive Committee for the choices you will make today for the new Party President and the new Party Secretary General. But let it be said, that though we are turning over the highest leadership of the Party to the next generation, our present generation and even the generation before me in our 17 year-old party have much to contribute the shoulders, the backbone will be the party stalwarts who have been there with us all these years.

Partymates, it is you representing the wide membership of the Party, who are selecting our new leaders and our new national standard bearers today. We expect you to stand by the decisions made today. May each and every party leader and each and every party grassroots member work hard and work together for the victory of our Party, our party’s standard bearers, and all our party’s candidates in 2010.

To you all, Long live LAKAS KAMPI CMD!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Lakas-Kampi CMD National Convention. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409181028/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php? option=com_content&task=view&id=26889&Itemid=38