Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Puno for your introduction.

PNP Chief Versoza, Secretary Ebdane and the other former chiefs of the PNP; General Yano, members of the Diplomatic Corps, members of the House of Representatives, awardees, officers and members of the Philippine National Police; ladies and gentlemen: Happy Anniversary sa PNP! (applause)

In his remarks to which we listened very intently, the Chief PNP said this day belongs to the policemen and the policewomen. Indeed, it is a day for acknowledging the sacrifices of our policemen and women who conscientiously do their jobs manning the stations, responding to calls for help, and keeping order in our communities. It is a day for commiserating with the policemen and women wounded in action. It is a day for mourning those who have lost their lives in the line of duty.

Policemen and women of the Philippines, for your courage and dedication to duty, thank you. Thank you for assuring that the citizens can rest easy because the police will keep the peace for them.

We have seen the positive indicators like the crime solution efficiency climbing. We have seen negative indicators continue to go down like index crimes and street crimes and especially bank robbery, kidnapping and stolen vehicle incidents. And we have been reminded in the report of General Versoza that the outcome of incidents like the RCBC robbery shows PNP’s efforts to uphold human rights and follow operational guidelines.

Years ago, when we started the PNP modernization, which you subsequently called “the PNP transformation,” we were saddled by budgetary constraints. But we persevered, stretching our funds. We pushed on to boost the force’s sagging morale in the beginning by implementing a pay increase in 2001 followed by 2002, followed by three other pay increases subsequently — five increases during our eight-year administration. (Applause)

As government revenues continue to go up, we increased recruitment, accelerated training, and boosted equipment and facilities. By the end of last year, we’d increased the force by over 12,000 men and women, so that General Versoza could speak in behalf of 125,000 members of the police force.

And I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on the recent agreement the PNP has entered into with PDEA to fight the evil of drugs. And I enjoin you to cooperate with the PDEA, with the local government units and other agencies, as we crack down on the big drug lords.

Let us wage a fiercer war against them on the fronts of law enforcement, judicial action and policy-making. It is expected that you will tighten your intelligence network throughout the country, which is indeed very vast, and endeavor to eliminate the number of drug cases dismissed due to mere technicalities. The report of General Versoza showed an increase in drug cases filed. Let’s make sure by building up a good case that they will go all the way to conviction.

As for Mindanao, in 2001, I inherited a state of all-out war. Since then, we made steady progress towards permanent peace until the setback of August 2008. With the PNP doing its share in keeping the peace and running after the renegade elements who have broken the law, I hope 2009 will be a come back year for peace, progress and prosperity in Mindanao.

The new Presidential Adviser on the Peace Progress is familiar to all of you, former Chief PNP Sonny Razon, who is here with us today. Congratulations, Sonny! (Applause)

Under Sonny’s oversight, the peace panel has been directed to touch base with our facilitators and the MILF leaders to schedule the resumption of peace talks. The panel is poised and ready to embark on substantive discussions, including ceasefire-related issues, the International Monitoring Team, and accelerated development for Mindanao. We hope all parties are as committed as government to resume negotiations soon.

Our new paradigm for peace includes interfaith dialogue, authentic consultation with the communities, and the principle of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration for armed rebel groups. This approach gives the PNP a more active role in the peace process, for one thing, by helping to activate and strengthen local peace and order councils.

We saw in the report of General Versoza about the two directorates for integrated police operations in Western and Eastern Mindanao. This will be very helpful to General Razon. And these directorates after all were the ones directly responsible for the capture together with the AFP for the capture of JI terrorists and bomb experts as well as other notorious characters. So, to the PNP, congratulations for your fight against the JI and other terrorists! (Applause)

And as reported to us by General Versoza, though he did not say it verbally, we saw it in the screen about the MILF bombers being given… what is it, MILF bombers, right? Yeah, they are called MILF, right? Whatever they were… the notorious bombers were given life sentences. So, that is an important accomplishment because that’s one example of a case that–with your good build up of the case–we’re able to bring all the way to conviction. (Applause)

To advance peace and progress in Mindanao, as in the past, we hope to be able to count on the support of our partners in the International Monitoring Team (Brunei, Japan and Libya); Malaysia who has been an ardent facilitator, our other friends in the OIC, our friends in Europe, and the United States.

Our policemen and women have been valuable contributors to the peace in Mindanao and to the peace all over the country — in the countryside, in the streets — that has brought us uninterrupted economic growth for 36 successive quarters, which is a historical record. Never before did we have 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth. And this growth has brought down the rate of poverty; brought up the annual average new employment; supported seven million microentrepreneurs, some of whom I hope are your families because we have microfinance services just for the PNP. This growth and our revenue enhancement measures — thanks to our congressmen and women who are here with us today — forming the virtuous cycle that has given us the financial resources to increase your ranks and your benefits.

This virtuous cycle has given us the ability to build the most roads in history, from highways to farm-to-market roads; the most ports, from modern airports to the RORO system spanning Mindanao to Luzon; the most barangays electrified; the most classrooms; the most scholarships for high school, college and post-graduate degrees in science and engineering, some of which scholarships I hope are enjoyed by your children; billions of pesos for training, not just millions as in the past, some of which

I hope are enjoyed by your families; and the most land for our indigenous peoples, which I hope include members of the police; and decent homes for our policemen and women.

For our police, we have housing for the PNP such as in Camp Bagong Diwa, Bicutan; Camp Macabulos in Tarlac; Camp Castañeda in Silang; Camp Capistrano in Cagayan de Oro. And you have 400 hectares reserved for you in San Miguel, Bulacan.

In preparation for our celebration today, over the weekend, I talked to the Secretary of the DBM to allocate 300 million pesos for police housing. (Applause) And SILG will confirm to you that I instructed him to have the bidding for the whole amount done in the next few days. (Applause)

With the revenues from the expanded value-added tax and the alcohol and tobacco excise tax — again, thanks to our Congress — we have been able to expand healthcare as never before. Health insurance now covers 74 percent of the population, including policemen and women.

When a policeman or woman dies, the spouse becomes an automatic lifetime member of Philhealth, including the family.

Public hospitals are also being upgraded. I instructed SILG and the Secretary of DOH to include in the DOH upgrading program the upgrading of the PNP clinics serving the poorest provinces in ARMM, CAR and CARAGA, so that they will become not clinics but small hospitals. (Applause)

And today — again, thanks to the Cheaper Medicine Bill of Congress — the poor from whose ranks many policemen and women come, can buy their essential medicines at half the price of year 2000.

And I also direct the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government to increase, together with the DOH, the number of Botika sa Barangay (Village Pharmacies) to be built inside or near PNP camps in Tawi-Tawi, Zamboanga del Norte, Maguindanao, Apayao, Surigao del Norte, Dinagat Islands, Lanao del Sur, Northern Samar, Masbate, Abra, Misamis Occidental, Agusan del Sur, Kalinga and Surigao del Sur. In other words, the areas where you have the biggest populations and the most hungry… the biggest poor populations and the most hungry populations are located.

You interact a lot with local government officials. One of the good side effects of the tax legislation that we have had is that local governments can now avail of 40 percent of the new taxes as additional Internal Revenue Allotment. This enables them to support police operations more. I know how important it is for the police and the local governments to work together. Some of those who receive awards here for outstanding performance are also known to have received a lot of support for their local governments.

But all of this happened because of the reforms we made in the economy and finances of the country. If not for the reforms we laid down before the global economic crisis happened, we would likely now be among the economies struggling to recover from the global crisis.

And we have legislation not only to do reforms but legislation to help the poor directly. We thank Congress for granting new legislation that provides income tax exemptions to annual earnings of as high as 150,000 pesos. This is a bonanza for wage-earners and salaried workers, including the police.

And the government has now developed our Economic Resiliency Plan worth 300 billion pesos. The aim of this large program is to further grow the economy by continuing our infrastructure reforms, taking care of the most vulnerable sectors, and creating emergency jobs.

In that emergency employment, the police are a big help. Since 2001, I have directed that the chief of police of each station should be in our Emergency Employment Program to recruit out-of-school youth who will be given employment. Why do they say the chief of police? Well, because the out-of-school youth who are unemployed are the tough guys on the street corners. So, they only look up to the police, so the police should recruit them, discipline them. And this program is now called OYSTER. Many don’t know what OYSTER stands for. Might as well because we have to give it a name for this particular period of the world economic history — Out-of-School Youth Serving Towards Economic Resiliency. So this is a big contribution of our police to our Emergency Employment and Economic Resiliency Program.

Police, congratulations to you! (Applause) Police, as Sonny Razon said during his time, ‘Mamang Pulis and Aling Pulis’ (Police Dad and Police Mom). What I ask of you on your anniversary is to further intensify your service. Because the people’s view of the police has changed — if before there was fear, there was doubt, now the view of policemen and policewomen has returned. In fact, our people cite the PNP as the number six best performing government agency today. (Applause) And that is indeed cause for celebration especially on your anniversary.

So, to all of you, congratulations for your accomplishment! More power to our PNP!

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 18th anniversary of the Philippine National Police (PNP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105703/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=19021&Itemid=38