Thank you very much Secretary Bebot Alvarez for your introduction of me.

I would like to greet the people of Batangas under the leadership of Governor Dodo Mandanas, Happy Founding Anniversary of the province of Batangas. I would also like to greet the people of Batangas City under the leadership of Mayor Eddie Dimakuha, Happy Fiesta in Batangas City.

I would like to greet the different Governors here from region 4, Governor Reyes, Carmencita is here; Governor Reyes, Joel is here; Governor Ong is here; Governor Marasigan is here; Governor Madrona is here; Governor Enverga is here; and the adopted son of Region 4, Governor Vic Magsaysay of Zambales.

I would also like to greet the different Cabinet members who are here: Secretary Leony Montemayor is here — or has she already left — there she is. And I would like you to get to know, and she is also here, Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process, Eddie Ermita. And I would like you to get to know the Presidential Adviser for Southern Tagalog, Secretary Cesar Sarino. Where is he? I would also like to greet our friends from Japan: Shimitsu, JBIC, Japan Embassy. And our Congress, there is only one Congresswoman here, only Vicky is here, Vicky Reyes is not a Congresswoman here; she is a Congresswoman there in a place in Batangas that also has many industries. But the Batangas port is not within Congresswoman Vicky Reyes’ district, the industries in her district will benefit from the Batangas International Port. Congressman Frank Perez is not here because he is in Hawaii, his father is not here because he has a hearing in the Commission on Appointments.

Now I would also like to greet President FF Cruz of FF Cruz and company, they are the ones who will build this port of ours.

And I would like to greet happy birthday BOI Governor Tony Leviste who fought hard for the bottlenecks of the Batangas port to be removed.

I would like to greet our friends from Asian terminal; the mayors of each town in the province of Batangas; our Southern Luzon Commander, Major General Ernesto Carolina; our regional director of the PNP, General Reyes — he is the caretaker of Nur Misuari here; and also our teachers who are here, the key to the future because they will produce the great Filipino workers.

I have already greeted you all happy Batangas Foundation Day. Happy Fiesta of Batangas City. Happy Birthday to Tony Leviste.

For me, today is very important. So long have I waited for Batangas International Port to begin because these studies started in the Department of Trade and Industry when I was still Secretary… I also want to greet City Mayor Arnan Panaligan because his constituents are the majority who benefited from this project. This project, according to Al Cusi whom I also greet, came from my instructions to the Philippine Ports Authority that a percentage of their income should go to direct pro-poor programs, not just trickle down. So these push carts came from that program, and many of those who benefit are those who work on the other side, at the Calapan port, the constituents of Al Cusi.

And there are those there who have tags, teachers here. I said to Al, are you sure they will benefit from this? Don't think they're just holding onto them. So I said everyone who is holding one needs to take it home, so make sure that they are really the beneficiaries.

So anyway, so long have I waited. And when I was Undersecretary for Policy and Planning of the Department of Trade and Industry, this program was created way back in 1989 to have a Batangas International Port. And my Department—the Office of Policy and Planning—was the one who made this proposal for this Batangas Port. We already processed it with the JBIC, I processed it through many headaches and heartaches—first of all, those who lived in the port area who needed to move to another place to make room for this port. And finally, after a long time, they were also relocated because there were promises that they would be helped.

Earlier, when I came from the helicopter and was in the car, I asked Governor Mandanas, how are those who needed to move? Because the areas where they lived, where the small shacks were built, would be used for the port. Governor Mandanas said they have moved, but the Philippine Ports Authority still has some livelihood debts that they are waiting for. Governor Mandanas said that as his help to the national government because he fully supports it, he will answer and help with the livelihood that these relocated people are waiting for. Anyway, with the many, that is just the first thing and for me, the most legitimate. Because all of this is for the good of the poor. You, the poor, should not think that you are being sacrificed for development, you should feel the benefits.

But there were many bureaucratic controversies, red tape, right of way problems, bidding problems, problems with the interpretation of bidding rules, problems with… Until I became president, I said, isn't the Batangas International Port starting? It's 2001 now, 1989? 12 years.

So when the world economic slowdown happened in the first half of 2001 and I saw that our exports would weaken, I told my economic managers, how can we maintain the momentum of our economy if our exports are falling? Let's find a way to boost domestic demand. So in the first period, the first half year or the first seven months, we focused on small and medium enterprises, agriculture, and the squatters who could buy the land they were occupying. It succeeded because when our growth rates came out, other countries were already starting a recession, but we were still rising. The whole world was surprised. Then September 11 happened. I told my cabinet members that our strategy was correct: we focused on domestic demand, but we couldn't increase government spending because we couldn't increase our deficit because our country would struggle. Now, with September 11, our country is even less secure. So what else can we do to boost domestic demand without increasing government spending? What are the budgeted, pending items stuck in red tape that we can release? Big ticket items of investment, or big ticket items of infrastructure. And it was counted, there were about half a dozen that I said we would give special attention to so that the bottleneck could be unclogged so that the project could start to provide domestic demand despite the long-term fruits of development.

So identified, Philippine National Bank rehabilitation. Thank God it's fixed, there's an agreement on the Philippine National Bank rehabilitation.

National Steel Corporation in Iligan, Secretary Mar Roxas is now in Malaysia to discuss how to do either foreclosure or the asset management company that will handle the assets of National Steel to get it running.

Regarding the MRT loop in Metro Manila, a small portion is incomplete, preventing the loop from being fully closed. Finally, isn't it, Secretary Bebot Alvarez, an agreement has been reached with the contractor—after a long controversy, construction and completion of the MRT will begin in a few months.

And regarding housing, housing has a very large multiplier effect—and we have so many small workers looking for housing, but for many years housing has been weak in terms of payment, and a lot of money has been tied up—we need an asset management company to buy the papers so that the money can circulate again for housing. Layman Brothers were there the other day and that's what they will do; and Sir Bruce, one billion dollars in investments for housing to get it circulating again.

And I mentioned National Steel, Philippine National Bank, closing the MRT loop, housing, and the Batangas port. So, the bottlenecks of the Batangas port were really identified. If it was necessary to use political will to expropriate, political will will be used because we are looking for the welfare of the entire CALABARZON, the entire Philippines, and not the welfare of a few landowners.

So earlier I was with Governor Enverga from Quezon, in a remote area called Tagkawayan where we are still helping coconut farmers on how to have a secondary income. I said, Willy, if the Batangas International Port had been built in 1989 or a few years after that, there would have been so many industries and factories here in Quezon. But now, because of the long wait, we are still providing livelihood, micro-finance, and self-employment to the farmers of Quezon. So anyway, better late than never. Maybe because I became president, this is perhaps one reason why, one year ago on EDSA Dos, the Lord made me a president because the Lord remembered that I was fighting for the Batangas port since I was an Usec. Can you imagine, Usec. Then became Senator twice, then became Vice President, then became President—can you imagine if all that time we still hadn't started this Batangas International Port. So today, as I said, so long have I waited.

Even though today I should be in EDSA because this is the first day of EDSA, I said no, this is the fiesta of Batangas, this is the day where I want us to celebrate a very big event not only in Batangas City, not only in Batangas Province, not only in the life of Tony Leviste but in the life of our entire Philippines because the Batangas port, the Batangas port will uplift the lives of CALABARZON, the lives of the Philippines; the Batangas port will provide more jobs for the great Filipino worker because traffic will no longer have to go to Manila for international trading once this is completed.

So teachers, teach your students well, your brilliant students—they are brilliant Filipino workers, whether in blue collar or white collar because just in time when your children, those you teach, we will also have the Batangas port in our prayers and just in time many more industries will come that will use the skills of the great Filipino worker in Batangas, in all of CALABARZON, in the entire Philippines on this day as the first day of the celebration of the EDSA Dos anniversary, it is a great honor for your servant to be with the great Filipino worker of CALABARZON so that we can celebrate the future of the Batangas port, of CALABARZON and the Filipino people.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Groundbreaking Ceremony of the Batangas Port. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231140/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7600&Itemid=38