Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Favila.

Secretary Romulo, Secretary Teves, the other members of the Philippine government, presidents and officers of the 11 chambers that got together for this International Network of Business Organizations, Donald Dee, representing the Filipino businessmen, ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for being here tonight. Thank you for putting together this very important aggrupation and thank you for inviting me to be with you. And I am here tonight to assure you that we will listen to you, we listen to you, we hear you and we are acting on your recommendations everyday to improve our performance to make the Philippines a better place in which to live and work.

As an economist, I have been praying to believe that government should play a role as a facilitator of growth, not a barrier to entry for domestic and foreign capital and investment. And you all here Filipinos and foreigners are central to our success, as you mentioned earlier, in attracting new levels of foreign investment and expanded trade which in turn creates jobs for Filipinos. I’m a firm believer in the adage that “trade is better than aid.” and my economic team has been directed to work with the domestic and international private sectors to ensure that you have the support needed to promote expanded trade for our commodities, products and services.

We have a world that is now flat, as Thomas Friedman said. And in a flatter world, as Friedman describes the world today, a more well-rounded government is vital to ensure that growth is consistent and that as a nation we build a just and equitable society. And in building a just and equitable society, I’d like to take this occasion to reiterate once again my support for a reasonable wage hike hammered out by the Tripartite Regional Wage Boards.

Through Undersecretary Danny Cruz here, undersecretary, I would like you to take care of fast-tracking the deliberations on ten pending petitions at the regional wage boards. And we must package a minimum wage increase with the bill on increases in income tax exemptions of minimum wage earners which is pending in Congress. Difficult? Well, you have witnessed my administration’s willingness to take the tough and often unpopular decisions to reform our economy and support sustainable economic development. And I thank you, most of you, for having supported me during these difficult times.

Our economy is growing, notwithstanding the political noise that captures so many news headlines. But as Fer Peña said, we’ve grown 5.5 percent GDP, 5.8 percent GNP. The 400,000 growth in jobs is only in call centers, BPOs and mining. If you talk about the growth in all jobs we’re talking about an average of one million a year in the past 5 years of my administration.

Going back to difficult and unpopular things one needs to do, in order to give you a good business climate, no leader anywhere in the world likes or wants to raise taxes. But that is what I had to do. We needed vital money for infrastructure projects, to give a boost to education and English language instruction, and to improve the health and security of our young and growing work force. I know that infrastructure development is high on your list of requirements. And our tax reform measures are finally giving us the capital we need to invest in that critical area and we’re also opening up new areas for private sector infrastructure investment. We will deliver the new transportation and energy projects that business needs to expand trade. We know that certainty of supply of accessible and affordable energy is required to drive your business throughout our country. And we are working to meet this need through such measures as public and private sector investment as well as regulatory and other reforms that will further develop this critical part of our economy.

The backlog of investments that are required to turn the nation around is sometimes daunting. And earlier your President Ram Sitaldas asked me how can you help me? Well, I said most important are your investments to create jobs. But I wanted to expound on that but I left it for talking to all of you and pointing out some of the areas in which I think you can help me. First of all, as far as investment is concerned, we do have a backlog of investments. The enactment of the BOT law, which I authored when I was still senator — Gary, were you the author in the House at that time? Yeah, because Gary and I were always partners in authoring economic measures then — the enactment of the BOT law is recognition of the lack of sufficient capital for the government to undertake all the necessary infrastructure projects in the country. And that’s one way where you the private sector can help.

Under a streamlined private sector partnership program, private-public sector partnership program, the former build-operate-transfer programs have been expanded to cover not only the BOT variants but also other modalities, such as joint venture agreements, concession arrangements and other programs tailored to improve public-private sector development.

Another place where you can help us is with regard to business process outsourcing which has been a particularly exciting growth sector. And this is an area that has the potential to create a hundred thousand new jobs every time I make a speech. It’s not even every year or every two years, every time I have to make speech I had to get myself updated: 2001 it was less than 2,000; a year later it was 4,000; then 8,000; then 16,000; then it just went on and on and on. And every time I make a speech there is a whole number of new entrants into this industry, and even more indirect jobs for our young and highly-productive work force. How can you help us here? I welcome your recommendations on how best to bring more sophisticated value-added BPO investments to the Philippines.

I also call on the international business community and our domestic business partners, business sector, to partner with the government in our efforts to ensure that our young people enter the work force fully prepared for the demands of today’s economy. As I said at the beginning, a flat world requires a well-rounded government to help smooth the rough edges of global competition. And part of that obligation by government is to make sure we measure in more ways than just the economic indicators — GDP, GNP growth, jobs created –other indicators outside economics, the measure of the health and vitality of our nation. And I’m here referring specifically to such issues as corruption, political extremism and security. Let me touch on each of these this evening.

On corruption, we must and we will break the back of corruption in the Philippines. Francis Chua gave you two examples: the 168 operation and the immigration card. And I believe aside from those anecdotes that Francis gave, and I thank him for being very concrete in what we’ve done, we’ve made great strives in government to break the cycle of corruption.

In the SWS surveys of enterprises on corruption, the percentage of enterprises who were asked for a bribe in transacting local and national government permits and licenses, and also in the payment of income taxes went down significantly between the year 2000 and the year 2005. And those who were not asked for any bribes in this and other transactions with the government almost doubled during that period, those who were not asked for any bribes.

And I have issued an A.O. 141 mandating periodic reporting on the use of the e-vat. This is part of the government’s efforts to promote greater accountability and increase the confidence of the general public that the taxes that you pay are used wisely, efficiently and transparently. As many of you who have been dealing with us know, I have enlisted the help of Hong Kong’s top corruption buster, Tony Kwok, who feels that we are making progress. In fact, Tony, would say we are not getting the credit we deserve for the strives we have made.

And of course, there is another more insidious form of corruption, and that is the corruption of our democratic form of government through the use of violence, intimidation and murder. The apparent murder of journalists and political activists is an affront to the fabric of our nation. And I would like to tell you that I am determined to bring to justice those who perpetrate these crimes and will not rest until justice is served even as I am determined to defeat the communist insurgency with the military and social weapons available in our democratic institutions. Are these empty words? I’m glad Francis reminded you about what we were able to do about kidnapping. So with the same fervor that we brought down kidnapping to historic lows, that is the fervor we will use to solve these killings of journalists and leftist activists.

We must turn our swords into plowshares and reap the benefits of working together in harmony and not tearing our nation apart in anger. And speaking of working together in harmony, I believe peace in Mindanao will happen, and when it does it will open up a floodgate of goodwill and investments that will turn that region around. Another place in which you, the ladies and gentlemen of the foreign and Philippine business community, will find many opportunities for investment.

In conclusion then let me say that we must build a strong foundation from the stones of many quarries, fiscal discipline — as mentioned by the speakers earlier — targeted investments — for instance, the private-public sector partnerships that I talked to you about today, the higher value BPO and others that I have been mentioning in previous messages to the business community — job creation, poverty elimination, peace and order, social justice, and press and political freedom.

And I thank each of you here this evening as well as you as a group who have come together, 11 foreign business associations. For also being our rock of granite in the foundation of a stronger, more prosperous, more democratic Philippines.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Joint Dinner of Foreign Chambers of Commerce (International Network of Business Organizations). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213048/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2811&Itemid=38