Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Philippine National Police Change of Command Ceremony of PNP Director General Edgardo B. Aglipay, Vice Director General Hermogenes Ebdane, Jr. (Ret.)

[Delivered at Camp Crame, Quezon City, August 23, 2004]

Thank you, Secretary Reyes.

Commander General Razon, give our troops Tikas Pahinga.

My new National Security Adviser, General Ebdane (retired); the new Chief PNP, General Aglipay and the other officers and members of the Philippine National Police; Senator Richard Gordon and the other elective officials; members of the diplomatic corps; General Abaya and the other appointive officials; former chiefs of the PNP; ladies and gentlemen:

I’d also like to take this opportunity to greet former Prime Minister Cesar Virata.

I preside over this turnover ceremony with a deep sense of gladness and satisfaction.

I congratulate Jun Ebdane as he leaves, after being one of the longest serving chiefs of the Philippine National Police. Congratulations! Jun. Jun Ebdane leaves a legacy of many things that he mentioned in his speech but I would like to add what I have observed, he leaves a legacy of the most extensive personal intelligence network in the country. He built this extensive intelligence network not during the two years that he was chief of the PNP but over the many years since his days as junior officer. You’ve all watched spy movies, James Bond and on. Intelligence networks do not attach to a position, they attach to a person. They come from interpersonal relationships and respect for individual expertise. This vast network that Jun was able to accumulate over his many years in the police is one reason why terrorism has been contained. It is one reason why kidnapping is at an all time low, especially with the excellent teamwork between Secretary Reyes and General Ebdane. This vast network of Jun has also been an important guide for my decisions regarding our peace process especially with our Muslim brothers. Congratulations! Jun for that unique and significant accomplishment of your police career.

I don’t want that vast network to go to waste, to fade into the sunset, and so I have asked Jun to carry this legacy to the office of the National Security Adviser where policy and international linkages mark the name of the game. And so it is fitting, as Jun reminds us, that he’s also been the leader of the ASEAN chiefs of national police.

I take this opportunity to prod him about his ASEAN connections, develop them some more even as we thank him for his leadership within ASEAN during his tenure as chief of the Philippine National Police.

I take this opportunity to express to our ASEAN neighbors and especially the people of Malaysia the appreciation of the Filipino people for their help in our peace process. I thank Malaysia for facilitating the GRP-MILF peace process, and this has strengthened mutual trust and confidence across the negotiating table. We shall continue to forge peace in Mindanao through third party facilitation, through the deployment of an international monitoring team to seal stability on the ground and the sustained deployment of multilateral development partnerships. All these can also be done through the work of our National Security Adviser. Because of the help of the whole world including our ASEAN neighbors, especially our ASEAN neighbors, things are looking up. Almost all displaced persons have gone home and normalcy has returned under the aegis of tolerance and harmony. We will carry this process, this peace process forward as a major component of our political stability and economic development.

I thank General Aglipay for putting the services of the police at the disposal of our ten-point legacy.

A recent survey of the Bangko Sentral says that business confidence is rising in the post-election period. One of the main reasons for this is our peaceful and credible elections reflecting the true mandate of the people. And let me take this opportunity to thank all of you, the men and women of the Philippine National Police, for your role in the peaceful and credible elections, and your devotion to democracy. Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. The other reason for business confidence is that our business leaders, our business community know that we do not deceive the people on the economy. We tell it like it is, because the solution cannot begin unless the problem is recognized.

We are already in the midst of a fiscal crisis and we have to face it squarely — wielding our courage, resourcefulness and solidarity as a people and nation. I appreciate the concern and suggestions being put forth by well-meaning quarters to resolve this crisis, and I take this as a sign of concern that must be translated into deeper public awareness and action.

Average Filipinos are already taking the brunt of sacrifices but we have to gather round again as one national community to take stock of the future. I’m glad that General Ebdane said that he will not require a sacrifice on anyone that he is not willing to do himself, and that is reflective of government policy. This government will not exact sacrifices that we ourselves are not willing to take. It will not exact sacrifices that we ourselves are not willing to enforce among those who can afford it. The pain is imminent but it will be shared fairly and without putting one over the other. I’m working with Congress — and I’m glad we have a number of legislators here today — on the strategies to get the budget in place, and we are hoping to work this out with public support and openness to sacrifice.

I shall rely much on my National Security Adviser to link up law enforcement to the imperatives of economic development and political stability. But I also shall rely just as much on our new chief of the PNP to bring law enforcement to, as Secretary Reyes said, new heights of achievement and professionalism.

General Aglipay comes in with a sterling record of operational achievements especially in fighting drugs and destabilizers.

When he gave his acceptance address, Egay thanked God for answering his prayers, thanked me for appointing him. But I think number three, he should thank General Ebdane for retiring early to give a chance for Egay to be chief PNP.

But I believe that Egay does deserve to be chief PNP. Because I know what must be done in the PNP in the next six years, having the benefit of my experience in the last three years, and I know that Egay will be a good man to start the reforms I want to have in the PNP.

What are these reforms? What are my guidelines for directions for the PNP? When I was campaigning for the presidency early this year, I said that I will fight for unprecedented change that makes us more secure, that strengthens our families, that stamps out corruption. I said that I will change the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs and wipe out terrorism. These were my campaign platform and these are now my marching orders for the Philippine National Police under the new leadership of General Edgar Aglipay.

As Egay said in his speech, we will need more police visibility even as I say we must stake out the syndicates. We must institutionalize that seamless weave of intelligence, enforcement, negotiation. I’ve seen that in General Aglipay. I’ve seen him amiably persuading angry demonstrators to back off from the line and head for home. He usually succeeds because he knows how to deal with people. he did that when he was chief of the police in the national capital region, I know he will succeed as head of the whole police.

I mentioned among my campaign pledges, strengthening our families. Of course, the PNP is not the chief institution responsible for strengthening families, but the police can contribute much to this goal by stopping the scourge of drugs which destroys families and helping the out-of-school, out-of-work Metro Manila youth, the Kanto boys, find meaning in their lives. General Aglipay as we all know has been spectacularly successful as head of the PNP Anti-Drug Task Force. Under his leadership the battle against drugs was half won. I’m sure he will even be more successful as head of the whole PNP.

And I ask him not only to work on drug enforcement but also on prevention by helping our out-of-school, out-of-work youth find solace in something meaningful rather than in drugs, rather than resorting to crime to finance their habit. Why do I ask the police to handle this? Because these Kanto boys are tough guys. They are not the youth the type that will listen to our sweet social workers to change their behavior. They respect toughness, they respect machismo, they respect the neighborhood police. Therefore, I want to reiterate an instruction I gave three years ago, that the community relations service of the police should be the one to implement the emergency employment program for the out-of-school, out-of-work metro manila youth under the technical direction of the Metro Manila Development Authority and with the support of the national road board. We will have a program of maintenance of metro manila infrastructure through labor-intensive rather than capital-intensive methods and direct the work opportunities towards the out-of-school, out-of-work youth. The neighborhood cop will be the main point, will be the frontliner for these young people for this project.

I said that the youth respect the police when the policeman they come across is tough but honest. And I’m sad when I see reports that people still perceive the police to be one of the five most corrupt institutions in our country. We must address this through punitive and preventive actions. As Aglipay said, put Kotong’ cops in jail. Not only that, transfer superior officers who have become too chummy with their subordinates to be able to discipline them. and also stop the practice of allowances from vice lords. And also propagate values formation within the institution.

Finally, as we have been able to contain and control terrorism, the marching orders for the Philippine National Police under this new administration are — wipe out terrorism. I’m sure Egay will be equal to this task, with his lawyer’s ability to put together an organized framework of action as I have seen him do in many assignments I’ve given him to handle, including the assignment to solve the terrorist bombings in Davao that have now become — thank God! — and hopefully to continue a thing of the past.

Yes, these are the marching orders of the Philippine National Police under my new administration. To be able to accomplish them we need to consolidate and integrate law enforcement, provide linkages between law enforcement and all areas of national security, strengthen criminal justice and place it with the overall framework of economic and political stability. I believe having a lawyer, like General Aglipay, at the helm of the Philippine National Police can do much in professionalization and institutionalization of our reforms.

For this reason, I am extending the term of the PNP chief to serve for a period of at least six months. this will enable him to get our plans off the ground, institutionalize our gains in law enforcement, and have a strong start in the things that have to be done to truly professionalize our police force.

To reiterate, ladies and gentlemen of the Philippine National Police these are my marching orders: make us more secure, help strengthen our families, stamp out the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs, wipe out terrorism. I have confidence in the able leadership of General Aglipay to carry these orders out.

Congratulations! Egay.

And thank you to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Philippine National Police Change of Command Ceremony of PNP Dir. Gen. Edgardo B. Aglipay, Vice Dir. Gen. Hermogenes Ebdane, Jr. (Ret.). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133231/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5689&Itemid=38