Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina, for your second introduction of me.

I’d like to also acknowledge the presence of Secretary Cito Lorenzo of Agriculture. Because later we will move to the other room to sign a large project that hopefully will help the barangays, the coastal barangays. It will help with planting seaweed in various coastal barangays. Hopefully, your barangays will also be helped with Cito Lorenzo’s project. And with him in the signing is Secretary Bibet Gozun of DENR. Bibet Gozun is also here.

I would like to also acknowledge the presence of our governor of our host province, Governor Pabling Garcia. Hopefully there is a barangay captain here from Cebu province, at least his presence here would be worth it. But he is going to go with us also to the other side because this Seaweed Memorandum of Agreement will be signed there, because Cebu province is the center of the seaweed industry in our country.

Let me greet our police officers who provided the reports of our… In this, what I said should be a command conference, Chief of Philippine National Police, Jun Ebdane; our new Chief of Director of Operations of the Philippine National Police, General Ike Galang. He said his presentation is a bit long because this is his first presentation as director of operations so he wants to express to the barangay captains the entirety of the PNP’s operational plans and I think many of you are seeing General Galang for the first time now. But he will be the one you coordinate with in many operations because he is the director for operations of the Philippine National Police now. So if he is a bit long on stage, at least you know him.

Later on, after my talk, we will be having a dialogue with you regarding SARS. And this is our very skilled researcher on SARS. That’s why the world admires us. You know, there are thousands of SARS cases in China, in Hong Kong. Hundreds of SARS cases in Canada, I think, in Singapore. Vietnam has reportedly recovered from SARS, before Vietnam recovered from SARS, they had 63 cases and five deaths. In the entire Philippines… Thailand has a brochure saying they have zero SARS transmission. But they have seven SARS cases and two deaths as well. Here in the Philippines, there are three SARS cases. This is because of the very good work of our doctors. And one of the leaders in our work against SARS is Doctor Consorcia Lim-Quizon. She will be talking to you later.

And of course, I would like to thank our very dynamic and well loved president of the Liga ng mga Barangay, James Marty Lim. You know, when I first became president and there was going to be an election for the president of the barangay, many people approached me asking for help to be endorsed or their candidate as the league of barangays. But Joey Lina and I, our answer was, you cannot reject the voice of those at the bottom. And the voice of the barangay still wants James Marty Lim to continue as president.

Barangay captains who are here now, my fellow countrymen:

I warmly greet all the barangay chairmen who are here now. Earlier I entered and I saw my colleagues from Pasay yesterday, I greet you again. I saw those from Laguna, Quezon, I greet you again. I saw, I noticed those who came from Zamboanga, from South Cotabato, good morning, good morning to all of you, to all of you as well. And I saw those from Zamboanga City, buenos dias otra vez. There are so many places you came from and it is really time for us to come together again. You know your jobs under the law. I will not repeat that. For many years now… Your Local Government Code is reviewed every year. I will talk about the main duties of our barangay leaders in these times, which are different times.

In these times, oh my! One crisis after another, so our barangay chairmen should be crisis managers in your communities. That’s the first thing the people expect from you. What does this mean? You will oversee the monitoring of all kinds of social and economic problems related to the crisis, such as the price of basic goods. If someone is raising the price of masks too much in your barangay, you should be the one to report them to the authorities of the DTI to reprimand them. You are needed to ensure that the community is safe from all kinds of terrorism that is still there.

Because terrorism is bold, the actions of the national government alone are not enough. So I said to our police, present to them the anti-terrorism program and understand, have a common understanding of what the role of the police is, what the role of the barangays is.

The new century, the new threat of the twenty-first century, is terrorism, and this requires concerted action from the entire government down to the barangay level to monitor suspicious people. Monitor suspicious activities. Monitor suspicious equipment. And you, barangay captains, you will be able to see who and what is different happening in your barangay.

The international linkages among terrorist groups have long been established and documented, and some of these linkages are embedded in our own territory. Within our regional neighborhood, a network of Jemaah Islamiyah cells are active, further extending to the worldwide Al Qaeda network. The revelation of a link between the former Iraqi regime and Osama Bin Laden is also significant in the light of our own findings in the Philippines that there are connections between Iraqi embassy officials and the Abu Sayyaf. Tracing all these linkages is important to acquire the knowledge to fight this threat effectively. And it is important for the participation of barangay chairmen to find these connections of terrorists in your area with foreign terrorist leaders.

Barangay captains are also information champions for economic stability and public welfare.

You can explain to our countrymen about issues they are not aware of or do not fully understand, such as how to prevent the spread of the severe test our country is facing now, the severe acute respiratory syndrome or SARS.

Later, Dra. Quizon will provide details, but I will take this opportunity to give you a report on the ASEAN Summit on SARS.

Just this morning, I arrived in Cebu, early in the morning, at three o'clock. I was met by General Ebdane and then by General Galang. Three o'clock in the morning, right? Or three thirty? After a day of visiting Thailand to attend the Asean SARS summit. That meeting was very important for aligning and unifying all our efforts in the region to combat this disease. Together with the leaders of ASEAN and China, we pledged to combine our capabilities and intelligence to prevent the spread of SARS.

At that meeting as well, I made a special appeal on behalf of the thousands of Filipino workers who come from your various barangays but are found throughout Asean.

I asked my fellow leaders to ensure that the best possible care is given to Filipinos suspected of or confirmed to have SARS; and that all possible assistance be provided to them to ensure their jobs in the face of a weakening regional economy.

We need to protect the welfare of our countrymen, their jobs, and their livelihoods in the face of this threat to humanity.

As Labor Day approaches, let’s reminisce the profound sacrifices being made by Filipino workers here in your barangays and around the world. Our workers are among the most vulnerable to SARS in their workplaces in your barangays and abroad. I was very touched by the statements of Singapore and china during the Asean summit acknowledging the role of Filipino health workers at the forefront of the fight against SARS in these countries. I said to them, I hope, leaders, you will take care of the Filipino workers who might contract SARS in your area. And Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong said to me, they will definitely take care of the Filipinos in Singapore because they are very impressed. They said, those who take care of our SARS victims are Filipinos and your nurses, he said in English, even when on vacation leave when SARS broke out, they returned and worked again. Because they said they need us to work here. That's why they are very impressed with Filipinos.

The Filipinos have placed themselves at grave risk in other lands for the sake of humanity, in the name of professionalism.

Let’s extol our doctors, nurses and medical technicians, and other workers from your different barangays who are at the frontline of this fight, worldwide.

I was reminded of the fact that more than a million Filipinos were also at risk from the threat of the Iraq war. Day after day, there are acts of Filipino heroism that do not necessarily run to the limelight. That’s why, as I said, I made that special appeal in the ASEAN Summit in behalf of our hundreds of thousands of workers spread across the region.

Just now, I said in Tagalog, I will say in English. I asked my colleagues to protect not only the health but the jobs of Filipinos. I asked them to extend the best treatment possible to our nationals suspected to be or actually afflicted by SARS, and that all possible accommodations be granted to guarantee the security and safety of their jobs in the face of the regional economic slowdown.

After I spoke, and the others spoke, the summit formulated their joint declaration. The summit accepted three proposals from the Philippine government:

First, to extend equal treatment to foreign nationals who may be suspect or actual SARS cases under the principle of “no blame, and dignity for all concerned.” That means, if a Filipino gets sick in Singapore or Hong Kong or China, in mainland… In mainland China or Malaysia, the treatment the government gives them, the benefits they receive are the same as the citizens of those countries.

Second, to convene a meeting of airport authorities from the ASEAN+3 countries in the Philippines, to work out relevant procedures for departure and arrival screening. Around the 15th we will have a follow-up meeting of the SARS summit, the airport authorities will discuss common procedures so that SARS does not spread through travel.

Third, to task relevant experts to consider a Health Emergency Fund within the ASEAN Framework, as a means to shore up overall regional capacity and preparedness. You know, there is almost one billion dollars in the asean foundation that is not being used. So I said, use that for our SARS throughout the region.

Here in the Philippines, I also told the PCSO to create one billion pesos for SARS. We can also take a portion of that from the ASEAN Foundation. So that the PCSO's money will not be depleted. Now this is for all of us to fight SARS. Whether in the capitol, whether national, whether in the barangay.

I remember 5 years ago, the barangay chapters were given ambulances. Now, I think because SARS is the problem, you should not be locked in to ambulances. An ambulance costs more or less 500,000. So I said to James, instead of giving ambulances, let's give the chapters a choice of what they need to fight SARS. So in the one billion I said to the PCSO to create and can take from the ASEAN Foundation to supplement, I said, set aside 50 million pesos for the league of barangays. What you will do is look at, “what is the most needed by my barangay or our chapter against SARS.” Make a proposal, submit it to James to the SARS management committee, including Dr. Quizon. And if they approve it, the PCSO will give that project to your chapter of the league of barangays. Okay, Dr. Quizon, yes.

The World Health Organization has made an assessment that SARS could become the first severe new disease of the 21st century with global epidemic potential. Indeed, as I said in the SARS summit, the SARS crisis is only second to terrorism in bringing quick death to its victims. We must now face it with unerring audacity and solidarity. Audacity, because its causes and full consequences are yet unknown. Solidarity, because it is randomly knocking at all of our doors.

We are an integral part of the ASEAN War Plan. Our government will stretch its cooperation regionally to help check the spread of disease across borders. Like we have done in the fight against terrorism, we shall wield common advocacies, educational programs, surveillance data and action plans. In facing the threat of SARS, ASEAN nations must be viewed within the boundaries of one region having a single army, teaming up under an imagined common sovereignty. Asean must field its troops under one cause, under one flag of humanitarianism, one code of procedures and operations. Regional cooperation will ensure a more permanent victory.

But if ASEAN – now they are the joint Chiefs of Staff – the platoon commanders, all the way down, are the barangay chairmen.

Every citizen should be diligent under the leadership of the barangay chairmen, every barangay should participate in all programs to fight SARS.

The barangay leaders, as said by General Galang and General Ebdane, as well as Secretary Lina, are also anti-street crime czars.

Maintaining peace in our country is not only the job of the police. It requires the commitment of every barangay leader to ensure that the citizens of the barangay respect the law and suppress the causes of terrorism and crime. The role played by barangay chairmen in achieving this aspiration is invaluable. In the barangays, you know almost everyone. Because of this, you can do more than prevent the sowing of terrorism or suppress crime. You can also create special community operations to promote discipline in the community towards a peaceful life for all of us.

The support of barangay leaders is the first key to making the government's program to fight poverty, terrorism, criminality, disease, and other ills of our society effective. So, let us unite, let us help each other to succeed in our aspiration. I wish you success because your success is the success of the entire Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Command Conference of Barangay Captains at the 6th National Convention of the Liga ng mga Barangay. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201451/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6128&Itemid=38