Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the orientation of newly elected officials of the Barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan of the National Capital Region.

Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina. What a wonderful introduction you gave me. Joey said that the Cabinet members are afraid I know their jobs better than they do. Joey said that because I don’t know his job better than he does, because he’s with the DILG and a former governor, so he’s exempted from that, that’s why he says that.

I would also like to greet the Metro Manila Chairman. And last night, I was with some journalists. One of them, Neal Cruz, said, “Bayani is being criticized for his drive to clean up our sidewalks, you should probably give him words of support.” “Oh dear,” I said, “Bayani has already done that in Marikina. Everything he’s doing now, he’s already done in Marikina. So he can definitely muster that political will because the criticism he’s receiving now is the same criticism he received in his first year as mayor of Marikina.” So that’s another Cabinet member of mine who knows the job better than I do, Bayani Fernando.

I would also like to greet our host Mayor, Pewee Trinidad, thank you very much for your welcome. And as Pewee said, many of you he sees here, but at night. So when Joey said I was lining up criminals, he asked me, who said that? Bobbit Carlos of Valenzuela said, “Don’t line up the visiting mayors here at night, in Pasay City.” But whether they visit at night in Pasay City or not, we will greet them all who are here now: here is Mayor Vicencio of Malabon; we were late because we both came from Baseco now, Mayor Atienza of Manila; the very capable successor of Bayani Fernando in Marikina, Marides Fernando; these are our new generation, Mayor Tobi Tiangco of Navotas; this is my former lawyer, Mayor Rosendo Capco of Pateros; and another new generation, Freddie Tiñga of Taguig. Oh, why was Mayor Rey Malonzo of Caloocan City crossed out; and who else? Representative of Muntinlupa, municipal administrator, representing Mayor Fresnedi, Mr. Reyes; and also the president of the Barangay Captains throughout the Philippines, James Marty Lim.

You know James had a serious accident, but we are happy that he is still here and very active.

Officials of the DILG; and of course, the newly elected and re-elected Barangay captains and Chairmen of the Sangguniang Kabataan of the National Capital Region of 1,600 Barangays of the National Capital Region.

You know our country has about 1,600 towns, Metro Manila has 1,600 Barangays; and some of your barangays are as big as a town, some are even as big as a province. So what a town is in the country, a barangay is in Metro Manila, that’s how important you are, so I greet you all, Barangay captains, SK Chairmen.

The power of the barangay chairmen, as well as the SK officials, is very large. The other night, I was with people from Manila and I mentioned that the barangay chairman or chairwoman, if you talk about power in your area of responsibility, you are more powerful than the President of the Philippines because I am only the executive, the legislative is different, the judiciary is different. But the barangay chairman or chairwoman, he is the executive, legislative and judiciary. So you are the most powerful in your area of responsibility.

Therefore, because of your power, you are very important in what the national government does. That’s why we are holding this orientation seminar, as well as asking for a pledge of commitment to our programs. Because if we want to have a strong and stable Republic of the Philippines, this will not happen if the barangay chairmen and our SK chairs are not involved and working with us.

Many of you watched my State of the Nation Address, whether there in Congress or here on television, and you heard me say strong republic. I said then, a strong Philippine republic has two characteristics: one, it represents not vested interests, but the majority; … The words, a strong republic is for the weak and the poor. And where are the weak? We find them there, in your areas of responsibility, in the different barangays. So if the national government wants to truly represent the weak, we need to go through the barangay officials because the weak we are looking for to represent are there, in your barangays.

The second component, to enforce good policies, strong institutions are needed, and a strong bureaucracy is needed. And as I said, one of the strongest institutions in the entire Philippines is because of your three powers — executive, legislative and judiciary — one of the strongest institutions in our country is the institution of the barangay organization.

If we want our republic to weaken, what will we do? Weaken the power of the barangay. But if we want a strong Philippine republic, what we need to do is recognize the strength of the institution of the barangay and respect that power. That is why when I became president, I thought that the president of the Philippines should not control you too much, but also recognize you as a partner.

I told this to the barangay chairmen of Manila the other night. When I took office as president, it was a Saturday night, ah no Saturday, not yet… Of course, like today it’s not a working day. Sunday, supposed to be a day-off, so Monday should be the first day of work. What happened? Sunday, my executive secretary at the time, Rene de Villa, was frantic, he needed to see the papers, I needed to sign them. What were these very important papers? It turned out that there were barangay officials who were going to travel on Monday, and if I didn’t sign their travel authority, they couldn’t leave. “Oh dear,” I said, “just for travel? A barangay official needs permission from the president?” so, I removed that power of mine and said it would be delegated to the Secretary of Local Government. The same goes for buying a vehicle, why should the president decide when you need a vehicle or not? That was also delegated to the DILG. These first steps I took to remove the power of control over you, that was in recognition that you are the ones who should really have the power in our country.

But power is not only exercised by asking for permission. It is also exercised by controlling funds. Perhaps you have experienced that even though there is a local government code and you have an IRA, in the past your IRAs were reduced or there were months when they were not given to you; or they would be given to you but you would first submit your program for approval. Well, because Joey is an expert in local government, he advised me not to — give it in full and no longer ask for permission on how to spend it since the law is already there.

So maybe because you have experienced over the last year and a half that I am president, you are getting your IRA in full. Not only that, but even the debt of the previous administration is being paid even though I was not to blame for it. So what I ask of you now is to help the national government fully address our very serious problems.

First of all, there is the problem of poverty. And if we are to have projects for development or provide employment for the people. Those of your barangay constituents who are unemployed, you should also help them find opportunities for employment within your jurisdiction.

And the second problem, the problem of peace. We have a problem with criminality, we have a problem with terrorism. And last night I was watching a television show, the one that usually criticizes me, the one “on-line,” but last night there was a survey: “does the people want the government to fight the NPA?” and what was the answer in the survey? Ninety-six percent of the people want the NPA to be fought.

Now in Metro Manila, that fight is not on the battlefield, there is no battlefield, there is no field in metro manila. That fight is in the hearts and minds, there in the barangays; and you are the ones who can create the frontline in these struggles demanded by our people.

That is why I am happy today that you are here to listen to the various requests made of you by the national government through the orientation and so that, as part of your duty to our republic, you can be relied upon by the national government in what we need to do for our citizens.

So I am asking you, will you agree to pledge your commitment to our programs?

Therefore, once again, congratulations to all of you and thank you for your partnership. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Orientation of the Newly Elected Barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) Officials of the National Capital Region. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224637/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8368&Itemid=38