Maraming salamat, Secretary Cerge Remonde.

When we appointed Cerge as the coordinator for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, his question was, what are my marching orders for him. I said, just support ‘Go Negosyo,’ you won’t go wrong.

The inspiration and moving spirit of Go Negosyo, Presidential Consultant on Entreprenuership, Joey Concepcion; Vivienne Tan, who’s also a great leader of Go Negosyo; our Cabinet members Peter Favila, Secretary of Trade and Industry under whom we have the Small and Medium Enterprises Department and Secretary Arty Yap of Agriculture promoting entrepreneurs and agri-business; and representing Secretary Ace Durano who is based in Central Philippines, in Cebu, so here in Manila representing him is Oscar Palabyab.

I would like to congratulate and acknowledge Lray Villafuerte who was recognized today for his wakeboard tourism attraction in Bicol. And we have two other governors here from Central Philippines, which includes Bicol, Gwen Garcia of Cebu and Sally Perez of Antique. And we have the governor of peace and development from arms to farms — I think now he wants to include Patikul beach among our attractions — Governor Ben Loong. I hear that Governor Evardone is here. There you are, governor, who of course the landlord or the overseer of the Guiuan surfing tourism; our inspiring tourism awardees; ladies and gentlemen.

A positive outlook on the future is truly in the spirit of entrepreneurship, just like the bright future of our economy. With this same vision, I congratulate our inspiring tourism entrepreneurs whom we are honoring today for their achievements.

Of course, those things require large investments. The mega resorts like Villa Escudero, the airlines like Asian Spirit, the hotel chains like Microtel. But there are also small businesses, Tony Carag’s adventure tourism reportedly started with 50,000 pesos, the souvenirs in Mr. Aldeguer started with 20,000 pesos, and the map maker almost had no capital, he just borrowed his neighbor’s printer first. So there are really many ways to become an entrepreneur, to become a millionaire, whether you inherited a lot or are just starting out. That’s why I also commend our teenpreneur awardees as a symbol of early entrepreneurship that should be promoted.

Let us also applaud the Philippine Center for Entrepreneurship, Joey, Vivienne and all our young entrepreneurs, for promoting this Tourism Negosyo Exposition.

The strength of the Philippine economy goes beyond transient political events like the forthcoming May elections. We have already laid the fundamentals of growth — a sturdy fiscal house, a solid program of good governance, a robust social payback to the people, mounting gains in the security front, and a democratic system in full bloom. The business community is on the right track in placing their bets on this nation and government, the excellence of the Filipino and the spirit of enterprise that lives in our society.

And let me say that as soon as the sun rises, we shall have clean, credible and peaceful elections in May. There should be no doubt that the Filipino will make this happen. We are a nation that cherishes democracy and freedom as deeply as we cherish enterprise and competition. Investors should go for the gold in the midst of the Philippine bull run.

This year, we want to have more than three million tourists. So many are already coming here, what we lack are rooms. So to the winner in Bohol who has a delicious restaurant, I said, put up a bed and breakfast. That’s what he’s doing. In the entirety of our economy, our goal this year — invest in the people to achieve 8 by 08: job creation or livelihood; cost of living or affordable goods; strong peso or stable currency; more investment; Pro-poor education; pro-poor health care, housing, anti-hunger, medical care, housing and food for the poor; green Philippines, environmentally friendly and green Philippines. Oca Palabyab mentioned, he said, why is Joey’s uniform green. Aside from the fact that he is from La Salle, green is hope, and green is eco-tourism for a green Philippines; another goal is strong anti-terror, a strong campaign against terrorism so that the beach of Patikul will have many visitors, visiting Governor Ben Loong.

And to help entrepreneurs as I said, of course there are big businesses with big capital but there are small businesses in tourism. The Philippine Tourism Authority has a ten million peso microfinance fund of the DOT for microfinance for the Grassroots Entrepreneurs for Eco-Tourism or G.R.E.E.T. — greet.

So I invite GO Negosyo to partner with the PTA so that these aspiring small entrepreneurs in eco-tourism that you are looking for can find initial funding from the Philippine Tourism Authority. I hope this helps Go Negosyo. As Ace Durano said, every tourist can create one job, so if we exceed three million plus in our tourism this year — because we almost reached three million last year — there will be more jobs in tourism, especially for our entrepreneurs.

To all of you, congratulations! Go Negosyo!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’S Speech during the Awarding Ceremonies for the Ten Most Inspiring Tourism Entrepreneurs. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151317/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1991&Itemid=38