Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to our Secretary of Labor Pat Sto. Tomas. She is not only a mother to the workers here in the Philippines but all over the world because she is also the President of the International Labor Organization, Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas.

And I would also like to extend my welcome to our officials here in Cebu, our Congressmen — Congressman Tony Cuenco, Congressman Del Mar, Congressman Kintanar; our Governor of Cebu province, Governor Garcia; our Acting Mayor Michael Rama; the father of the Labor Movement in our generation now, Associate ALU National President Democrito Mendoza; our Vice President, Attorney Cecilio Seno. And I would like to express my gratitude to Vice President Seno for your beautiful expression of support for our administration; and also the two members of my Cabinet, together with Secretary Sto. Tomas, Secretary for jobs creation Cito Lorenzo, and Secretary for Special Concerns Bert Gonzales; and all-all the members of the labor unions; various invited guests; my beloved Cebuano people, good noon and a happy day to all Cebuano and Visayan people.

This is the centennial of the creation of the first union of workers in our country, the union obrera demokratika. On this occasion, let us remember the hardships of the first leaders of the union. In Manila, there was Andres Bonifacio, Don Isabelo Delos Reyes, Lope K. Santos, Amado Hernandez and others. And because today is a special Labor Day, a Centennial of our labor movement in our country, our National celebration should not only happen in Manila but in the center of the strongest, largest labor union in our country right here in Cebu, the home of our ALU and TUCP and Labor Solidarity Movement. And our slogan here is really beautiful, Labor Day 2002: Sandaan Isang Daan — 101 Ways; 100 and Unity, that is our theme for our celebration.

A century has passed since it happened, our Union Labor Movement was founded, poverty is still the biggest problem in our country. We really need to overcome poverty in the next decade. So that we don't pass it on to our children and grandchildren. Last year, we went through many trials including problems in politics and the economy not only here in the country but all over the world. But even though many other countries lowered their production, lowered their economy, thank God the production and our people here in the Philippines increased. And when I was sent as president, our unemployment which I reached 11.3 percent in January 2001 but now that our administration has ended for one year, it has been lowered to 10.3 percent. I know this is still big but thank God for the decrease from 11.3 to 10.3, 1.6 million new jobs were created and the total number of Filipinos with jobs now reaches 29.16 million.

Here in the Visayas, DOLE said that the unemployment rate decreased to 9.3 percent under our administration from 11.06 percent in the previous administration. Throughout the Philippines 10.3, here in the Visayas 9.3, the economy in the Visayas is better compared to other areas throughout the Philippines. Under our administration, 473,000 or almost 500,000 new jobs were created here in the Visayas. In my State of the Nation Address last year — Congressman Del Mar and Congressman Cuenco were there — I said that our first way to overcome poverty in our country is to create more jobs in our country. I said, the way to fight poverty is to create jobs not to destroy them. And that is the beauty of the labor movement that started here in Cebu. Your labor movement seeks to create jobs and improve working conditions not to destroy jobs. Therefore, my welcome and great admiration to all of you.

Our progress depends on finding opportunities to create more jobs for our people. There are four parts to the employment strategy of our Department of Labor — employment generation, employment preservation, job enhancement and employment facilitation. The first strategy is employment generation. If new… Many new jobs will be seen and growth sector of the future. The sectors where growth is fast and we have a competitive advantage for our great Filipino workers such as information and communications technology, modernization of agriculture, various labor intensive and skills intensive service sectors, such as here the expansion of the housing sector that will help the poor have homes and more jobs.

I would also like to extend to one of our growth sectors tomorrow our tourism. And yesterday in our Cabinet meeting, it was finished, the National Tourism Strategy was completed by the best consultancy firm in the whole world based in Washington and its clients include Singapore, Korea, Malaysia, India — its president is a Filipino. And he did it for us… Our National Tourism Strategy was completed. Of course, in a strategy, there needs to be a review of our resources, our baseline, our present conditions, and in its review, number one in the whole Philippines as a competitive area for our tourism is none other than tourism here in Cebu.

And why Cebu, we have many natural wonders here in Cebu but many of our natural wonders are in other places perhaps, even though there are many natural wonders in the different places in the Philippines, the warmth and hospitality of the Cebuanos is special. And this warm hospitality of yours is a demonstration of your goodness of heart and your goodness of heart is seen in the good relationship between labor and management here in Cebu. Therefore, Cebu is very competitive and one reason is because the labor and management relations here in Cebu are very good.

The relationship between labor and management is important. In our second strategy, the employment strategy, which is labor preservation. This will happen with industrial peace and in the various multilateral and bilateral agreements. I really said in my State of the Nation Address, we want to reduce excessive friction in labor and management relations. And to do this, we will go the extra mile to work for industrial peace and to work with labor and business to re-train workers for the fast changing technologies of the new economy. Even though the unions are very active here, industrial relations are very good. This goes to show that strong unions do not necessarily mean weak economies. What is important is that the union’s main goal is to maximize the benefits for its workers and not to destroy the economy that provides the jobs to these workers. This kind of union, the responsible and reasonable union is what is… There on our streamer that is the kind of unionism that will create jobs and preserve jobs. And I congratulate ALU-TUCP for being that kind of union.

Therefore, here in the Visayas, the disposition of cases of strikes and lockouts is fast and the number of cases that went through preventive mediations also increased, the success rates of strikes are greatly increased through mediation and negotiation reaching 94 percent because 59 notices of strike or lockout were prevented through good talks between labor and management. DOLE also said that collective bargaining is starting to become a favorite way to resolve problems between unions and management. Out of 715 local organizations here in the Visayas, 202 are already engaged in CBA, this indicates that the maturity level of the relationship between labor and management has increased. I congratulate you because in your choice of a peaceful approach, productivity and job preservation continued. I am very happy that the labor and management sectors chose negotiation and dialogue to resolve your problems. Talking to or listening to each other are effective instruments to increase productivity in order for us to hasten the overcoming of poverty.

There in Manila this afternoon, I will receive a copy of the tripartite declaration signed by representatives of labor, employers and government who are accustomed to following procedures to enhance decent work as defined by the International Labor Organization. This document will list what the three sectors will do to follow employment creation, labor standards, social protection, social dialogue and tripartism. I hope that soon the three sectors here will also sign a commitment like this one. The government constantly urges unions to use clear methods to enhance peace in the workplace. We already have new rules on subcontracting to address the issues of contractualization and job security.

Third strategy is job enhancement. Included here, kasama na dito, is improving the skills of workers, improving the conditions in the workplace and providing incentives. I said in my State of the Nation Address I hope that Congress or the wage board will decide on the appropriate minimum wage. We also followed the policy of wage simplification which was requested by the labor sector. This is within the process of increasing the minimum wage and 11 wage orders have been issued by the Regional Wage and Productivity Boards. But on top of the wage boards, I also believe and I respect that Congress still has the right and the duty to look at what the appropriate minimum wage should be at a given point in time.

I, today, would really like to express my great gratitude to all of you for your various achievements in our industrial peace and we have programs that we can offer to our workers. First of all, for the informal sector. Since I became president, I saw the condition of our informal workers, so the government created a Social Protection Program for Workers in the Informal Sector. Through this social protection program, the informal sector throughout the Philippines will now be covered by the SSS. This program will be implemented in Cebu through the Development Bank of the Philippines, the DOLE and the SSS.

Secondly, among our programs is the creation of the State Insurance Fund with an allocation of 27 million pesos for use as loans to displaced workers. And so far, in our pilot, 2,000 workers have already availed of this program. Therefore, if you lose your job for any reason, you can go to the State Insurance Fund. Seek help until you can find a new job.

Next, to implement my directive in last year’s Labor Day, DOLE and the President’s Social Fund set aside 22 million pesos for a demonstration of our poverty-free zone projects in every region. For our OFWs because there are many of our OFWs in the Visayas, we have reduced the processing time of papers for OFWs at OWWA and POEA which have also installed 24-hour hotlines for them. And for our OFWs as I really said in my State of the Nation Address, they will continue to contribute to the economy and security of our country. Tomorrow, DOLE and SSS will sign a Memorandum of Understanding to establish a National Provident Fund or SSS Flexi Fund for OFWs. This Flexi Fund is a Special Savings Project for OFWs and can be borrowed for investment or personal purposes. We want to strengthen the voice of our OFWs in the government, so in Congress, including my priority legislation in my State of the Nation Address, to represent our OFWs in our country through their voting rights in another country for the Philippines. And now Congressman Del Mar and Congressman Cuenco and they said that it is close to passing in the House of Representatives this law.

Training and re-training of workers is important, especially now that there are many new technologies. We have re-training for workers because the change in technology is very fast. For the Visayas, 250 workers every year will be trained in high-tech fields such as fiber optic cable technology, computer-aided design and network administration, this is included in the TESDA training program. There are trainees who can avail of the offer from private education student financial assistance and here in the Visayas, have availed… There are 3,364 scholarships for our workers.

Now, the union of the TUCP is an important union of our port workers. And I want to convey a message to our port workers. Even though the modernization of our ports is important, the Philippine Ports Authority, DOTC, DOLE or the private sector can help raise the capability of our port workers so that their employment is further improved. And we will establish the workers fund. This will be funded with 100 million pesos. It will be used for loans to finance micro-entrepreneurial activities of workers organizations including the TUCP.

Then this afternoon, I will issue a formal directive there in Manila. Many of the workers have become entrepreneurs. Other governments promote entrepreneurship, so with this visit now, we have assistance totaling 180,000 pesos for cooperatives that want to enter into income-generating projects, and in other areas of the Visayas now, in Eastern and Western Visayas, there are other cooperatives that have assistance today. These are the various things that the government wants to give to you, the Great Filipino Worker who are the backbone of our economy. My request to you is to continue your work and… May our unity be strong. Cooperation is important, it is important that we do not get too political, and so instead of arguing, let us find ways of helping one another, helping our workers in the workplace and in our businesses.

Here in Cebu, a model of progress, a model of industry, a model of tourism, a model of workers rights. Therefore, on this day, on the 100th Anniversary of the Labor Movement, I extend my welcome and great respect to the labor movement here in Cebu.

Thank you very much and Congratulations to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Centennial Celebration of the Labor Movement in Cebu City. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225840/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8316&Itemid=38