Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, to the Filipino community in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

I am so happy to be with all of you… I am honored to be with you, my fellow provincemates…I am overjoyed to be with all of you, I miss the advice of my mother…I am happy to be with all of you, my siblings from the Visayas and Mindanao…I am grateful to be with all of you.

I am happy that we are together, my beloved countrymen. I am deeply impressed by your unwavering care for your family, work, and country.

This past year, 2008, was very historic. The turmoil of the world economy spread and placed the well-being of billions around the world in danger.

I probably don’t need to tell you: Here in Saudi Arabia, is the largest Filipino expatriate community in the world. I want to ensure that your jobs here are stable, despite the global economic crisis because there are fellow Filipinos losing jobs in various countries. But I want to report that there are more new jobs being offered. That’s why remittances are still increasing by 13%. Thank you very much.

Meanwhile in our country, we continue our program to create more jobs. So, as I always say, may the day come when working abroad is merely a career option, and not the only choice for the hardworking Filipino. One of the things we are doing is establishing retraining programs in the Philippines such as training in call centers, welding, baking and culinary arts, and others, which can prepare returning expatriates to work here. We are also bringing professional licensure examinations to select locations where there are many expat workers such as Qatar, Hong Kong and now Saudi Arabia, to prepare you for more stable jobs and higher salaries. For example, for those who graduated with engineering but do not yet have a license, our Professional Regulation Commission will bring professional exams here in Saudi Arabia. Thus, if you pass, you can be promoted and receive a salary increase, and your position will be more secure.

In this time of trial for expatriates, your government is not sleeping.

For the government, it is now time to give back. The heroic efforts of the overseas Filipino workers will not go unreciprocated.

A program of full reciprocity shall be carried out to help those who lost their jobs.

The DOLE and OWWA will lead the implementation of this program for you, as well as for the workers in our export industries.

The first component is the Filipino Expatriate Livelihood Support Fund amounting to P1 billion, which will be funded by OWWA and supported by government lending institutions such as the Development Bank Of The Philippines and Land Bank. This fund can be used by expatriates who have lost their jobs to invest in new businesses or finance further studies or training.

Secretary Roque of DOLE is here. I have tasked him to ensure that the regulations and processes to access this fund are simple and not complicated. Let us not further burden returning expatriates with a lot of red tape.

The DOLE and OWWA were instructed to coordinate with government economic and investment agencies such as the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Agriculture – here are Secretary Peter Favila and Secretary Artie Yap – to identify new businesses that returnees may venture into.

The second component of the government’s comprehensive support is assisting returning expatriates in finding gainful employment.

The DOLE-OWWA is establishing help desks in each province. This is so that you can be assisted and your skills, training, and experience can be matched with suitable employment. We match the jobseeker with the job.

There is still more help available. This is the online information. Its function is about vacant jobs, like classified ads, “wanted: Carpenter” or “wanted: Welder” or “wanted: Plumber.” There are now one hundred touch screen kiosks for this nationwide. It can now be accessed online at phil-job.net.

For returning expatriates who wish to cross over to other countries that require their skills and talents, the POEA is currently conducting a large-scale opening of employment opportunities in many countries. We are conducting a marketing blitz.

We can fund all of these programs because, compared to many other countries, the Philippines remains an island of stability in an otherwise stormy global sea of economic troubles. This isn't just what I'm saying, but also financial experts such as Standard and Poor’s. We transformed our economy several years ago. This is helping us now. As a result of dramatic reforms in collection and the creation of a broader tax base, expenditure monitoring, and banking reform, our economy has grown.

We are making transformative investments in our people, such as education, training, healthcare, social services, as well as in infrastructure. We are investing in modernizing infrastructure like roads and bridges on an unprecedented scale. Do you know that it now only takes half an hour from Monumento to Clark when you take the North Luzon and Clark Expressway? The next time you go to the Philippines, you will be able to drive from Aparri to Jolo using our roll-on-roll-off nautical highway system. Or you can spend your vacation in our various world-class resorts such as Boracay, Cebu, Bohol and Palawan.

For us, according to surveys, nine out of ten look forward with hope to the new year. It is very important that we all come together. Let us continue to help each other in all ways that will benefit our country.

Thank you very much.

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Sa atin, ayon sa mga survey, nine out of ten look forward with hope to the new year. Napakahalaga ng pagsama-sama nating lahat. Patuloy tayong magtulungan sa lahat ng paraang makabubuti sa ating bansa.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech before the Filipino Community in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105615/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=19526&Itemid=38