Thank you very much, Commissioner Palabrica.

Chairperson Barin and all the commissioners and all the very valuable staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Happy 70th Anniversary!

When Chairman Barin asked me if you could pay a courtesy… She said could officers of the SEC pay a courtesy call for me on the occasion of your 70th anniversary, I gladly agreed. And then when I was reviewing my schedule and I saw again the request to pay a courtesy call, I said why courtesy call, it’s a great year, 70th year, let’s have a very nice lunch celebration. So here we are today.

It’s my way of saying congratulations! To Chair Fe and to the whole team at the SEC. You are celebrating your 70th anniversary just when our stock market is experiencing an extended bull run, hitting a 9-year high and piercing the psychological barrier of 2800. Congratulations! To you for that.

A great way to celebrate your 70th anniversary because you have contributed to that bull run as part of the economic team that has brought renewed confidence in our markets and fresh optimism in Philippine business.

On the front line of government agencies, you are among those privileged to have been rated “very good” by the Civil Service Commission. Congratulations! Your efforts to reduce the incidence of graft and corruption, both within the organization as mentioned by Chair Barin’s reforms and also in corporate governance, are commendable.

You are also contributing significantly to the public coffers. Thank you for the 645 million pesos remitted to the Bureau of Treasury last October 30th. That was a great 70th anniversary present you gave the Philippine government. It’s a 139 million over the amount we had targeted for you to raise for the whole year. So, congratulations! Okay.

Just as you have worked hard to surpass your goals, your partners in our economic team have left no stone unturned to bring the economy back on track and keep it humming. The results of that synergy are now out there for all Filipinos to appreciate and enjoy: our exports have been increasing by over 15 percent this year; international investors and rating houses are giving us the thumbs up; the VAT has yielded 54 billion pesos in nine months, exceeding the target by 1.4 billion pesos.

We commend our revenue agencies for a job well done, but most of all we extol the Filipino taxpayer who continues to exercise the patriotic duty of paying the right taxes. We will continue to increase our tax collection efficiency, seal revenue leakages and maintain disciplined spending as we clear more hurdles along the road and open broader opportunities for enterprises and jobs.

We’re determined to raise the rankings of the Philippines in the U.N. Human Development Index on the back of our steady gains in the economy. We shall wield new revenues to accord every Filipino a life of dignity, productivity and human security against the backdrop of larger reforms in governance. As we translate our economic gains into broader social justice, we also extol the sense of productivity of every Filipino that is keeping our strong niche in world competition. Economic growth, competitiveness and social justice are key thrusts to a better future.

Twenty two billion pesos has been shaved off next year’s interest payments for our foreign debts.

Our people have led the march back to our fiscal health. They will enjoy our first gains. We have ordered the allocation of P16 billion of the P22 billion savings to additional funds for education; P5 billion to additional funds for health services; P1 billion to additional funds for social welfare. That way the savings in interests go directly to increase social services.

We aim to be part of the first world in twenty years by loosening the grip of poverty at the grassroots. Our immediate objective is to give the poorest of our people the basic amenities of food, water, electricity, health services, education and decent jobs with which they will improve the quality of their lives.

We are starting our strengthened poverty reduction campaign through a comprehensive anti-hunger program to bring affordable food to the ten poorest provinces of our country. While working on our pro-poor programs, we are giving equal attention to the policy, systems and physical reforms that create the environment for sustainable economic growth. And that’s where you come in.

All these measures are bringing in positive results. End-august foreign direct investments rose 21 percent, amounting to 1.3 billion dollars. The combined BOI-PEZA record of investments for ten months of this year reflect 220 billion pesos, and may hit 240 billion pesos or more by the end of the year. And of course, I should not be the one to tell you what the SEC statistics are. You know that better than me.

This new growth is not a fluke. It is not a one-time upsurge. Indicators show that it is sustainable.

As the vanguard of the country’s corporate governance, you in the SEC set the tone of business practices. You in the SEC ensure that the field will always be level for business. You in the SEC therefore have a direct hand in making our country attractive to investors.

This steady economic growth means you will have your hands full in the coming years with the number of new and expanded businesses to register, monitor and regulate. And I support the reforms that you have put out in your blueprint for the next five years. You in SEC have shown your sterling competence in these areas of promotion and regulation. We know you are committed to work even harder to make a bigger contribution to the fight against poverty and the march towards becoming a first world nation by the year 2020. And so, we support your reforms because we want to have a first world Securities and Exchange Commission for a first world country.

Congratulations on your next 70th year!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 70th Anniversary Celebration of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203506/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3037&Itemid=38