Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2003 Global Cooperation Society (GCS) International Convention and Peace Conference in commemoration of the 22nd anniversary of the International Day of Peace

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Century Park Plaza Hotel, Manila, September 19, 2003]

Thank you very much Dr. Punzal.

Dr. Young Seek Choue and Madam Choue, Dr. Mohapatra, Dr. Ponchai, Congressman Hizon, Ambassador Son Sang-Ha, Dr Jae Shik Sohn, Dr. Jen You Chang, delegates of the Global Cooperation Society, national and international chapters, our 200 friends from Korea, our 100 friends from all over the world, and our 50 friends from the Philippines, ladies and gentlemen.

There are many conferences for peace especially in this contemporary times, this trying times. And therefore, I cannot attend all of these conferences. But I made it a point to attend this one because this particular conference for peace was organized by someone that both my father and I consider as one of the greatest prophets of peace in our contemporary history, Dr. Young Seek Choue.

When the year 2000 was proclaimed as the “International Year of the Culture of Peace,” we were bouyed up by unprecedented hope.

For a short time that year 2000, it appeared the world was heading towards that future — a future of peace. But only a year later, on September 11, 2001, our hopes were shattered by a senseless and shameless act of terrorism.

From then on, the world was put on dangerous alert.

But we cannot forever be held hostage to terror. We must hunt down terrorists, hold down the threat, and never capitulate even as we strive to win the peace at all costs by dint of our durable unity and resolve.

Here in the Philippines, we are not pegging a date for the capture of Al-Ghozi, the Indonesian international terrorist, who is believed to be hiding in the jungles of Mindanao in Southern Philippines. But the hunt will be focused, intense and relentless. The dragnet is closing in on him and we are severely limiting his chances of getting through it. I am paying a short visit to Mindanao next week but not only to check on this matter but rather to check on the entire run of peace and development activities that have a bearing on our fight against terrorism and poverty. Al-Ghozi’s capture is a key event but it is not the whole pie of peace and security. Many other pieces have to be put in place.

And here in this conference on peace, we declare that even in a time of strife, a culture of peace shall prosper for so long as we remain steadfast in addressing not only the immediate causes of conflict but by boldly striking at its roots — inequity, injustice, economic exclusion.

Our work for peace in Mindanao brings together valiant allies. Malaysia has agreed to host the resumption of the peace talks with the MILF. The United States has committed to play a role, a leading role, in post-conflict rehabilitation. The member-states of the organization of the Islamic conference provide a broad backdrop of support and assistance.

Our government has initiated, with Indonesia and Malaysia, an agreement committed to practical measures against terrorism. It is an accord to which other countries in Southeast Asia have since acceded in the name of regional peace.

Peace is something that no nation can achieve alone.

In 1975, seventy eight former presidents and heads of state, university presidents, scholars, scientists and Nobel laureates gathered in the defense of peace and founded the Global Cooperation Society.

One of those 75 was my late father, President Diosdado Macapagal. And he was there upon the invitation of and because of his great admiration for Dr. Young Seek Choue, the society’s founder and president.

Again, twenty-two years ago, I joined my father when he travelled to the 6th triennial conference of the International Association of University Presidents in Costa Rica. It was there that an international day of peace was proposed, and in that same year, the U.N. established the international day of peace. Another achievement of Chancellor Young Seek Choue.

The UNESCO made a powerful statement during the commemoration of the 19th Anniversary of the International Day of Peace in the year 2000 and I quote, “as war begins in the minds of men, it is also there that the defense of peace is made.” that is why it is important to promote a culture of peace because culture is in the minds of men.

And your presence here proves that no amount of senseless and shameless violence can shatter our dreams. Peace is ours to hold and we shall not let go as long as there are men and women who promote a culture of peace like the men and women in these halls.

Mabuhay! To all of you and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 2003 Global Cooperation Society (GCS) International Convention and Peace Conference in Commemoration of the 22nd Anniversary of the International Day of Peace. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194333/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7111&Itemid=38