Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the Oas Town Fiesta.

Okay, thank you Nonoy Andaya, son of Oas.

To all our guests, and the hosts; those on stage; the mayors of the 1st and 2nd districts; to all of you; good morning and in advance, happy fiesta to all of you! (applause)

There are so many of us from Oas here, including Nonoy Andaya, son of Oas. That's why it won't be too difficult for the things I will order later. (applause)

I am happy, thank you, Mayor Ricarte for inviting me to your fiesta. And I really wanted to come here because Oas is close to my father's heart, President Diosdado Macapagal. (applause) As the mayor said, the first president who came here was Diosdado Macapagal because he was a very close ally of your former Mayor, Mayor Jose “Peping” Ricarte, the father of the current mayor. (applause)

And I thank the Mayor for recognizing that my father helped you start the Oas-Mabayawan-Cagmanaba Road. (applause) And I am happy to be here, I chose to come here today because yesterday was my father's wedding anniversary, so it's like a celebration of his wedding anniversary too. (applause)

And now, as a gift to him in heaven, and to the term of office of the children of friends Macapagal and Ricarte, we will fix the road built by our fathers. (applause) So thank you that Nonoy Andaya is from here, because we will ask Nonoy – at the DA, the DAR, the DPWH (applause) and Congressman Reno Lim’s PDAF, the funds needed to fix the road in the Coastal Barangay needed for the repair of that road.

And we really want to fix it because the farm-to-market road is important for the production of rice and palay. And I want to congratulate Oas not only on your fiesta but also because Oas is very important in the food production of the province. (applause) Joey Salceda, the governor, said that Oas has the largest land area in the province, the largest with a surplus of rice in the entire province. (applause) Because according to Joey, unlike Camarines Sur which exports rice to other provinces, Albay imports. But Oas helps because Oas exports to other towns in the province of Albay. (applause) So I am happy to hear that you have the largest surplus of rice this year – your production reached 75 metric tons this year. Congratulations to the farmers of Oas! (applause)

Your surplus rice is a great help not only to Albay but also to the entire country. Increasing yields is becoming even more important because there are global clouds on the horizon that are driving up the price of oil and food, particularly rice. Thankfully, we are now in a vastly improved position to weather this storm than at anytime in recent memory.

Regarding the issue of rice supply, this is a global problem that we have seen for a long time, so we have been working for a long time to overcome it when this time comes. Our answer to the global shortage is to address three basic needs.

Number one, ensure the supply. That's why we've been talking and closing contracts for a long time, right Secretary Artie Yap? With Thailand, Vietnam, Pakistan, America, a long time ago, before the shortage even hit. And we have invested heavily in production efficiency and new seeds.

For Oas, two dams were built, a rubber dam — the cost is P250 million. (applause) This is used to irrigate the rice fields.

In Barangay Mayao, are there people from Barangay Mayao here? In Barangay Busac, you are the source of water for irrigation. Thank you very much. And you not only irrigate Mayao, Busac, but also Saban, Gumabao, Manga and the neighboring town up to Libon of Mayor Gonzales.

The other dam is in South Quinale. Ah! That's you. But I heard that the dam would be more helpful if we put in more irrigation canals. (applause) So Artie Yap, who wasn't with me, L-Ray Villafuerte and Reno Lim and my son Dato yesterday in Camarines, I sent him now, I had him follow up now to tell Artie to allocate 50 million for irrigation canals. (applause) Fortunately, Nonoy Andaya is from Oas so Nonoy will release it to Artie Yap. (applause)

Second response, to make sure that the distribution of rice gets to the people who need it most — efficiently and cost-effectively. So that this can happen, we have moved to utilize distribution through churches, Father Jun, I don't know if the rice distribution in your parish has started so you can point out who the poor are and sell it there. Also in schools when classes start. Also the government's own distribution network.

Yesterday in Camarines Sur, in Caramoan, in Lahuy, we distributed family access cards to the poor. We don't have family access cards here now, right? No family access cards here now? Okay, what does it mean with the family access cards? In those areas where they are already being distributed, it means that the poor have been identified. And they, those with family access cards, are the ones who can buy NFA rice for P18.25. Because others, those who are not so poor, can buy commercial rice especially now that the price of commercial rice is going down.

Thirdly, we need to be vigilant so that unscrupulous traders do not take advantage of the situation. We are ensuring that anyone caught stealing NFA rice from the people will be punished, and this includes NFA officials who are caught colluding with unscrupulous traders. (applause)

Later in the meeting with the Bishops, AFP, PNP, governors and regional directors, Artie Yap will report on what has been done regarding those arrested here in Albay who colluded with unscrupulous traders.

Now, Bicol, when I first took office, was the second poorest region in the entire country. Now, it is no longer, it is number four – number four it has graduated. (applause)

Because as Joey said, as Reno said, as the Mayor said, we have poured a lot of services here that are part of our 10-point program, including our SEA-K. (applause) Okay, so that there will be more small entrepreneurs here in Oas and in Albay, congratulations to you. (applause)

And as part of our program, to have water in every town, and electricity in every barangay. And I congratulate Oas because all your barangays now have electricity. (applause) And regarding water, very recently we released P5 million for water here in Oas. (applause)

We want to accelerate development, not only of Oas but of the province, not only through rice, or not only through SEA-K, water and electricity but also through the development of tourism because Bicol is part of Central Philippines where 55% of the tourists in our country go to Central Philippines. So let's promote the tourism of Albay. After all, what is the original tourism attraction of Bicol? Nothing else but Mayon Volcano. Even before the Camarines Water Complex, even before Donsol, even before Caramoan, Mayon Volcano was already there.

So Joey, let's campaign for Mayon Volcano to be voted as one of the world’s new seven wonders. (applause) All of those from Albay, all of those from Bicol should vote www.new7wonders.com for Mayon Volcano. But because you need to vote for seven, don't forget, also vote for Tubattaha Reef, Chocolate Hills, and Puerto Princesa Underground River.

In the development of tourism, the role of the government is access – roads and airports. The advantage of Mayon Volcano is that it is close to the airport, the roads are good and it is on the Maharlika Highway. But here in Bicol, if we want tourists from other countries to come directly here, we need an international airport. But it is not possible for every province to have its own international airport, because there wouldn't be enough space for the planes, the planes wouldn't come here if there were only a few passengers, there should be many. So the governors agreed that the international airport of Bicol will be located in Daraga here in Albay. (applause)

It's just right that the Cagsawa ruins are in Daraga, right? The current status, I asked Secretary Lary Mendoza last night, they are already buying the land for that, because if it's an international airport, it's big so they are already buying the land. That's why it's important that we start the international airport and continuously improve Maharlika Road.

You know yesterday, the Maharlika highway, and there's Quirino Highway, then it became Maharlika Highway in Bicol. Yesterday we went to Andaya highway which was formerly part of Quirino Highway, we were teasing Congressman Reno Lim that the part of Maharlika Highway that passes through your district should be called, instead of Quirino highway, Reno highway. (laughter/applause)

But that is our vision for Albay, to become rich through tourism and our vision is based on a strong and growing economy. It’s the central pillar we have labored to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country.

And your progress, from being the second poorest region to now being only fourth, that is also something we have achieved – the strongest economy in thirty years. So let's continue to work together like during my father's time, there, there's a picture of my father and Mayor Greg's father, there. (applause) Like during his time, now again in our time, let's work together so that the programs we mentioned and other programs, we have grocery packs for the poor, we have medicine that will be sold at half price in pharmacies, all these programs will bring further strengthening of our development, in Oas, in Albay, in Bicol, in the entire Philippines.

God bless, happy fiesta to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Oas Town Fiesta Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121851/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1418&Itemid=38