To all of you, workers, a meaningful Labor Day to us all.

Earlier, Mang Mocring Mendoza said that the workers' call is for jobs with good salaries and housing. And that is also our agenda in our government. Because as many say, there are still many unemployed. That is true. But to those who criticize the past administrations, who among them created one million jobs a year? Only we in our administration.

The administration that preceded mine, and even others, the average was 500,000 jobs in two years. We, from January 2006 to January 2007, created 1.5 million jobs. That is why we are working to ensure that those who are unemployed have jobs.

That is why I’m saying our national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single worker.

And as Mr. Tupaz said when he read the manifesto, we expect the day when there are enough good jobs created in the Philippines so that diligent Filipinos no longer need to go abroad to work. As Vladi Tupaz said, the day we are looking forward to is the day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

That is why in the past six years, we have made difficult but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. And now these steps are beginning to pay off. Now we have funds to invest in the dividends of our social partnership.

For example, Vice President Noli De Castro is here, and we can say that Pag-IBIG will distribute six billion pesos worth of dividends to the members. How many of you here are Pag-IBIG members? You will receive dividends, a total of six billion. And will add an additional fund of 30 billion pesos for loans to members, including you, you can be loaned for tuition and your medical emergencies.

If you remember in the past, we forgave the penalties for Pag-IBIG loans. We will continue this condonation. And Pag-IBIG will allocate a new 25 billion pesos for housing, with only six percent interest and payable over thirty years.

Those who criticize us, who among them lowered interest rates to six percent during their time? The interest rate I inherited when I assumed office in 2001 was 14 percent. Now, we have lowered it to six percent. And Noli added, those who were paying the old high interest rates, if you pay off your debts in advance, you will get a bonus, the early birds, you will be given a two percent discount on the old interest you were paying.

And we have many… Because the past ones we inherited – we didn’t build expensive housing, the workers couldn’t afford to pay those installments. What we are doing is we are foreclosing those projects and auctioning them off so you can buy these houses cheaply. So a special discount because these have been pending for so long and couldn’t be sold because too much was spent on construction. We just inherited these white elephants. We made a way to auction them off and sell them to you very cheaply, affordable for workers.

For GSIS, a program for a 10-month salary loan will be created, the scholarship grant will be increased, interest rates will be lowered, and housing loans will be restructured. Hospitalization support will be expanded and services will be improved through computerization – PGEA, your requests.

For SSS, the flexi fund for overseas Filipino workers will be improved and informal workers will be included in our SSS coverage.

For sugar workers, we will establish sugar livelihood centers worth 25 million pesos in Regions III, VI and X. And we will allocate 12.6 million for the sugar workers’ socio economic program.

POEA will use ten percent of its income to fight illegal recruiters even more effectively.

Earlier, in the manifesto read by Vladimir Tupaz, he said there are workers being scammed online. For example, there are jobs available, you pay, but it turns out the job isn’t available. So DOLE will look into this internet, examine if those jobs are real to expose those who are scamming our workers.

To help with the re-integration program, our OFWs who finished education, accounting and others, so they can return and become professional teachers, become professional accountants, because there are so many accountants needed now in our business process outsourcing. The Professional Regulation Commission will conduct examinations in the Middle East, in Hong Kong and other countries.

And yesterday in Malacañang, we started, together with TESDA, the ‘FAST’ (Free Assessment from TESDA). If you need certification, because there are jobs that require certification, TESDA will assess you and you will no longer be charged an assessment fee.

Just recently, we brought home many workers, and we are still currently bringing them home from places where they had problems. This is because we now have a standby revolving fund to pay for the fare of our workers returning home and we no longer need to wait for the employer to pay for your fare.

And also, we will create an OFW pension system. The Bangko Sentral is lowering the cost of sending money to the Philippines and OWWA is allocating 50 million pesos to improve skills, upgrading and bridging programs so that our seafarers can become engineers and deck officers.

The PCSO will provide money to the Migrant Workers Scholarship Fund and another complaint of the workers, when leaving there is an escort service. If you are not paid… If you don’t pay, the service is not good, you will be harassed. That's why the new B.I.D. Commissioner, Nonoy Libanan, will help the airport manager of Al Cusi to remove this escort service at the airport and seaports.

For the informal sector, DOLE will add 50 million pesos for livelihood, including the sector of parents and families of child laborers because this is the principle of the ILO child labor program.

Those who criticize us, what have they done during their time? Those who lived on the railways for years, had no toilets in their area. Now we have given them a comfortable place in Cavite, in Laguna, in Bulacan, their own house, a beautiful house, a comfortable place, with jobs and livelihood but those who continue to work ecto our program is – oh, alright, until you find a job there, continue your work in Recto in Manila, the train is free, right? And earlier I came from the first Workers’ Inn or Gwapotel where you are here working during the weekdays, one bath, one sleep, 25 pesos. And you will go home again on the weekend to your homes. And that is for one thousand workers for now. But if this is successful, we will build many more Gwapotels so that those who have been relocated outside, instead of going ecto the worker and sleeping on the street during weekdays, you have a Workers’ Inn where, for example, if you work in the government, you work five days long, you will only live there for four nights, 100 pesos a week, 400 pesos a month is your expense.

During Women’s Day, I understood, I learned, I found out, that government workers are not reached by microfinance. So tomorrow we will start the microfinance program where each government employee who borrows from microfinance will have a five thousand pesos loan with no collateral. We will do that tomorrow.

And also for government workers, as I announced there on Women’s Day, we will start your 10 percent increase in compensation for government workers this coming July.

The minimum wage. The minimum wage, by executive order – because that’s what I can do, an executive order – we have already issued an executive order stating that minimum wage earners will not pay…will not have a withholding tax deduction. Now, this is what I can say to our Team Unity congressmen and senators, if they win, I can commit to you that in the coming Congress we will pass – as requested by Vladi Tupaz – a law exempting minimum wage earners from paying income tax.

The minimum wage earners, during our administration, their salaries have increased on the average by 100 pesos a day. Now, regarding the additional increase in salaries, I am directing, I’m urging the Regional Tripartite Wage Boards to speed up the resolution of pending wage issues.

We are able to do all of this, including the creation of one million jobs every year, because of strong alliances. We have forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments so that as of January, 1.515 million new jobs were created, and our wage and salary employment grew by 11.4 percent. And this is an important proof that our social partnership is effective, although of course, we still have a lot to do so that the welfare of our workers truly improves. But right now, we can say that an indication of effectiveness is the decrease in the number of strikes. In fact, from the beginning of this year, up to today, the number of strikes that pushed through is one. Only one strike. All others had their problems resolved before reaching a strike.

We believe in the Philippines. We believe in the hardworking people of the Philippines. So let us all work together to make prosperity for our country a reality.

Again, my fellow Filipino workers, as the economy and the country rise, as we prevent the economy and the country from falling, to all of you, thank you very much and long live the Filipino worker!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].