Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 21st National Prayer Breakfast

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, August 16, 2001]

…Says, the Philippine national prayer breakfast has been a tradition or …. To give thanks and ask for God’s blessing. This annual event reaffirms our heritage as a God loving nation.

It has been more than six months when I accepted the mantle of responsibility to lead our people as your president. And it is time for us to have this prayer.

My work ethic is guided by the philosophy, do what is right, do your best, and God will take care of the rest. But to do what is right, I need prayer to discern what is right. To do my best I need prayer for the grace, for the health and the energy. And to make sure that God takes care of the rest, I need prayer to ask God because he will answer if we ask Him.

God’s taking care of the rest when we do what is right and do our best can also be summed up in the article of faith that all things work for the good of those who have a covenant with the Lord.

I believe, like Tita Cory, that my being president is part of the covenant with the Lord. While I do not believe in fate, I believe in divine providence. And as leaders of society, we are placed where we are because of a reason, because of a plan, a divine plan for all of us. And each one of us must pray to discern what that plan is, then act according to our best light to comply with that plan. And yet, always maintain a childlike faith, but it is not us but rather it is God who will have the final say in the fulfillment of his plan.

The key in manifesting God’s plan in our lives lies in our ability through prayer to discern his divine wisdom and to apply it in our daily lives.

The theme of our celebration today reflects how we must go about fulfilling God’s wonderful plan for all of us, as individuals, and as a people. Today’s theme as read by Tita Cory, from 2 chronicles 7:14 says, if my people who are called by my name will humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven. I will forgive their sins and heal their land. This was the verse that we were singing in all the prayer rallies leading up to EDSA 2. It is still the verse that we still keep singing today whenever we get together to pray and to celebrate EDSA 2.

The first stanza of the song version quotes the verse. And the second stanza is our answer. It declares that we are complying with God’s condition for hearing, forgiving and healing us. The second stanza of the song that we all sing in EDSA 2, in EDSA commemorations, tells the Lord that we are calling Him by name, that we are humbling ourselves and praying and seeking his face and turning from our wicked ways. Then we ask Him to hear from heaven and forgive our sins and heal our land.

What does it mean to humble ourselves? For each one of us there is a particular meaning. For me, it means staying detached from the trappings and perks of power. It means, reaching out to those who still carry hatred or cynicism in their heart. It means, forgiving those who have done wrong rather than using my power to do vengeance upon them. And what does it mean to pray?

Let us recall the four kinds of prayers and let us pray in all those different ways. First, there is a prayer of adoration. Let us worship God, simply because he is God, and not only because he is good to us.

Second, there is a prayer of thanksgiving. Let us indeed thank the Lord for all our blessings. Let us not think for a moment that these blessings that we have, we have achieved by ourselves. That we have achieved them because of our own talents and efforts. Because our talents come from God. And our efforts come from the energy provided by his grace. And when we reflect on it, we realize how much God’s role is, and how little our role is in the blessings that we enjoy.

Again, when I reflect upon it myself, the best example is myself. It was God who planned that I would be vice president at the time of EDSA 2. It was God who orchestrated, …… revenge that made me president today. Indeed, in a sense, I’m more fortunate than Tita Cory because she had to loose her husband to martyrdom before she became eligible for the presidency. All I had to do was to be vice president at the right time. And therefore, that to me, is one great source of a gratitude to the Lord. And once again, I say, to God be the glory that I am president of the Philippines today.

Third, is the prayer of contrition. This is the prayer that we were singing in EDSA 2. This is the prayer that we are singing today when we gather together to celebrate our freedom, our democracy and the restored morality of our nation. Even today we ask God to forgive our sins. Indeed, the true God is such a forgiving God, so different from the God that the pagans worship or the gods of mythology whose vengeance makes up the bulk of the stories we read about them. But for our true God to forgive us, he said in chronicles and in many passages, that we must first call Him by name, humble ourselves and pray. This is the prayer of contrition.

Let us not pretend to be so perfect. Let us accept that we are imperfect, that there are times when we do wrong. And let us take advantage of our forgiving God by asking for his pardon.

Finally, there is a prayer of petition. And this is the prayer that almost everyone prays. People may forget to pray in worship, or to pray in thanksgiving, or to pray for forgiveness, but we are always asking God for so many things. But he is such a good God that he wants us to ask. He wants us to petition. He said: ask and you shall receive.

In today’s theme, we are petitioning God to heal our land. Indeed, our land needs so much healing. But I give thanks to the Lord that the healing will probably be made easier from now on, because the mainstream of our society is united. The unity of our society’s mainstream shows in the results of the last may elections. It shows in the eroded capability of those who have been seeking to grab or re-grab power. It shows in the way that the masses have been responding to our outreach. It shows in the fact, in the economy, that after all the reforms in the Bureau of Internal Revenue have been started with great difficulty, last month at last, the BIR exceeded its revenue target. The unity of our mainstream shows in the fact that notwithstanding the doomsayers, here to date, we are still p11 billion pesos below our deficit ceiling. And we can still overspend by p11 billion in the months to come, and still be within our targets. The unity shows in the fact that despite, again, the doomsayers, that the unofficial results of the ARMM elections indicate that Marawi City and the province of Basilan and possibly Cotabato City have voted to join the expanded Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

All these show that the mainstream is united. And when the mainstream is united, the healing is made more possible. But the healing that our land needs today is not really among the mainstream, it is the healing that is needed between those in the mainstream and those in the margins. Healing between the administration and the political opposition. Healing between civil society and those who attempted to do an EDSA 3. Healing between the indifference among the majority and the bitter among the poorest of the poor.

The Lord says in chronicles, that he will heal our land if we turn from our wicked ways. He will heal the hurts between the administration and the opposition if we show in our actions that while no one is above the law, yet no one in power exacts vengeance on the vanquished.

He will heal the cancer within the civil society and the minor but multitude of players of EDSA 3 if we turn away from sanctimony. He will heal the prejudice within the middle forces and the lumpen if we comprehend rather than condescend.

And today, I pray to the Lord, give us the discernment to differentiate between prosecution and persecution. The difference between being principled and being pharisaical. The difference between imposing our values on others and imbibing and emphasizing with their sentiments.

We are, at the moment, of great spiritual opportunities. To choose to do right in the light of God’s will. Those of you who are here are devoted to the mission of leading the spiritual renewal and strengthening our people. There are many who are not here, but also devoted as well to that mission.

I call on all of you and all of them to continue the prayers that we are doing today. And I hope we will do it at least for the entire week. Let us make this week a week of prayer and fasting, for the intention of glorifying the lord, of praising Him for his goodness to our nation, of begging his forgiveness for our sins as a nation, and as individuals, and of asking Him to bless and heal our land.

When I read the bible this morning, as I do everyday, I purposely avoided reading what we had to read in the prayer breakfast today. And so, looking at other readings, I had a chance to reflect upon Matthew chapter 18 verses 21, up to chapter 19 verses 1, which tells of the episode, when peter approached Jesus and asked Him, Lord, if my brother sins against me, how often must I forgive Him? And Jesus answered: I say to you not seven times but seventy seven times. Indeed, if God can forgive us, each time we repent, then we can do no less to those who hurt us especially those who are reaching out to us.

This is one reason why the Lord’s Prayer is a perfect prayer. It asks God to forgive our sins as we forgive those who sin against us. The Lord’s Prayer is also the perfect prayer because it begins with worship before going into supplication. Hollowed be Thy name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done, before he says, give us this day our daily bread. We are not perfect, but we can say the perfect prayer, the Lord’s Prayer and other kinds of prayers that the Lord teaches us thru the bible. Indeed, we must say the perfect prayer. This is our duty and our privilege because we are God’s special people.

In the chronicles verse that Tita Cory read, God says: if my people who are called by my name. We are that people called by his name. We are Christians. In fact, we are the only Christian nation in Asia. And yet, at the same time, we must remember that our country, our society is a multi-ethnic society. And even if our Muslim brothers call themselves by another name, we are all worshipping the same God; only he is called by a different name. We are his new chosen people. Let us live as his people who are called by his name. Let us humble ourselves. Let us pray. Let us seek his face.

How do we seek God’s face? Again, for each one of us, we have a different inspiration on how we must seek God’s face. And let me share my inspiration on how I must seek God’s face. Where do we see the face of Jesus?

When I was praying as I was writing this speech in prayer, the answer came to me in the story of the last judgment, where the Lord said: when you did it to the least of my brethren, you did it to me, says the Lord. And I ask you my friends, in this prayer breakfast, to pray for me — that I must always seek the face of God in the faces of the least of our brethren. In the faces of the like of Jason, Jomar and Erwin, the children from Payatas who sent me their message of petition in paper boats which they sent floating down the Pasig river. In the faces of those like them who look for a home, a school, a job. In the face of those who do not eat three meals a day. Pray for me because as President of the Philippines, it is imperative that I seek the face of God in their faces. It is imperative that I worship Him by serving them. It is imperative that I do not stumble as I seek to empower 150,000 urban poor families a year to be able to buy their own homes. As I seek to build schools for the unserved 4,500 barangays within the next three years. As I seek to create a million jobs in agriculture before this administration ends. As I seek to provide food for every table. I need you to help me to pray so that I can do what is right, do my best and let God take care of the rest, in providing the jobs, the schooling, the homes and the food on every table.

Let us then unite in the spirit of God’s undying love. And reaffirm through prayer and action that moral and spiritual strength are, indeed, the key elements of God’s good leadership.

For while the new century bring us a new economy, with all its new opportunities and new perils, the moral imperatives remain the same: to worship and love God with our whole heart, our whole mind, our whole soul and to love our neighbor as we love ourselves. Let us unite in faith that we may be able to generate the strength that we need to bring us to the fulfillment of God’s promise of a land that has been tilled.

Today’s gathering is a blessed way to start a day in prayer, united in the spirit of fellowship and proclaiming God’s promises on the family. It is also a good way to start our work in the Lord.

Philippians chapter 4 verses 6 tells us, that in everything by prayer and by supplication, with thanks giving, let your requests be made known unto God. And the peace of god which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. Let prayer, indeed, be our strongest bond as a people. Let us pray for each other. And as Philippians says, let our petitions be known to God. He knows, of course, what we want even before we have asked it. But we must ask it because we must humble. We must humble ourselves and pray. Because he is our God and we are his people.

Let our prayers be filled with praise and worship and adoration, for our dear Lord ………unceasingly rewards us with his grace and blessings. Let us pray for the fulfillment of our nation and our people as God’s special nation, God’s special people. Amen.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 21st National Prayer Breakfast. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213154/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8704&Itemid=38