Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much.

Thank you Secretary Rey Chua, Chairman of the Commission on ICT for your introduction. Thank you also to President Vince Fabella for your very kind words of welcome and for showing me an example of your ADEPT classes.

I’d like to introduce also the Chairman of CHED, Manny Angeles;our new Press Secretary Jun Icban; and my special fond greeting to one of the ladies of my father’s… one of the Cabinet ladies, Mrs. Marinella Fabella of my father’s time.

I am really very happy to be here at JRU, and although it is not the reason why I am here now, I’m happy to hear the recollection of Vince about Armand Fabella, revered member of the Fabella family who founded this school. He was one of the youngest Cabinet members of my late father’s administration. He was the head of the program implementation agency which later on combined with the National Economic Council became the National Economic and Development Authority. And as Vince said… well, no, I will add the commentary, he was so young in my father’s Cabinet that 40 years later in my own administration, I was still able to tap him to be Chairman of the UCPB. And he led a team that turned that bank around from an insolvent bank to now a going concern. So, I’d like to thank him for that posthumously.

One of the things that President Vince did not point out to you is that one of my favorite laws that I passed when I was a senator was the expanded Build- Operate-and-Transfer Law which improved the BOT Law and expanded it to other private sector participation and physical infrastructure, and one of the most important resource persons I had sitting if I was here defending the bill sitting right there in the gallery whispering to me all the answers to the technical questions was no other than analyst consultant Vince Fabella. So, I thank him for that.

And the result of that law I think you can see all over Metro Manila and the provinces, all the BOT projects being built: the North Luzon Expressway, the South Luzon Expressway, the Skyway, the Caticlan Airport and so many others. So, I’m glad to be here and I was happy that the last time I was here I was here for the installation of Dr. Fabella as president of your university.

Now I am here as part of a tour of the Super Regions to review our legacy of accomplishments. The Super Regions were designed to decongest Metro Manila and spread development. They are: Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Luzon Urban Beltway and the Cyber Corridor. Mandaluyong where we are, Metro Manila where we are belongs both to the Luzon Urban Beltway and the Cyber Corridor.

The Cyber Corridor is made up of the strongest actual and potential locations for ICT investments, including call centers, back office, software development, medical transcription, engineering design, animation game development and others. It currently houses 750 call centers and BPO companies and counting, and these companies are served by three high-bandwidth backbone and digital networks.

What composes the Cyber Corridor is jointly identified and periodically updated by the private sector, the academe and government. For now it starts from the north from Metro Pampanga and goes down to the south in Davao City. It includes of course Metro Manila and Metro Cebu which were the country’s two original ICT Centers of Excellence, and 10 urban areas being promoted as the so-called 10 “Next Wave Cities” to be the best new destinations of the ICT industry: Metro Laguna, Metro Cavite, Iloilo, Davao, Bacolod, Metro Pampanga, Metro Bulacan, Cagayan de Oro, Central Bulacan and Lipa. And ranked among the top 50 cities worldwide as suited for BPO are Cebu, Pasig, Quezon City and Mandaluyong. These are worldwide choices of the top 50. So, I congratulate Mandaluyong and its citizens like JRU.

And I like to believe that JRU is a factor as identified by the world’s industry for Mandaluyong’s potential for BPO and ICT because you offer, aside from a B.S. in IT, a B.S. in Engineering, your ADEPT. I understand that there are only 20 schools offering ADEPT. This is a six-unit course that at the end of the six units brings about a 60 or 70 percent chance of your being taken in for a job in a BPO or ICT industry. And so more power to JRU and more power to our students going to the ADEPT program.

So, I came here because they arranged for me a look in, a drop in into an ADEPT class because if we are to visit any Super Region, visits to schools are an essential backdrop like for instance in ICT and BPO we cannot have that without the school’s providing the manpower to be able to make that industry flourish.

And that is true of every Super Region, so we must visit the schools especially because I want to reach out to the youth of this nation. You the youth are our future. The future of this nation depends on the next generation.

The Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. Most of you were kids at that time, so you probably don’t remember much about that tumultuous time less than ten years ago. Even for your titas and your lolas, they probably have forgotten that at that time the nation was on the brink of political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made. Few jobs were being created. The debt of the government and its corporations, I believe including UCPB at that time, a 3.6 trillion pesos was bigger than our GDP of 3.3 trillion pesos. There were almost no foreign reserves.

It was a time of lower salaries and higher prices. Tax revenues were so low that we could hardly invest in expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I did not seek the Office of the President in 2001; it was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

These actions would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver an unprecedented 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth, create 9 million new jobs, and add 53 billion people to healthcare, while keeping government coffers stable enough to merit credit upgrades at the height of the global recession.

In my first State of the Nation Address, I said that we would create wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills-intensive sectors such as ICT. From scratch with only 2,000 workers we created what is today a global powerhouse — the Philippine BPO industry. We achieved this by promoting strategic investments in three areas:

First, digital infrastructure. We encouraged more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. Thanks to these investments in connectivity, the cost of international calls went down from 40 cents to 2 cents a minute through the VOIP. The number of internet users jumped from 2 million in year 2000 to more than 24 million today.

That’s why you have an infrastructure for BPO and ICT to develop. And so that no Taiwan tremor or tsunami can cut off our cyber services from their global clients, we encouraged PLDT and Globe to invest billions in having more than one international telecommunications gateway. So throughout all of the calamities around the world our BPOs continue to operate 24/7.

The second area for investing was an appropriate policy and legal environment. We created the Commission on ICT chaired by Rey Chua. It is guided by the policy that the ICT sector should be guided by the market, with minimal government interference. For example, if the market calls for call centers, we should not force them to specialize in something else. Instead of regulating, we gave incentives to developers of IT parks, assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites, built more transport facilities to those sites. And this morning I went to one of the IT inaugurations and the chairman of the board told me, that after he met me in 2007 in New York in one of my trips, he decided to come and invest in the Philippines because we have a very strong Intellectual Property Regulatory framework.

This philosophy of letting the market determine business decisions but supporting them drove the fast growth of call centers. Now the market is further leading the growth to the higher value added segments of the offshoring and outsourcing industries, such as accounting, legal, medical, personnel and administrative services.

And third… oh no, before I go the the third. About the second, about how the markets has been leading to these services. Earlier I mentioned in year 2000 salaries were very low. Today, a BPO agent begins with 15,000 pesos not including bonuses and allowances. And as you go up the value chain into IT, today when I went to the IT Center, many of the employees that I talked to were expatriates. They had done IT work in Singapore, in New York, in China, in the UK but they came home because the salaries are comparable to what they were receiving abroad plus they are able to be with their families. So because of BPO and ICT we have a regime of better salaries and better pay.

But that means the third investment, and this is where JRU is so important, the development of human capital. We start with the basic education, English as the medium of instruction which we are restoring, and we’re making our high school students familiar with the computer and the internet. So more than 5,000 public high schools now have computer laboratories. Almost 4,000 of them have been connected to the internet.

And in technical education and skills training, we have invested three times as much as the combined budgets for three previous administrations and a very large portion of these investments goes to scholarships for the BPO and IT industry.

But I understand that ADEPT is in JRU is a self-supporting course. You are not getting any money from the government for that, in fact, you are giving the government skilled manpower that will man the future of our economy and that is the growth sectors like ICT. So, congratulations to JRU for that!

So thanks to these strategic investments by the public and the private sector like JRU. Billions of investments had been poured into the country, creating half a million new jobs in BPO and ICT.

Today, the Philippines with 90 million people has challenged India’s one billion population for BPO supremacy. Compared to 0.02 billion in 2001, our BPO industry earned 7.3 billion dollars in 2009, not far behind India’s 9 billion dollars for call centers. And for the second time, the United Kingdom’s National Outsourcing Association awarded the Philippines as the Offshoring Destination of the Year.

The 500,000 jobs we are creating in ICT are part of the legacy that I am happy to leave. A legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investments in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure like roads and bridges, irrigation and RORO ports.

Much remains to be done, but I am determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines ready for the challenge of bringing the nation to the verge of first world in 20 years. Ten years ago, you were children, 20 years from now, you will be the leaders of our country whether you are in politics, in business or in civil society. I hope that by that time, the preparations that had been made for you in this generation will serve you well. And in these preparations, I want to thank JRU for playing such a big role in preparing our human capital to go to the first world in 20 years.

Thank you very much to all of you. Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Cyber Corridor National Capital Region Tour: Visit to Jose Rizal University (JRU). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235122/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27420&Itemid=38