To recognize the members of the diplomatic corps from the organization of the Islamic conference who have been so supportive of our peace and development efforts for Muslim Mindanao. I think we should know each one of them. Plus they have come here personally to know us better here. We have somebody who has been in the Philippines for such a long time that he’s practically a Filipino, the Ambassador of Libya, Ambassador Salem Adam. We also have of the organization of the Islamic conference has been so supportive of the Philippine position, Ambassador of Bangladesh, Ambassador Munir Uz-Zaman. With him is Madame Munir Uz-Zaman, the Lady of the Bangladesh Ambassador; Philippines in the OIC, the Chair of the Committee of the eight is Indonesia and we have here the Charge d’ Affaires of Indonesia, Alexader Laturiuw; and the Chairman of the BIMP-EAGA that we hope will be part of the fruits of peace and development, the Ambassador from Brunei, Ambassador Hajah Maimunah Dato Paduka Haji Elias. The region of Muslim Mindanao, the World Bank Representative in the Philippines Mr. Vance Pulley.

Here in our area. Mayor Montawal, the Mayor of Pagalungan. Thank you for being here despite the work being done, Mayor Annie Montawal; also the Mayor of the neighboring town across the river but these three should be one economy, the Mayor of Pikit, Mayor [name], and also loves us all, and here is the barangay captain here in Inug-Ug, Captain Ibrahim Malabana; and the President of the ABC, thank you for your welcome remarks. And I also want to greet the officials of “Tabang Mindanaw” whose help is so great that we are all here today.

You already know that President Aquino is the honorary chair of “Tabang Mindanaw.” The moving spirit of “Tabang Mindanaw” is also Ambassador Howard Dee. I made him my Presidential Adviser for the Indigenous peoples and he helped me rebuild and form the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples. That’s why he loves all of you and all of us very much.

And also a moving spirit especially here in this area, the bishop of Kidapawan, most reverend Bishop Valle. He called me last night, because he said I should speak. I said, it is a great honor to have President Aquino with us, he should be our guest of honor and main speaker. But Bishop Valle said, “the people of Pagalungan also want to hear what the government's policies are, so it’s good that you speak too.” Well, the bishop said it’s hard not to obey.

And I also want to greet the head of the entire board of the Public Estate Authority, and he was tasked earlier to give a response for the Datu Paglas town, Datu himself, Toto Paglas; Angie Reyes is the Chairman here because of their thinking, so they are always mistaken for each other. And there are many helps, Secretary of Official Development Assistance, Mai Jimenez; I want to greet Mothers for Peace. And we have Mothers for Peace from Manila here.

Truly, this is a very good thing that you are a sanctuary of peace. As Bishop Valle said earlier, sanctuaries of peace are, oh! You didn’t write it, my Presidential Adviser on Strategic concerns. He is the one helping me with my entire Mindanao campaign now to be whole, not just soldiers, not just… But all military, diplomatic, cultural, political, religious information — all adjectives — he is my adviser, Secretary Rene De Villa. Oh! Why wasn’t that written. With so many Cabinet members here, I can’t look at them one by one; our new chairman of the Peace Panel, Secretary Ed Rrmita. And the former chairman of the Peace Panel…

…Just tell me, it is not an imposition, it is coming from the decision of the people in the community. And that is my big greeting to you.

Of “Tabang Mindanaw” to take shape so it can reach the government, the soldiers, even the rebels themselves. And what “Tabang Mindanaw” is doing is very good, because what they are doing is an answer to my long-held belief.

I believe that as long as we, as the people of the entire Philippines, do not reach an agreement in Mindanao, we will never achieve our promise as a great nation.

Therefore, we need to reach a national understanding on the principles that will guide our search for peace. And I will use this opportunity to reiterate these principles.

One principle is that our primary goal should be peace and development together. So, Mayor Montawal mentioned that he supports my declaration, and I said, why a ceasefire by installment? It should be a permanent ceasefire, it should be a final peace agreement.

And this saying that it should be a final peace agreement is a response to our second principle. Our second principle is that our framework should be based on our constitution, on national sovereignty, a unified nation, and the integrity of our national territory.

Our third principle is that our society is multi-ethnic. We are a multi-ethnic society. We must recognize that we are a multi-ethnic society. This means that we must have social justice for all and we must have institutionalized accommodation of the various ethnic traditions. Christian and Muslim, Chinese and mestizo, Tagalog and Cebuano, these are just some of the names that Filipinos answer to as a very important witness of our heritage as a nation. So, in accordance with our institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions, if a mosque is damaged, even here in Pagalungan, even in Buliok, wherever it happens or a mosque is accidentally damaged in battle, it is the duty of our armed forces to rebuild it… Our soldiers themselves will rebuild these mosques. And it will be made into a complex issue that I want to happen, no soldiers, no MILF there. Let us offer it to a Muslim NGO recommended by the Office of Muslim Affairs, that is what we will do.

And I also want to say, yesterday wasn't it the celebration of our Independence Day? I delivered a speech to the entire nation from Zamboanga City. Part of what I narrated was for far-flung areas, especially where schools are being destroyed or teachers are afraid to go because of the fighting, we will put in place distance learning. We will put in schools that come through television. Teaching on television. And part of what we will use are the technovans of the Technology and Livelihood Resource Center. These go around places teaching livelihood training so that both parents and children can learn to read, count, and write. And we will put a TLRC technovan for distance learning for school on television here in the Pagalungan, Pagagawan and Pikit complex.

You still need medicine, rice, canned goods, necessities because many are losing their livelihoods due to the war. I brought a check from the Sweepstakes worth 100,000 pesos for Pagalungan and Pagagawan.

Yesterday also, in my Independence Day message, I said that in our celebration of Independence Day, our most important definition of human freedom is Mindanao – freedom from fear; freedom from lack; freedom from injustice. Our aspiration here in this sanctuary of peace here in Barangay Inug-ug, our aspiration is to ensure that the people of Barangay Inug-ug become – that’s right – they achieve these freedoms desired by our entire nation, the Philippines.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of the “SANCTUARIES OF PEACE” Program by the ‘Tabang Mindanaw’. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412200702/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6469&Itemid=38