Thank you very much, Secretary Lapus.

Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; Mayor Lim; the congressman from this district, Congressman Amado Bagatsing; our other Congress persons who are here today with us: Congressman Benny Abante, Congressman Asilo, Congressman Roxas, Congresswoman Susano — Oh? No, I greeted Bagatsing first, it’s his district, okay. It’s his district, okay. Didn’t I greet you first? Okay — (laughter)…Our members of the Committee who worked very hard to make this out-of-the-box Independence Day Commemoration headed by Secretary Lapus but we have Chairman Ambeth Ocampo who’s been very active as well; other members of the Cabinet and national government officials who are here today; our officers of the Armed Forces and the police; non-government organizations; my other colleagues in the government; fellow countrymen; ladies and gentlemen.

Happy 110th Anniversary of the Republic of the Philippines!

Fellow countrymen:

One century and one decade have passed since the declaration of independence of the new Philippine Republic there in Kawit, Cavite. Then as now, our country faced many threats and many challenges. Even though independence was proclaimed in Kawit, many parts of the Philippines were still under the force of colonialism.

However, the heroes who founded our country did not back down. They did not succumb to any doubts about their future. Instead, they strengthened the spirit of the entire nation to let the whole world know that a new nation was born, the Philippines, which is ready to participate in the community of free nations around the world.

In the present time, in the face of the threats and challenges brought about by the fate of the whole world, we must internalize and continue to revive the qualities that made our fathers and mothers of our country great. Their patriotism, their concern for others, the firmness of their determination to establish and defend a free and progressive nation.

For our Independence Day this year, the overarching theme is “Republic Service for Complete Freedom and Progress.”

Chairman Ambeth Ocampo was telling me, was telling us about his first chairmanship of the working group in 2002, that the parade was too short. I was telling him I wasn’t really scolding him because it had been the Cabinet members who said, “Let’s make the parade short.” But after the parade, I was watching TV and one of the citizens who came all the way from Isabela told the TV reporter, “I came all the way from Isabela to see all those floats and I didn’t see too many of them.” So it’s really very difficult to figure out what is the right length of a parade.

Anyway, this year we have no such dilemma, but we have decided that in keeping with how we are trying to conserve our resources so that we can give direct service to the people during this period of high world prices of oil and food, we have decided to dispense with the parade and use the budget instead to give direct service to the poor.

Therefore, this theme emphasizes the paramount duty of our government to serve the people, to redeem our long struggle for freedom, and to achieve national development.

This duty to serve is even more vividly offered to the ranks of the poor, the poorest of our countrymen, who are currently being battered by the current problems brought about by the global economy. If we cannot avoid these problems that come from abroad, it is still our duty to distribute aid to those who are suffering from them.

The Philippines has built a robust economy, helping to face the challenge of the global surge in food and oil prices. Our efforts are bearing fruit: in 2007, the economy reached its highest growth in over thirty years, the peso is strong, and we are close to balancing the budget.

As a result of the economic recovery, we are able to invest in key sectors to cushion the blow to the poor from the rising cost of rice and oil. We are also able to continue investing in necessary infrastructure such as roads, bridges, and education, to name a few. While balancing these very necessary investments with the commitment to fulfill our fiscal obligations and balance the budget by 2010.

The stability of the foundations of our economy is also helped by the increasing number of different countries buying our products. For example, we are no longer so dependent on our sales to America, and we are much stronger in entering China and other Asian markets.

We tirelessly strive to address the challenges brought about by the weakening of the world economy and the rise in oil and food prices. These global forces severely impact the poor.

It is clear that the state of the economy, due to the high price of oil and food worldwide, is a challenge, and we are facing it with full enthusiasm. We are intervening to defend our most vulnerable citizens.

The government is working to ensure that the country's food sufficiency is stable and to put food on the table of every Filipino.

Our plan has three pillars: ensuring sufficient rice supply, monitoring the orderly sale of rice, and arresting those who hoard and smuggle rice.

We have already tracked down, apprehended, and filed cases against many profiteers. Although the legal process is lengthy, and rightly so in a democracy, do not mistake: we are acting swiftly and forcefully against those who violate the law.

Our efforts are also focused on the most vulnerable, to ensure that they are the first to get the rice they need.

We have adequate supply of rice today, and we have a solid plan for self-sufficiency. This is important for our domestic and international audiences to appreciate. Meanwhile, we are contributing rice and food to the reserves, but for the future. We will be able to deliver food to the table. And I am gratified and grateful to the Lord that notwithstanding the very high price of rice in the whole world market in the last two quarters, hunger has gone down significantly. Thank God for that.

We are always concerned about the electricity bills paid by families. As much as possible, we want to lower them.

When it comes to oil, the impact of high diesel prices and daily necessities is heaviest on the poor. Although the high price of oil is a global problem and beyond the power of a government, we are implementing programs to help our citizens. We lowered the tariff or customs duty on oil, making it zero. We are also providing money to the most vulnerable to help them afford their electricity bills.

But whatever we do, this is a global problem, and we must work together to alleviate it, to find a solution in the distant future.

In energy, as in food, this is a global issue and much of what we can do is beyond our capacity. Nevertheless, we provide selective relief for crude oil focused on those most in need. We are promoting vigorous actions to conserve energy and rely more on our own energy sources, through investments in natural gas, geothermal and electricity from the sun and wind. And thankfully we have our own crude oil production to meet ten percent of our needs.

The problems of the global economy are a heavy burden on the whole world and on the Philippines. And we will invest in the people to get through this time.

Much remains to be done. We will work to fulfill our reform plans for the Philippines. We will fight for the Economy, Education and the Environment.

Our ancient heroes founded a new nation through their unity, sacrifice and sense of unity. If we also fill our hearts with the same love of country, we too will reap the sweet fruits of freedom, justice and progress. We will also be able to stand alongside other great and free nations of the world.

Towards this lofty goal, I now ask that we all unite for the sake of Motherland, for the sake of the family of every citizen, for the sake of future generations.

Once again, to all of us, Happy 110th Independence Day.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 110th Anniversary of the Proclamation of Philippine Independence Plaza San Lorenzo Ruiz. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412121347/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1562&Itemid=38