Thank you very much Secretary Mike Defensor for introducing me. And thank you very much because you are obedient, our housing program is accelerating.

Ms. Ocampo, our National President of PGEA; Mr. Minoto, who leads the Social Ministry of Couples for Christ; Deputy Executive Secretary Tale; Winston Garcia, president of GSIS; Romero Quimbo, who leads Pag-IBIG — isn't it Pag-IBIG? — and Dr. Ponciano Jeres, the vice president of PGEA; delegates to the housing needs conference of government employees; other government officials; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Good afternoon to my fellow servants of our country.

I congratulate the Philippine Government Employees Association for holding this meeting about housing for government employees. You are a model Government Employees Association. Because you do not try to bring down the government from which your livelihood comes. What you do is look for ways to expand the blessings of your members, as you are doing today. That is why, with my great admiration for you, I invited you to hold this meeting in the home of the Philippines, the home of the government, your home, Malacañang Palace.

I recognize the Philippine Government Employees Association as the true representative of the great worker in the government. You are proof that government workers continue to serve not only the needs of the public but also your colleagues in the government.

In my State of the Nation Address last year, I said that the government's goal is to have a home for a thousand workers every year. What you are doing now is a big help to achieve this goal. That is why we are giving it our full attention.

It is only right to address the housing needs of all Filipino workers, whether private or public.

I know you really want to speed up the housing service and ensure that it is affordable for every employee. Currently, a large percentage of our personnel belong — as Ms. Ocampo said — to the lower salary grade, rank-and-file. These people, if they are not renting, live with relatives — and as Ms. Ocampo said — some even live in squatter areas.

The need for housing is also a priority issue of government workers, which was presented last December 4 and 5 — as Ms. Ocampo said — at the National Convention of Government Employees at the PICC. That is why, as she also said, I immediately agreed with the PGEA that we need to speed up the housing program for government employees.

I expect this conference to serve as a collaboration for us to clarify and address your housing issues and needs.

Therefore, I am directing the HUDCC, Pag-IBIG and GSIS to provide all support not only for the success of this conference but also for the achievement of concrete results of your future initiatives.

I am pleased that Winston Mismo is here — I didn't even recognize him. He has lost weight from his one-year job at GSIS — So Winston, because we rarely get together, listen carefully to my instructions, and follow me:

Number One, I am directing GSIS to work with PGEA to facilitate the access of government employees to affordable housing programs and provide sources of funds. Facilitate is the operative word here. Meaning, I don’t want red tape. Meaning, I don’t want the GSIS to dictate and limit the number of designs the government workers want to adopt. The rules for lending should only revolve around the amount of the housing loan, not the kind of housing because that should be the prerogative of the individual government employee. In fact, if an employee wants a more expensive model than the loan provides for so be it, as long as the employee is willing to finance the difference from other sources.

Also, when I had the last commission meeting of the Presidential Commission on Mass Housing before I abolished it, when we saw that the amount of money that GSIS is actually spending for housing is quite small compared to verbal commitments, and when we examined why — one excuse was given, that because GSIS does it through conduits — private banks and because many private banks are quite conservative due, among other things, to the red tape which has been reduced, and also because of their bad experience during the Asian crisis and also the 2001 crisis, they’re quite reluctant to lend out their money as long as they still have many non-performing assets. But I said, well, that’s because they have their own obligations to their stockholders. But in that meeting I said, if the private sector is still reluctant then expand your conduits to include Pag-ibig itself as a conduit.

So I’m reminding you, Winston, that Pag-IBIG should be a conduit and I think when Pag-IBIG is made a conduit then the money will go out faster to our government employees. okay? good.

Now on HUDCC — ah, here’s Mike, I always see him anyway, but I’ll just make the instruction public so that you’ll be happy — I believe, Mike that the government employees want to identify a land area for Presidential Proclamation to be developed and declared as a housing site for government employees. So I am endorsing this request of PGEA to implement a housing project for low-salaried government employees to be incorporated in the preparation of a masterplan for the lungsod silangan area. That’s their… request, that’s what I endorsed. But I want to know, is there a masterplan for the lungsod silangan area? So there is one. There are cases, because I was thinking, if there really isn’t a masterplan, if there are a lot of problems, this is one fallback.

Earlier, I instructed the DOJ to start transferring Bilibid Prison from Muntinlupa to the military reservation in Tanay. But in case your master plan doesn’t push through — and we have to know that in a few month’s time — one option is for that portion of the military reservation that was supposed to be for the Bilibid, we can reallocate it to government housing, but we need a decision soon on that because we also cannot hold the DOJ hanging. so no need of this. Okay. Good, no need of this. Because if not, I would have to transfer the prisoners from Tanay to Fort Magsaysay instead. I was just thinking because Fort has plenty of land. I was just thinking about the families of the prisoners if they have to go all the way to Fort Magsaysay. So if you have your land then at least we don’t have to do that, and DOJ can continue working on transferring Bilibid to Tanay which is much easier for their families to visit. Okay.

Now in Pag-IBIG: I am instructing the Pag-IBIG to allocate the unoccupied housing units available for disposition under the rent-to-own scheme to PGEA members.

Now, it doesn't mean you have a quota, okay? Because the PGEA does it on a “first come-first served” basis. So while Pag-ibig cannot allocate a quota to PGEA because of the “first come-first served” basis, what Pag-ibig should do is to provide PGEA regularly with the list of available rent-to-own units on a weekly basis. Oh, they can prioritize. meaning, if two applications arrive, other things being equal, the government employee will be first — that’s what prioritizing means.

So, you PGEA members should attend the rent-to-own briefing every Saturday at the Atrium building in Makati, because that’s where the availability is always updated.

Now GSIS, National Home Mortgage Finance and hgc should adopt the rent or lease-to-own scheme of Pag-ibig and extend this to government employees.

And subject to COA rules, I am approving the GSIS proposal that instead of selling foreclosed residential properties, GSIS should sell its abandoned housing units at discounted amounts to its members. I understand GSIS has identified 3,000 abandoned units which it took out from developers. So please confer with the commission on audit at the soonest possible time to work out how this can be done without being construed as violating the law.

Ang official government conduit or representative to COA is the DBM. So I would suggest, Winston that you work with Emi Boncodin to work with the chairman of COA regarding this.

One of the achievements of this administration is that we have reduced interest rates to an all-time low. We achieved this through fiscal discipline that kept our budget deficit down to a 147 billion. But this all-time low in treasury bill rates should translate into lower interest rates for the consumers and the Filipino families. I have appealed to the banking sector to translate their lower borrowing rates to lower lending rates. Sa private sector banks makakaapila lamang ako because this is a free enterprise society and I cannot impose on them what interest rate they will charge, but the public sector financial institutions are under the president of the Philippines, and I am telling them they must set the example. Thus, I am instructing all the government lending agencies, particularly the GSIS, to exercise modern financial management that will reduce your lending rate for housing loans. I won’t tell you how much because you have to exercise your financial management, but certainly the rates you are charging now are the rates that were being charged when interest rates were very high. But interest rates are low now and the consumer, the lowly worker, including the government worker should be able to feel the blessings of our fiscal program.

I understand that GSIS is also planning to extend a restoration loan to member-buyers at an average of a 100,000 to 150,000. Well, if this is possible without sacrificing the goal of reducing interest rates then go ahead. But this is my advise and prioritization instruction — rather than spreading your administration over so many programs, I think you should concentrate on providing the basic, the housing itself. Let us target the whole housing sector, including GSIS a 100,000 housing for the workers including government workers. and if we provide that, never mind the other side programs. That’s the most important thing, let us focus on the basics. So this is my instruction for GSIS — mabuti nandito si Winston, paminsan-minsan nakikita ko siya.

So this is what I believe will help us to achieve our targets for this year and thereby reduce poverty even among our government employees.

Now, to you in PGEA, I have a request. I already said that I want to have good governance, and on my first working day — the first Monday I was President — I defined the pillars of good governance: moral ascendancy in the leadership — that’s my instruction to myself; an ethic of transparency in all government actions — that’s why Emi Boncodin, the cabinet members, they have to work on the systems; the third is an ethic of effective implementation by the bureaucracy at all levels — that’s you. That’s what I’m asking from you.

And because of this — it’s good that Joe Tale is here, maybe his organization can help too — I have said publicly many times that to promote an ethic of effective implementation I want values formation programs to be revived in the various government agencies, but not necessarily conducted by the head of the government agencies.

I have told the various evangelical groups, Catholic Charismatic, Couples for Christ, whoever is doing the values formation, you should talk to the PGEA.

Kaya ‘yon, what the government would like to do for you is to give you housing and other benefits to improve your standard of living; what the government asks from you is good governance and an ethic of effective implementation in the bureaucracy. and we are empowering you to work out those programs yourselves, kasi malaki ang tiwala ko sa PGEA.

Again, my colleagues working in the government, congratulations on your housing agency. And I hope these instructions I gave to our housing and related government agencies are followed well because I thought about these instructions carefully because this is what will benefit and speed up the housing program for our workers.

Thank you very much and good luck to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Housing Conference of the Philippine Government Employees Association (PGEA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225915/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7640&Itemid=38