TOGETHER, WE WILL PREVAIL!

This ceremony never fails to impress. It invests the highest official of the land with the chief care of the nation, and the principal responsibility of leaving it better than when she took it in hand.

Let me speak plainly. When I step down six years from now this will be my 10-point legacy. I shall have created more than 6 million jobs, perhaps, even 10 million jobs. Mahigit anim na milyong trabaho, kung maaari sampung milyong trabaho. I shall have supported 3 million entrepreneurs by giving them loans and helping them become good managers. That way, we shall be establishing a deep foundation for a broad middle class.

I shall have developed 1 million hectares, if possible 2 million of agribusiness land by making them productive and transporting their products to the markets efficiently. Everyone of school age will be in school in an uncrowded classroom, in surroundings conducive to learning. I want every child to be able to go to school. There is enough space in the classroom and there is a computer in every lesson.

I shall have balanced the budget by collecting the right revenues and spending on the right things. The network of transport and digital infrastructure on which my government embarked in the last 3 years will have linked the entire country.

Power and water will be regularly provided to all barangays. Electricity and water for all barangays.

Metro Manila will be decongested with economic activity growing and spreading to new centers of government business and community in Luzon, in the Visayas and in Mindanao. The Subic-Clark corridor will be the most competitive international service and logistic center in the Southeast Asian Region.

Elections. Elections will no longer raise a single doubt about their integrity. The electoral process will be completely computerized. Tama na ang manu-manong pagsusuma ng boto. And long before that, peace will have come to Mindanao. All insurgence shall have turned their swords into plowshares. They will have become so absorbed into one society that the struggles of the past will be just a stuff of legend.

The divisive issues generated by EDSA I, II and III will also be just memories shared by friends from every side in those upheavals. Only the lessons of unity, courage and a just closure left alive in their hearts. We must end the conflicts stemming from EDSA I, II and III in a just manner. What unites us is greater than what divides us as a nation. We are a vibrant nation. Democracy is alive. The hearts of the people are fervent. Diligence and perseverance, faith in God and love for family are at the core of our being. Filipinos are known throughout the world. Known for their honest character, noble spirit and strong personality. We fight for what we believed in. The last election clearly saw this fighting Filipino spirit at its best. Roco, Lacson, Villanueva and Poe all fought with conviction. If only we could now fight together with the same energy and conviction to preserve our freedoms and advance our nation’s progress.

We know now what we can do when we set our minds to it. We know now how well we can unite the people around our respective causes. Can we not work together to rally the nation behind the paramount objective of its salvation? To succeed and achieve our dreams, we must unite. Remove the obstacles that divide our country. Promote livelihood for the poor. Justice for all. That is the foundation of true unity. Our unity as a people will be defined by a strong vision for the nation built on common values of hard work, shared sacrifice and love of country. The unity we seek is not one of conformity but unwavering respect for the rules and institutions of democracy, a modern country founded on social justice enjoying economic prosperity. To achieve a united country, we need to face the deep divisions of our nation squarely, not only the truth but also the solution. That solution must engage all segments of society in a new government of political reform and economic change.

Our nation must embrace a vision of economic opportunity, social cohesion and always and ever democratic faith. I offer my hand and I hope it will be taken with the same faith. Unity is not measured by how many political parties are able to achieve the accommodation of narrow self-interest, rather it is achieved by the harmony of the sincere convictions based on our agreement on the basic requirements for achieving the national good.

We are not merely a collection of islands surrounded by water, but a nation connected by the seas and united by the rich characteristics of the different parts of the people. We are not separated by hopeless despair, but united by the progress we dream of. Our ability to unify will be judged by our ability to come together under a common vision that will erase the divisions that hold us back as a nation. The government must make tough choices, but this I promised they will be tougher on those who have it easy than on those who have it tough already. In this way alone lies unity and not exploitation and division. The hope and dreams of the poorest citizens must be included in what the nation aspires to, so that we do not all fail.

It is immoral for the rich and powerful to endlessly enjoy themselves while giving less and less to the poor. It is immoral for the government to be insensitive and corrupt while the poor lack medicine, schools, housing and water. It is immoral to allow the enemies of our democracy to frighten our children, paralyze the economy and ruin our future because the most affected by all of this are the poor. That is why I am here today, carrying the mandate of the people, to unite the people and fight for a new tomorrow for all of us.

I come to you today with a mandate to govern by the clear call of the sovereign people. I pledge to bring you a pro-poor agenda that will lift up our poorest brothers and sisters, invest them with dignity imbue them with hope. I pledge to you a government that will live within its means and put every spare peso to real work. I pledge to reduce spending where government does not work and increase spending where a government can make a difference for better. And while I am doing that, I will crack-down on wasteful and abusive officials and influenced peddlers. I pledge to collect taxes mandated by law even as I stop extortion masquerading as tax collection. Pay your taxes; don’t pretend to be innocent when you are caught. I will crack-down on tax cheats. And I pledge to do everything necessary to expand the economy, engage it in the world of commerce and advance the interests of our country and our people the world over.

But to do all of this, I need you. I cannot do everything alone. I need every Filipino to unite, cooperate and individually heal the wounds of the past. I need every Filipino to strengthen the nation for the challenges of tomorrow. I challenge our business community to rise to the occasion and embrace selfless nationalism. Invest in our people and our country instead of giving excuses for keeping your money abroad where it cannot put our people to work.

I challenge our young men and women; there is a role to play in the re-creation of our nation, some in honest public service, most in productive private endeavor. Whatever it is you decide to do let the greater part of it be for our country. It is personal patriotism not impersonal free markets that makes nation strong and great.

I look up to Congress to seize this moment in history. It’s like it will not come again. All eyes are on us. You have it within your power to transform the nation with laws. Laws that modernize our banking, laws that reform our bureaucracy, laws that strengthen the independence and honesty of our judges, laws that invest in our country and secure to our people the promise blessings of democracy which are a life worth living, liberty worth having, happiness within everyone’s grasp.

Now, is our time to march forward as one. I seek your wisdom and I trust in your commitment to the common good, to the swift actions you will take. And finally, I challenge myself, and our government to live up to the highest standards of honesty and competence in the public service.

Every day, I will wake up and work hard for you. I will do what is right and good for the good of all and not just for show. I shall make good and I shall do good for the good of all and not just for the cameras. After all, the canvassing for public attention is over. I expect you to rise up every day to ensure that I fulfill my duty as a leader without concealment. I will use the power of the Presidency to uphold truth and justice. I dedicate my life and wealth to fulfilling the duty you have entrusted to me.

Fulfill your duty, I will fulfill mine. United, how can we lose? Together, we will prevail! Let us all work hard together. Together we will succeed. Long live the Philippines. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].