Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Dinner hosted by JP Morgan

[Delivered at the Lobby Level Dining Room, St. Regis Hotel New York City, USA, September 14, 2005]

Thank you, Joyce.

Thank you.

Speaker de Venecia and other members of Congress who are here tonight; Secretary Romulo and other appointive officials who are here tonight; members of the Cabinet; distinguished members of the business community; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for inviting me to be here with you tonight, Joyce.

This is an important opportunity for me to speak with you about some of the important developments in the Philippines and to hear your thoughts as members of the international financing community.

Notwithstanding the political environment, the economy of the Philippines remains resilient, growth is respectable, and our fiscal discipline is paying off and remains ahead of target.

Our strong economic performance has come, of course, at a cost — a political cost to me in terms of public support. But I want to emphasize that I will not waiver in my commitment to ongoing economic reform and fiscal discipline no matter the political cost. By the way, I shouldn’t only greet the congressmen but also the local government officials who are here because they are part of helping me remain committed to pursuing reforms that strengthen our economy and improve the environment for domestic and foreign investment.

I made the tough choices on economic reforms, on taxes, because it’s the right thing to do politically, economically and morally. I cannot in good conscience pass on debt to the next generation. I have to invest in people through better education and training, and improve infrastructure to attract the foreign investment needed to generate sustainable economic growth and create jobs.

I remain optimistic. Let me tell you what I can and will achieve in the months and years ahead.

Much of the economy is working, and working well. There’s investor confidence in key sectors we have identified for growth, these include business process outsourcing — thank you, Joyce for your decision to do your BPO in the Philippines — mining, the services and export sector, and the high-tech sector. I’ve built up a new nationwide transportation system. Built up the Subic-Clark corridor and opened up the interior of the country to new industries like mining and call centers.

The problem, of course, is that current economic growth is working for too few people. I’ve millions of poor people who’ve rightfully lost patience with their political leaders and their individual circumstances. However, I’m optimistic that with the passage of the value-added reform law, I can finally do more than feed the debt beast. Politically and economically, I must invest in the people through better education, better health care, and more job creation.

Last August, the supreme court strongly affirmed the value-added tax reform law. This legislation is the cornerstone of my economic turnaround plan and is the launch pad for phase two of my economic reforms. And with this new revenue, I have presented a budget to Congress that will fund enough classrooms to be on schedule to close the classroom gap by the end of my term. Enough hectares that will develop two million new hectares of land for agri-business by the end of my term. Construct police stations and other requirements for police visibility. Provide billions in funding to boost rice and corn production which will generate over a 150,000 new jobs for next year alone in rice and corn.

Job creation remains a significant economic and political challenge for the government. In terms of political stability, it’s not good enough to record solid export and investment growth if the people are not feeling the benefits like more jobs. I’m very happy, for instance, that yesterday our stock market recorded 27 points increase, but the people want to see jobs not the stock market. The 2006 budget contains a range of job creation initiatives including major agricultural, electrification and infrastructure projects.

It’s encouraging to see early signs of the positive results of our sector-specific reforms such as in the mining sector. The Department of Trade and Industry Secretary Favila here says, there are 23 mining projects in the pipeline, of which 7 major projects are worth 5.3 billion dollars.

As I move around the country and talk to people, local governments and business groups, it’s clear that there’s strong support for the phase two reforms and the investment in social services and infrastructure it will deliver. Our private research bears this out as well.

I have strong support in congress, and the congressmen and congresswomen are here to confirm that. And local government support is rock-solid, I have local government officials here too to support that. I believe with their help I’ve become politically stronger today than a month ago. I believe this shall translate into working with allies in congress, Speaker De Venecia, to pass the legislation needed to implement phase two and work with my local government colleagues to ensure that these investments in services and infrastructure are implemented at the grassroots level.

My agenda is the right agenda, and the people recognize that. The problem is that for every two steps we take forward, we take one back. The gains are too easily obscured by the setbacks or dominated by sensational headlines. But we’re here to cut through the headlines and tell you the news.

In other areas such as peace in Mindanao, elimination of kidnapping gangs and anti-terrorism initiatives, we have made huge gains. So, overall, I remain positive now that the majority of the political noise is behind us. I also realize, of course, the trust I need to gain with our people if we are to move ahead with political and economic reform. And I can have the leaders of Congress and local government to help me with that.

I hope that you, the business community, here in the world’s financial capital can understand the progress we’ve made in implementing the first phase of economic reforms to put our fiscal house in order and get the economy moving. We’re ahead of target to meet our deficit reduction. We are 35 billion pesos below our deficit ceiling. Exports and investments are up. We are now moving into phase two of the economic reform agenda.

The reform program will focus on the day-to-day issues that confront our people in their daily lives out in the provinces: clean water, reliable energy, price stability, a good education and job creation. It will also continue to focus on creating the right conditions for foreign investment including ongoing fiscal reforms, a renewed campaign against corruption led by Hong Kong’s former anti-corruption czar, significant investments in infrastructure and public sector reforms to reduce bureaucratic roadblocks facing foreign investors.

I hope what we have done and what we are continuing to do will sit well with you, the movers and shakers of the world economy.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner hosted by JP Morgan. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412062623/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5165&Itemid=38