THE FIGHT CONTINUES FOR WOMEN

Women around the world are coming together today to celebrate International Women’s Day. Here in the Philippines, I am honored to join you in celebrating the role of women in Philippine society in the past and present.

And as we connect with women around the world, on a day of solidarity and hope, Filipino women have long been actively involved in the global struggle for equality, justice, peace and development. I know you, I know many of you and I know we, you and I, will not rest until every Filipina is safe to build their hopes and dreams, safe from fear and full of opportunity.

Our fight against poverty is also a fight for the right of women to have more economic choices to decide the future and the lives of women themselves and the lives of their families. Women in our country often take responsibility for feeding and clothing our children and they ensure that children can go to school ready to learn.

There is nothing more important to Filipino women than seeing their children educated, having the tools to see and build their potential. Look at Narda, when Lito Camacho took his oath as secretary of finance everyone was surprised, “Narda is your mother.” So that is a dream of everyone to see their children succeed. But before seeing their children succeed, they will work hard for many years to ensure their children have a good education.

Our societies can be said to have failed if we cannot ensure that women are able to achieve some dreams through access to education, health care and social justice. You leaders, you are not bothered by this for yourselves but for all the women of the Philippines, especially those who are less fortunate like you.

This is what our growing economy means. This is what our steadily improving economy is all about — steadily improving despite the political noise — with the taming of the budget deficit leading to the rally of the peso and the robust stock market, we are pushing on relentlessly with pump priming initiatives and more lifelines for the poor.

Like ‘Tindahan Natin’, the stores — not sari-sari stores but specialty stores that we put in the poorest parts of our cities. Specialty store because they only sell rice for 18 pesos, noodles for 4.50, sometimes sugar at a low price because it is rising outside to lower the sugar outside, and Ipg in small quantities so it can be for daily needs, and sometimes half-priced medicine. The half-priced medicine is not only in ‘Tindahan Natin’ but in various pharmacies — the barangay pharmacy, the town pharmacy, our pharmacy or the pharmacy in the government hospital — and microfinance.

Do you know that on November 8, the Philippines should have been a headline but was only placed on page 8 or 9 of BusinessWorld, regarding the Philippines being chosen over 160 countries in the world as the best microfinance program? This includes training in entrepreneurship, seminars in rural areas, even in the barangays of our city.

We have come a long way in the fight waged by women, our feminist movement for rights and participation in the political and economic process. But there is still work to be done to ensure that all societies recognize the equality of women and men.

The rights of women are human rights. And our society must do everything in its power to ensure that these rights are respected and protected.

I appeal to all of you – but I think there is no need to appeal – I thank all of you that we are united in a struggle to ensure that no woman in the Philippines needs to live a life of poverty or exploitation. So today, I probably shouldn't be calling on you to shoulder this together. We are already helping each other. Let us continue the fight for the rights of our sisters here in the Philippines and abroad, because the Philippines is a model of progress in women's rights.

The work of women is never done. We need to fight to make the lives of our sisters better. We need to fight for more economic opportunities, for more rights in society, and for a better future for our children.

Women and men are equal in the eyes of God. We must ensure that they are also equal in the eyes of society, in the law.

Our laws for women are good, aren't they? Our Women in Development Act, our anti-human trafficking law, our domestic violence law. Our laws for women are good. I hope it's the same in other countries and I hope the implementation of these laws is the same in our country. And if we can do this, we can spread our good laws to other countries and implement our good laws correctly here in the Philippines, then we can say that we have fulfilled our obligation to women and their families.

So today, I am full of hope as I stand with you now. In unity, we can lead the streets of peace. Swords can be turned into plows. Those who cannot do anything to help themselves can be replaced with the fulfillment of hope, and disunity can be replaced and become unity.

This is one of the many special gifts that I believe the women in this room can bring to our country and even to the whole world.

So women leaders of our society, congratulations to all of you! And continue your good work.

Happy Women’s Day!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].