Thank you very much, Secretary Cruz.

Please sit down.

Secretary Ermita and the other officials — I heard everybody calling him Lieutenant General Abu earlier today. Let me be the first to call him General Abu– and the major service commanders, recipients of the military honors and distinctions in this year’s anniversary celebration, men and women of the Armed Forces as well as their relatives and friends, other guests, ladies and gentlemen: good morning and happy anniversary to the AFP.

Military service is the epitome of national service. It’s a profession reserved for the brave but also for the selfless.

In my years as commander-in-chief I’ve seen the Armed Forces as a hand of steel in a velvet glove.

I’ve seen this in the terrible fight against terror in Basilan. I’ve seen this in the rescue operations in Quezon. And I see this again today that you have done away with the parade on AFP day and put the money in the kitty for disaster victims shows the leadership of General Abu as being sensitive to the call of the times.

Indeed, no one should test the sensitivity of the Filipino soldier to the feelings of the Filipino people. And no one should question the loyalty of the soldier to our people. All the conspiracies that have attempted to withdraw the allegiance of the Armed Forces from my government have miserably failed. And i thank you once again for your loyalty.

Today, our Armed Forces face the most formidable challenge. But it’s a challenge not only to the Armed Forces, it is a challenge that our national culture itself faces, and that is the challenge of self-redemption.

As General Abu said, some have disgraced the command, they must be tried and punished. But those who have stained the uniform are not the real AFP.

Today, we honor the real AFP. today, we recognize the valor and excellence of the troops. The medal of valor: Lieutenant Colonel Noel Buan and Staff Sergeant Leopoldo Diokno, Jr., Two scout rangers who took on the Abu Sayyaf in a close quarter firefight — tawag nila doon sa tagalog mano-mano — that killed the entire group of the enemies including Hamsiraji Sali, one of the most notorious terrorist leaders in history.

The distinguished service star, the gold cross medal, the Philippine legion of honor for bravery in combat, military management reforms, successful peace negotiations, gallantry in action, and exceptionally meritorious and valuable leadership, respectively — this represent the real AFP.

The men who died in the line of duty will be remembered as our vanguards of peace and security in a world of growing challenges. And the many other worthy non-military individuals and institutions like the Kapuso Foundation that are being bestowed awards today have been equally gallant and noble for our people. Thank you for your service to our people.

When January kicks in, we are in for a formidable test of performance and delivery of results in all areas of national concern. After all, the best defense against military adventurism is sound governance founded on moral leadership.

2005 is a year for urgent change in the Philippines. To get the economy back on track, we will improve tax collection, pass a budget that will support our ten-point legacy plan and pro-poor agenda and take executive action to break the culture of corruption. I expect you the soldiers to be by my side, to man the flanks by keeping all threats to national security at bay.

I bid you to stand beside me in the quest for peace, with honor, dignity and justice for all Filipinos.

The work, the struggle, the fight will be hard on the soldiery. But I am consistently committed to the goal of a quality of life for the Filipino soldier that measures up to the job and the burdens of the soldier’s family.

I have full confidence in the ability and commitment of General Abu to push for reforms in the AFP. And I have complete trust that the soldiers are faithfully serving and can be relied upon for meaningful change.

On this day, I salute you. It should be a proud day for the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

Long live!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 69th Anniversary Celebration of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615132909/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5752&Itemid=38