Thank you very much.

God greatly bless you, Secretary Jun Esperon, our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development for Eastern Pangasinan. I thank you for your introduction.

Please, everyone, stand.

Mayor Monching Guico, President of the Mayors’ League of the entire Philippines, mayor of Binalonan, and with all of our work and support, hopefully, future senator of the Republic of the Philippines. Governor Bong Revilla, present senator of the Republic of the Philippines and a very outstanding one, we’re very happy to have you here with us. Bong and Monching are partners in campaigning. So, thank you Bong, you are a sure bet, we expect that your campaign for our son of Binalonan, Mayor Monching Guico, will also be successful. Vice Mayor Monmon Guico, thank you for your explanation of this very important project and congratulations to you, to Monching and to our mayors here on this very, very important initiative for the Luzon Northern Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle.

Let's add Monching, acknowledge Mayor Kimmy Cojuangco as the next congresswoman but it’s very important also to recognize her as the spouse of the present congressman of the district of Pangasinan, Congressman Mark Cojuangco. And we have here so many Cabinet members: we have here Governor Mads Espino, thank you so much and congratulations for all of the infrastructure projects that we put up together. You’ve talked about dam, the seaport, and here we have an airport, so Pangasinan is really a transport hub now in the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle.

Our cabinet meetings here aside from Jun Esperon who introduced me, we have to his left Secretary of Public Works Vic Domingo; to his left, Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources Horace Ramos whom I will give an assignment later on; and to the right of Governor Espino, Secretary Sonny Alvarez, our Climate Change Secretary; and to his right is Secretary Peter Favila whom I will give an assignment too later on as Secretary of Trade and Industry.

We welcome all the other officials here, and we welcome the mayors of the partner locations of this airline, and we welcome the President of San Beda, thank you for helping to bring up University of Eastern Pangasinan. To all of you, my relatives and kin, good evening and a joyful fiesta to us all.

We also extend our congratulations for the recognition of our town as a first class municipality in the past year. What Mayor Monching Guico has done to make Binalonan a first class municipality, she can also help other towns on how to improve your towns if she is fortunate enough, with all of our help, to become a senator of our country.

But a big contributor to Binalonan becoming first class is this no-frills airport built by the private sector, which we launched in 2008, and Monmon remembers what I said, that the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle needs no-frills airports to bring the agricultural products of North Luzon to various places. So from Binalonan, there are already planes, I assured Monching, going to Cauayan; now going to Maconacon and Palanan in Isabela, Divilican too? Divilican. To Tuguegarao, there is already one; to Calayan, it’s coming; to Bagabag, Nueva Vizcaya, it’s coming; to Laoag City, it’s coming; to Baguio City, it’s coming; in Batanes, there will be one now. So this is the beauty here, an example of how this airport is used, the shrimp and lobster products of Maconacon, Palanan and Divilican can now reach here through the airport. And from here, through the good roads of Pangasinan and SCTEX, they will be quickly delivered to other parts of Luzon.

Indeed, we started this journey in 2001. Not just our province, I didn't aspire to be President in 2001, but destiny led me here. We did not back down from the challenge and the responsibility to change the economy of the Philippines.

Our focus is like a laser beam to bring services that will change the lives of the ordinary Filipino. As an economist, I know that to return to the path of progress, we need fiscal discipline, to increase and invest in people and infrastructure.

We made difficult and unpopular decisions to control our deficit and pay for the future of our country. I thank senators like Senator Bong Revilla who helped me make difficult laws like increasing taxes, it wasn't popular but that's why we are able to do the projects mentioned by Governor Amado Espino earlier. I endure criticisms even daily and again and again we see that our country is progressing.

And education, the environment, the economy – these are the biggest parts of the money. It is necessary that the children of today have a better life than those of yesterday and before them. We can show them a beautiful day. There is no price too high to pay for their education and the future of their success. But we are so happy about University of Eastern Philippines and the tie up with San Beda because that improves the life and the education of our young people here in Eastern Pangasinan.

Part of a good education is a strong culture. So today in this fiesta, we have not only Secretary Sonny Alvarez of Climate Change, we also have Presidential Assistant Cecille Alvarez — I can’t see where she is — for Culture because during this fiesta, aside from launching this symbol of the future of Binalonan, as a hub of the pasada, we also want to honor the buzz of Binalonan through a book launching in honor of Carlos Bulosan who is also a great writer and native of Binalonan.

And it is good that Secretary Favila and Secretary Ramos are here because I also want to launch today a project that will help education and the environment, the Engineered Bamboo Project which is a collaboration between the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources because we expect that 25% of the desks needed by the Department of Education will come from bamboo and not from forest trees. The DENR will manage the bamboo nursery and dispersal growing, while the DTI is tasked to promote the production of bamboo products. The DTI through the Cottage Industry Technology Center has machines to make desks from bamboo, so earlier, I instructed Secretary Peter Favila to give a bamboo desk-making machine to the town of Binalonan to make bamboo desks for the entire Pangasinan. So this will arrive, this machine will arrive in one month because it takes one month to fabricate this kind of machine.

Let us go back to our fiesta, again and again, every year in an important, in a great time that we give to the tour of the different provinces of the country. We don’t just travel to other provinces, but we initiate it with them, because our political and economic process is difficult, and so much power is concentrated in Manila. So we focused on giving power to the entire country instead of the power brokers and elite in Manila.

I would like to express my gratitude to our mayors and the private sector who put up and invested in this very important airport because by making the products of those distant towns nearer to the markets, we will be able to spread development away from too much concentration in Metro Manila and we will be able to develop North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle into the food basket of Luzon.

To all my constituents, I offer my thanks for all the support you will give me. Let us always continue to work together for the good of Binalonan.

God bless you all and Happy Fiesta

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the launching ceremony of the proposed aeronautical highway of Northern Luzon. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080608/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27591&Itemid=38