Maraming salamat, Secretary Peter Favila.

Other Cabinet members; Undersecretary Alonzo, our host; Mayor Tinga, the host government.

I’d like to greet our special guest, Canadian Ambassador and the other members of the diplomatic corps; Governor Villafuerte and Congressman Pancho; all the donor organizations; all the participants; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, thank you for this SME Development Plan Accomplishment Report. I will study this so I can incorporate some parts into my State of the Nation Address.

I am happy that we are together today, especially our brave small business owners, for the opening of this exposition in connection with the celebration of Small and Medium Enterprise Development Week. The holding of SME Development Week is a recognition of the importance of small businesses to national development.

The national SME agenda spearheads the fight against poverty.

If you remember during my inauguration as President in 2004, when I gave my ten-point program, the first one was: to create six to ten million jobs by developing entrepreneurs. And that is part of the work of the SME.

Our entrepreneurs are part of Philippine global competitiveness and that is why in order to help you, I have asked Peter Favila to conduct a national competitiveness summit in the middle of August and to have a national competitiveness council which I hope the SMEs will participate in.

Aside from the SMEs, another very important aspect of our competitiveness are our Overseas Filipino Workers. And I would like to take this opportunity to say something about our workers in Lebanon:

“We are keenly focused on our zero casualty goal for Filipino workers in the Lebanon-Israeli conflict and we assure the families of the OFWs trapped in Lebanon that we will exhaust all the available means to ensure their safety.

The Philippines makes a special appeal to all combatant forces to spare Filipino nationals who have no wish other than to be taken out of harm’s way.

Our crisis managers on site shall devise clear markers and signify that will identify Filipino nationals. And in the name of humanity, I ask the combatants not to shoot or harm them.

I have also ordered our diplomatic posts to negotiate at the political level and on the ground whenever possible to ensure that our nationals are given safe passage and humanitarian assistance and safe sanctuary.

At the same time, the government will open as many avenues of communication between our OFWs in Lebanon and their families here in the Philippines. I have further released the amount of 150 million pesos to support our objectives.

Our resources may not be enough, but we are trying to address the problem by teaming up with other foreign countries that could help us in the evacuation process.

Our diplomats shall coordinate with private foreign firms for the leased of pesos that could be utilized.

Our best laid plans can never come to fruition without the cooperation of all. This is true for the safety of our OFWs safety in Lebanon and it is true for the SME development plan.

And so the next step is, let us build on our collective experience. Let us continue to innovate. Let us prosper by dint of unity and hard work.

Long live our small and medium enterprises!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Development Week and Exposition. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212438/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2821&Itemid=38