Thank you. Thank you very much to the band.

Thank you very much Secretary Mai Jimenez, the Cabinet officer for Regional Development because she is a daughter of Mindoro island; I greet Congresswoman Josephine Sato; I greet Governor Jo Villarosa; I greet Mayor Barrera and the Sangguniang Bayan of Magsaysay under the leadership of Vice-Mayor Abesamis. I want Mayor Barrera and all the people of Magsaysay to know that I have already released the 20 million pesos fund for the road that will lead to Jose. That road comes from the government, not from the NPA.

I want to greet Barangay Captain Loreto Nicolas; I also want to greet our officials of the Department of Education. There’s Superintendent Romualda Dayan, where is she? Dayan? She was my teacher at Assumption before. Regards to her. Okay; here is also Dr. Magdalena Juan, the district supervisor of Magsaysay; I also want to thank Mr. Zosimo Panahon, the Principal of Purnaga National High School; and also Mr. Gallano, the Head Teacher of Purnaga Elementary School.

And I am here at your school in Purnaga because I want to let you, them, give instructions that the television we are bringing with us now with tapes — that is to broaden education in Barangay Purnaga. Because it’s far, you need additional teachers, your additional teacher is the television. That’s why it’s education by television. And once a week — I already told them, that’s everyday for the subject of Makabayan or the subject of English depending on them, on the superintendent how he will put it, what subject he will put, it will be taught to our students here at school everyday, Monday to Friday. On Saturday, our para-teachers will be brought to the sitio of the Mangyan who are enrolled in what we call the Strong Republic School. I want to repeat, that television comes from the government, not from the NPA.

I want to greet those who take care of our peace here, the leader of the soldiers throughout Southern Luzon, our three-star general, Lt. General Alfonso Dagudag. You know, General Dagudag has a history, I was with him. On the day I met Angie Reyes, on January 19, 2001 in a safehouse — it was a safehouse then but is now well-known, Eddie San Jose’s house — two generals were with me: General Angelo Reyes and General Alfonso Dagudag. He was the former Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations at that time. After that, I made him a division commander in Mindanao in Northeastern Mindanao. And after that, I made him Commander of Southern Luzon. Where are you from, Al? Dumaguete, Visayan.

Well, I learned that there are many Ilocanos here. Perhaps sixty percent Ilocano here? I am also Ilocana on my mother’s side, because my mother came from Binalonan, Pangasinan. That’s one of the two Ilocano parts of the province of Pangasinan. That’s our kinship.

I want to greet those who also take care of our peace, the leader of the police throughout MIMAROPA, Police Superintendent Alejandro Lapinid. Now, General Dagudag, since he is taking care of the entire Southern Luzon, including Calabarzon, including MIMAROPA, including Bicol, he is not here in Mindoro every day. He is based there at Camp General Nakar in Lucena. So, the one taking care of peace here in MIMAROPA, here in the brigade, including Romblon, is Colonel Fernando Mesa, the Commander of the 204 brigade. Yesterday, he showed me his plan on how to restore peace here in Mindoro. I said, it’s a very good plan because he said we cannot fight rebellion with arms alone. We need a right hand and a left hand. The right hand is the force of our armed forces and our police. That’s what they are taking care of, especially General Dagudag and Lapinid and Mesa. But they also coordinate with the left hand, that’s the one taking care of despair or the root of disappointment, the root of rebellion is poverty. And a large part of our response to the poverty of Magsaysay is the 20 million road that will bring you closer to San Jose.

Also, this will raise the level of education of the children here because the materials from Manila, the education by television will be brought here because we will put a television here. And this television, by the way, principal can also be used not only for… Not only for the lesson, you can also use it to watch… Watch what… telenovelas if you want. So, yes, it’s very clear, it’s not exclusive only for subjects, it can be used by our community to watch telenovelas and whatever you want to watch. Just not subversive material, okay?

Now — so, I already said about the road, I already said about education — what about livelihood. I am happy to see your green rice fields. The one who brought that here, from me last year, is Secretary Cito Lorenzo of the Department of Agriculture. The seed came from me, not from the NPA. So, if you pay taxes, don’t pay the NPA. In fact, the poor are already exempted from paying taxes to the government. So, if you are poor, don’t pay taxes. If you have income, pay taxes to the government. Because the government brings education, the government brings income. You know, you will see double the income because of this new seed. The income of our farmers will double. The government brings you the road. The government brings you progress and progress and peace go hand in hand. When there is no progress, we understand, peace is difficult because there are those who are tempted to rebel. But, if there is no peace and you help the NPA, there is also no progress, because encounters will always happen. Because it is the duty of the republic to defend itself.

Well, when the Oakwood mutiny happened, I said there was a State of Rebellion so I sent the soldiers there to Makati to suppress the rebels, and those who came from different camps, those who were left behind were also taken into custody by their commanding officers. Some critics said, “But isn’t there a rebellion in different parts of the Philippines, why didn’t you declare it there?” It’s no longer necessary to declare, because the meaning of rebellion is that there is a rebellion here, military go and suppress it. Now, I am telling the military here, there is a rebellion here in Purnaga, come here and fight the NPA. Suppress the NPA, bring progress. And progress cannot be brought while the NPA is disturbing your lives here. So, friends, that is my message to you as well.

And my message to those in the sitio of the NPA, if you want progress, if you are really sincere about progress, come down, join the good rice fields that are doubling the income of our farmers. Join teaching or learning here with our television by education. Join the walking that will be easier because it will bring your products to San Jose. That is true progress and peace that we want to bring here in Barangay Purnaga.

So, I am here to let you know that despite, contrary to what you may be taught that the government does not care about you, this rice is proof of the government’s love for you in Purnaga. You know, if I could visit all the barangays of Mindoro, I would do it. But there is not enough time. But our officials are here — Congresswoman, Governor, Mayor — they will bring our message. And I want to say that this road from Magsaysay to San Jose, I gave the saro to Congresswoman last week, Monday, when I called her in Malacañang.

I am pleased with your warm welcome to your servant even though it was a last-minute notice that I was coming.

Thank you, let us unite, because that is the source of the progress of your barangay, your town, your province, your region, our whole country.

May God bless you all, my fellow provincemates.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Launching Ceremony of the Strong Republic School (SRS). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194641/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6510&Itemid=38