Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the Eucharist and mass wedding on the 18th anniversary of El Shaddai

Thank you very much to Brother Mike, our servant leader, and Happy Birthday on the coming Tuesday. And to you, my beloved brother and sister prayer partners in all of us, Happy 18th Anniversary. I said to all of us, because of the 18 years of El Shaddai’s life as a prayer partner, I have been with you for ten years. And year after year I have attended and I became president even more. Because if you don’t see me here, I see you because I watch Brother Mike on television in his teachings to us.

Earlier, in Bishop Bacani’s sermon, he said, the sermon was about the test that Jesus Christ did to the Gentile woman. And that’s how faith is, there are small trials, there are big trials. There are temporary trials, there are long-term trials. But in our faith, we must accept all of these, we must pass all of these, all of these must strengthen and further stabilize our faith.

For example, earlier, it was raining, like a trial. As Bishop said, in his church in Caloocan, when it rains, the church still has a roof. When it rains, fewer people attend church. Earlier, it rained. But the number of people here before the rain is still the same number after the rain. Bishop said, how many hundreds of thousands are here.

I arrived, perhaps Bishop arrived earlier than me. But I arrived almost at the start of the mass, so the crowd I passed through, I would say it’s not just hundreds of thousands, I think a million are here again for the anniversary. And if we think that a million are here for the anniversary, I think Brother Mike and Sister Belen, every anniversary, they remember how it started and how few prayer partners there were 18 years ago.

With me here now is the chairman of the SSS, Secretary Bernardino Abes, who was my father’s Secretary of Labor. He has known Brother Mike for a long time, even when Brother Mike was young. And then Secretary Abes left, went to Canada during Martial Law. He only returned after Edsa 1, and then he attended. So he was two years old when the children of El Shaddai were born. And Brother Mike was telling it while Secretary Abes was listening, after he said, because they are close friends… He said, “Why are you giving them false hopes?” that was 16 years ago. But now you are still here and I am also here since ten years ago. So the hope that Brother Mike gave, 16 years ago, 18 years ago, was not false hope. At the beginning, there was doubt, that was part of the trial. But in maintaining faith, here is a million celebrating the 18th Anniversary.

I said to Brother Mike, “you know, at first, this I haven’t told him yet, not at first, but several times when I came here as a senator, after bringing my classmates, my classmates who like to pray. And we were in front, sometimes in the back but often I wanted us to be in front to listen to Brother Mike from the front like you who are sitting there. And one of my friends who also often attends our own prayer meeting with our classmates. When he listened to Brother Mike, he said truly this man is anointed, he said.

So when Brother Mike was telling about what Secretary Abes said 16 years ago, and now 16 years later, the children of El Shaddai have not just reached two years old but are now 18 years old. And that’s what I said: because brother, that’s really the anointment.

Because if it were just a person, it wouldn't reach 18 years. But this is a blessing from El Shaddai. So many more years will reward our faith.

So again, brothers and sisters in prayer, to all of us, Happy Anniversary! To our newly married couples, those thirteen pairs we sponsored with Brother Mike, congratulations and best wishes!

I am happy to celebrate with family, World Family Day in January, you are truly a family of the Lord.

The Pope's prayer is for his health so that, with God's will, his trip can continue to the Philippines.

Jesus tested that Gentile woman, the Canaanite, because she was not among the “blessed chosen people.” But because of her faith, she was blessed and her request was granted by Jesus Christ. What more about us? What more about the children of Yahweh El Shaddai? What more about the Philippines, which was formerly the only Catholic country here in Asia, now there are two of us, East Timor. So friends, brothers and sisters, we should rely even more on the blessings of Yahweh El Shaddai, especially we must, even if we are experiencing, feeling hardship, even if there are those who tempt us to lose hope, let us not lose our faith because we are children of Yahweh El Shaddai.

Happy Anniversary to us all!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Eucharistic Celebration and Mass Wedding at the 18th Anniversary of El Shaddai. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224605/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8366&Itemid=38