Thank you.

Thank you very much. Thank you very much, baby for your very nice introduction. And its campaign time so it was not wrong of you to give me an endorsement. Thank you for your endorsement.

I would like to greet and congratulate all the officers and members of the National Innerwheel headed by Aida Vera Cruz. Thank you for your beautiful report and I take this opportunity to greet her husband, my former presidential assistant for Western Mindanao, Boyet Vera Cruz.

And of course, speaking of VIP’s on the floor, past president and now congresswoman, Congresswoman Nining, thank you very much, Nining Nicolas, very nice to see you here.

I would like to also greet the president of the Innerwheel foundation, Mrs. Carmen Santillan. Thank you for your donation to our health program. And of course, the only Filipina who has become president of Innerwheel Rotary, Ms. Ester Vibal.

How nice to be here among empowered and empowering women. You are empowered because you are leaders but you also empower because of your concern for the communities and the families in the communities. Congratulations for your good work.

I didn’t hesitate to say yes when baby invited me to be with you today. Notwithstanding, that for us national candidates during this time, our schedule is usually dictated by the campaign manager. But I ask my campaign managers, make sure that I am in manila when the Innerwheel has its convention.

Because being a rotary arm, I know how Filipino Rotarians and Rotary arms, I know how the Innerwheel clubs have initiated all the good things that Aida told us about over the last 38 years and I am especially very appreciative of the programs that you have initiated for peace, for the alleviation of hunger for literacy for the youth and volunteerism. You do this because you want to be agents of change. And you are women leaders in the community, you have the power to be agents of change and you use that power.

Yes, we all want change and speaking woman-to-woman, I know that the change, that we women want are those that will make life better for the average Filipino family. We are women, we are family-oriented, and even if we are community-oriented, even if we are nation-oriented, it is still the family in the community, it is the family in the nation that is what we want to help make life better for. That is why you are working on things like alleviation of poverty especially, therefore, food on every table, because that is the bottom line as far as poverty is concerned. That is why you are working for peace because our families want to have safety and security. That’s why you’re working for youth projects, for education projects, for literacy, because we know that education is the key to the improvement of the life of the ordinary Filipino.

Well, on the one hand, I thought that since the campaign was gonna start before your convention, there was a need to make sure that my schedule didn’t clash with the campaign. But on the other hand, I think it is also God-given that I would be able to speak with you during the campaign period so that I can take this opportunity to say and to ask you to tell all of the many people you influence, in all of the many communities in which you work that among the candidates, Gloria Arroyo is in the best position to achieve the changes we want. Why? Because I have gained the clout and the experience to turn the economy around.

In a short time I have made a strong start. I have turned the economy around and stabilized the mess we inherited. I guess the best way, the shortest way to describe the mess that we inherited is that in the three years before EDSA 2 made me president, our economy was only able to create one million jobs. That’s why when I became president at EDSA 2, I inherited more than four million unemployed Filipinos. But in a short time, we have created now, in my short administration more than three million jobs.

Indeed, the most important thing, if we want to have food on every table, if we want to alleviate hunger is to create jobs, to create investments and to have people like the Innerwheel helping take care of the marginalized families and the poorest of the poor.

Literacy and youth, indeed, we have in our short administration worked for the betterment of our education system. We are in the 21st century and there are challenges of competitiveness in the 21st century that our educational system must be able to meet and that is why during the short period of my presidency we have improved math and science and English in order to make our young more competitive in the 21st century. And I thank the Innerwheel because again you helped the government, not necessarily on a government-to-Innerwheel kind of partnership but because you helped the young and you helped to increase literacy in the communities, and I thank you for that because what you do is volunteerism.

I thank you in your work, in your programs for peace because I know that you know, we all know as mothers, as family members that we want safety and security for the family. And in my administration, being a mother and now a grandmother who wants to have our families live in peace in the community, I have done unprecedented things in order to fight terrorism, fight kidnapping, fight the scourge of drugs, fight the corruption that makes public officials and law enforcement officers tied up with the syndicates that perpetrate these crimes.

Those who should be in jail are the kidnappers and the drug lords. And that's what we did with Ning Nicholas in creating a tough law against drugs. So now, in your district, Ning, we just seized 1.5 billion pesos worth of shabu. That's included in the many drug laboratories, drug syndicates, drug smuggling, and drug lords that were able to evade the law in the past because the law was weak and they could post bail. Now, we have so many drug lords in jail, including the number one drug lord of them all, William Gan, and the one caught in Meycauayan, Bulacan, along with his accomplice syndicate in China. Because of the strength of our foreign policy, they are in jail in China, those here in the Philippines are in jail, and because of the strong law made in our administration, if you are a drug lord, you will be in jail for life. As I said, those who should be in jail, our jails are packed because of the number of drug lords and kidnappers being arrested. Drug lords and kidnappers should be in jail, and not our elderly who are more than 70 years old.

So when the Innerwheel Club brought this to our attention, these two grandmothers, the elderly in the Women’s Correctional, more than 70 years old, that was the main reason I agreed to grant them pardon for their offenses. Because our belief is that prison in the 21st century is not for revenge, it is for rehabilitation. I suppose, by the time they are 70 years old, and so many years in the Women’s Correctional, they are already rehabilitated. So, it's time for them, more than… Oh, it’s already overdue for them to enjoy the comfort and company of their family. That's my policy, as long as they are not drug lords and not kidnappers, if they are more than 70 years old, make a recommendation and I will also pardon them.

I thank you for your programs regarding health, so Undersecretary Galon is here, and received your contribution, that's 5,000 pesos per container. Thank you for your support. And it's good that Baby Golez, the National Conference Chairman, as well as her son Tony Golez, whom I am a godfather to, is the head executive assistant of the Secretary of Health. So, the partnership of the Innerwheel Club and the Department of Health is a perfect fit.

You know, I first met Tony Golez because he was a leader when they called it Lingkod E.R. He was still a student, a medical student, and they were helping as interns in the emergency room of U.S.T. Then they saw the needs, the deficiencies, so they established Lingkod E.R. to raise contributions to cover the needs in the emergency room. But those things we can help each other with.

When I was a senator, I passed a law — National Health Insurance. That means, supposedly, all families would be covered, included in health insurance. But when I became president, I saw that it wasn't being implemented. Only those with health insurance were mostly GSIS and SSS members. In other words, those who are formally employed. Those who are unemployed or informal workers were not. In the law, if they are poor, the local government should contribute to their premium, but many local governments, especially the poor ones, have other priorities and cannot afford to pay those premiums. So when I became president, so that emergency rooms like U.S.T., especially if they are confined in the hospital, would no longer need to look for contributions, the National Health Insurance could pay. What I did was expand the health insurance program. Those who are poor, and the local government is poor, PCSO and the local government partnered to pay their premium. We got millions of Filipinos into this, so now the majority of Filipino families are covered by National Health Insurance.

But that's just a down payment. Because if we managed to get the majority covered by health insurance, our next ambition is to get everyone covered by health insurance. So I told the PCSO, if the local government cannot afford its counterpart — I also told the DBM because it also has a subsidy portion for health insurance — take over the entire premium so that everyone can be included.

So this is my request to our Innerwheel, because you serve so many communities, if in the communities you serve you find poor people who don't yet have Philhealth — Baby is here, Tony is here — maybe, Tony, Baby, let's have a program whereby the Innerwheel can submit the application forms of the indigent who are not yet covered by health insurance to the DOH through Tony so that when the poor people you serve are hospitalized, you don't have to take money out of your own pockets to pay for their hospitalization, the health insurance will pay.

We have so much we can do together. And I am pleased that you really said that you want me to be your guest of honor today. Thank you for the opportunity because we women, of course, we should be together to take care of not only our families because almost all of the innerwheel members have the ability to take care of your family, so the family of the community you choose to take care of.

Let's work together. Congratulations on your 38th years of serving the Filipino family.

Let us be together for the next six years and serve the Filipino family of the 21st century.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 38th National Conference of the Innerwheel Clubs of the Philippines (IWCPI). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090547/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5646&Itemid=38