Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Philippine Stock Exchange

[Delivered at Ayala Tower 1, Makati City, January 10, 2003]

STRENGTHENING VITAL STRUCTURES IN NATION-BUILDING

As I said yesterday, we did plenty in the past 20 months. And as I vowed yesterday, we will do plenty more in the next 18 months. And as I assured everyone, a president willing to give up her post can be more powerful than a president who wants to hang on to it at any price.

We’ve made significant progress, if not so much in going forward, certainly, in gathering the strength to do so when the worldwide recession ends. One thing, however, remains unsatisfactory: there are still too many poor, too many jobless, too many homeless people around.

The challenge is not just to reach out to the poor. Every administration does that.

The challenge is to actually alleviate their miserable conditions. And do it in the shortest time possible because, in the long term, as a famous economist said, “We are all dead.”

If the poor do not have the strength to hold out and help out, no long-term solution will succeed. You cannot postpone eating, drinking safely, learning useful things and having gainful work. Only those who exploit the weak bargaining position of the poor believe the poor can wait.

But, having resolved to do our best to alleviate present miseries, we should not limit ourselves to temporary solutions. We do need deep and far-reaching reforms that will lead to stronger political and social stability, and to sustained economic recovery. But none of these reforms should ever entail keeping down the poor, or making them suffer some more.

By 2004, I want to see a revitalized economy that adequately serves the needs of our people, creates even more jobs, and raises our people’s income levels and pushes poverty to the margins.

Our focus must be on pro-active microeconomic and structural reforms. We cannot rev up the old engines of industry. Global trends have already dismantled many of them. But we can entice new investments in new technologies, by seriously reducing the risk and the bother of doing business in the Philippines.

I will reduce to the bare minimum the national government requirements for doing business. Officials – be they local or national – are the last people who should second-guess a business activity. At most, they should monitor businesses for the harm they might do the community. But that is all. Let a thousand, a million, ten million enterprises, small and big, bloom. Let the market separate the good from the bad.

Filipino business, has great potential. We don’t need to tap it. We just need to let it be. What we need is just to create the conditions for its flourishing.

Thus, we need to fast-track the implementation of various infrastructure projects that will be vital arteries of commerce. I have built the Batangas Port after a decade of red tape. That Batangas Port was first conceptualized and planned when I was Undersecretary of Trade for Planning. Then I became senator two times. I became vice-president. I became president, only to find out that the port hadn’t been built. So last January 16, 2002, it was built. We inaugurated it. And it’s now in operation. I will soon open NAIA 3 under fair conditions to the public. And I will soon complete the San Roque Dam in Pangasinan.

Thanks to investment support and official development assistance from South Korea, China and Italy, the rehabilitation and expansion of the country’s railway system will soon commence. Work on the Luzon Railway has actually started likewise the ongoing relocation of urban poor communities along the right of way of the PNR. Within the year, we will build the Balintawak-Malolos and the Manila-Cabuyao legs. We will expand the North Expressway and extend the South Expressway up to Batangas Port.

The MRT and the LRT will soon begin their interconnection so that my successor’s administration will enjoy a Metro Manila relieved of the traffic jams that we are suffering today.

The Development Bank of the Philippines has 20 billion pesos to lend to creditworthy businessmen and even local governments or government corporations, who will invest in the roads and roll-on/roll-off (RORO) terminals and ferries that will bring down the cost of cargo from Mindanao to Luzon. To illustrate this project, next month, I invite you — the stockbrokers — to a caravan in the Boracay to Batangas leg. It will be in an 8-hour trip in your cars.

I will soon unveil a masterplan for the power sector that will cure the brownouts we are now beginning to experience in Panay and prevent the brownouts that threaten to darken our country by the year 2005.

The Special Purpose Vehicles Act or SPVA and the Government Procurement Law that I signed today are but two elements of the set of policy actions designed to widen the opportunities for business in the country, and to shore up good governance.

The SPVA seeks to save the banking sector from the financial fallout of lending decisions that went sour after the Asian crisis. The banks have been groaning under more than 300 billion pesos of bad loans and more than 200 billion pesos of repossessed assets.

The SPV Law takes away this burden — for a price, of course. But it allows banks to charge their losses against their taxes.

The SPVA should bring in new money to revive bad loans, find new uses for foreclosed assets, rehabilitate failed businesses, and open wide the lending windows again.

Republic Act No. 9184 or the Government Procurement Reform Act conforms to our three pillars of good governance, namely: a moral foundation to guide leadership at all levels; a philosophy of transparency in government actions; and an ethic of effective implementation throughout the bureaucracy.

R.A. 9184 will help government procurement officers stick to the straight and narrow path. It will fight graft and corruption, improve operational efficiency, foster transparency in bidding procedures, and encourage competition. As a bonus, the money that can be saved by making procurement more effective, efficient and less prone to corrupt practices will reduce the budget deficit.

I commend both Houses of Congress and Senate for their careful crafting and passage of these measures, and call on them again to fast-track other key reforms vital to our economic success.

To enable business to cash in on future income flows so that business can use investment funds twice over requires the approval of the Securitization Act. The House has passed it. And I call on the Senate to give its approval.

But to revitalize the securities market also requires unity in the stock exchange. And I congratulate Vivian Yuchengco and Robert Coyiuto for agreeing to sacrifice, by withdrawing their candidacies to remove the poison in the stock market, the way that I renounced my candidacy for president to remove the poison from the body politic.

The stock market should also receive a boost from our new policy to revive the mining industry, where the Philippines holds one of the richest ore reserves in the whole world. To realize its potential, I will create a natural resources mining development corporation that will develop our many dormant but high-potential mining areas which we can list in the Philippine Stock Exchange.

In the fiscal sector, we need to enact several important bills that will help return our fiscal balance.

The TRANSCO franchise will facilitate the sale of the National Power Corporation’s transmission assets for the best possible price so as to bring in reputable investors to rehabilitate and expand our power grids.

The indexing of sin taxes to inflation should raise 40 billion pesos yearly in additional revenues, without introducing new taxes. But I also ask Congress to rationalize motor vehicle taxes and mandate the registration of heavy construction equipment.

Corporatizing the BIR into a national revenue authority will bring in fresh talent, and infuse the almost century-old agency with energy. And so I ask Congress to enact the National Revenue Authority Bill.

Of course, I would also like to ask the Senate to please pass soonest the General Appropriations Act.

We must build institutions that foster productivity and resolve distortions that hinder productivity growth such as wage rigidities in micro-enterprises. Thus, I recently signed Republic Act 9178 exempting enterprises with assets of less than 3 million pesos from the Minimum Wage Law.

Another rigidity or source of unproductivity is the rigidity of land transfers under the present Agrarian Reform Program. Modern finance and modern agricultural technology favor large land holdings and are often at odds with the demands of social justice on the land under the present shape of our land reform law. But we cannot give up on either modernization for social justice. Therefore, on my certification as urgent, the House of Representatives has passed a bill to stimulate private investment in agriculture by permitting agricultural land to be used as collateral. And I understand the Senate has prioritized its counterpart bill. What SPVA is for the big bankers, farm land as collateral is for the small farmers.

On the part of the executive, we are committed to increasing the productivity and incomes of our farmers through the adoption of hybrid rice technologies and expansion of small water impounding irrigation projects.

Another source of unproductivity is dead assets in land. So we will continue with the unprecedented pace of proclamations giving informal settlers of urban land the right to buy the land that they occupy and use it as collateral for raising their own small capital.

Another source of unproductivity is unfair trade. And so I am adopting tariff policy signals to encourage the manufacturing sector and signal industrial policy. The Philippines is ahead of WTO requirements. Our tariff policies were created a decade ago in the heyday of globalization. Unbridled globalization is no longer in vogue. The 1997 Asian crisis and 9-11 have since hit us. After 1997, our tax collections are short. So I’m instructing NEDA, DTI, the Tariff Commission not to be married to the idea that our tariff program can no longer be revised. I am adopting the policy to slow the program pace only to the AFTA and WTO minimums, and to take full advantage of all exemption windows allowed, such as for the petrochemical industry.

To encourage business, we must fight dishonesty in the private sector and in the public service.

Trust is the heart of business. A vibrant financial system cannot function without it. Yet, there can be no trust where businessmen are not afraid to break contracts because they can buy judges. And where public officials are not afraid to extort from businessmen because they are the law.

Thus, I ask Congress to reform the pay scale of judges and encourage mediation as an alternative to costly time-consuming and rent-seeking court litigation.

The only way to foster trust is to punish its betrayal in the private sector and in the public sphere.

Government will wage an unrelenting war against business frauds on the general public, and against official extortion of business. If anyone in my government tries it, tell me.

I am instructing the Budget Secretary to double the budget of the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission to further empower it to make lifestyle checks and file the appropriate cases.

I’m instructing the Commissioner of the Bureau of Internal Revenue and the Commissioner of Customs to crack down on big time tax evaders and smugglers. The Commission on Internal Revenue through computer analysis has identified quite a number of big time tax evaders especially in the value added tax and has identified a number of cases pending in the courts. And this will be moving.

These reforms require broad-based cooperation. On the part of the Executive Branch, I shall make the members of the Cabinet realize the urgency for policy coherence and coordination for the need for them to step down.

I thank Congress, which has given me key pieces of legislation I have sought. Though I must say our investors and creditors are not yet satisfied with the harvest.

I appreciate the work of careful crafting done by Congress so that unintended consequences are avoided or minimized. But there is a point where too much care is worse than too much recklessness. Our economy needs the TRANSCO Bill, the Securitization Act, and the other key pieces of economic legislation soonest.

I shall invite to a meeting on January 14 the Legislative-Executive Development Advisory Council (LEDAC) and the chairs of the committees that will deliberate on my key prescriptions for renewal and reform.

What we will not talk about is Charter change. Because I don’t want the people to misunderstand the reason for my decision not to run in 2004.

The focus of the discussion must therefore be, exclusively, the economy.

One of the means proposed for healing the deep divisions within our society is a government of national unity. This is a good idea, provided that the basis of unity is my National Agenda. Because no so-called team can supply the energy and focus of a singular executive, where everyone is picked by the president and serves solely at her pleasure.

To each his appointed task, therefore, I ask Congress to give me the good laws, and I will give you firm and efficient implementation.

To avoid the wrong impression of an ongoing civil conflict that has reached a stalemate, I would like to substitute for the term “government of national unity” instead the term “government of national cooperation”. Cooperation on the essential things we cannot quarrel about — on the need for reform and good governance, on the components of national survival in these perilous times, and on the elements of national progress in a worldwide recession.

To the business community represented here, gathered here to witness the approval of two substantial reforms to get business going and go back to business as usual, this brief message. “We in government are doing our part. We are taking the risks. We are making the sacrifices. We are doing everything to get this country going forward.”

I now ask you to make your sacrifice. Take a gamble. I took the plunge and I’m glad of it. I’m at the head of the country, seeing clearly the way ahead. Stay with me, I have no motive to lead you or the people astray. Join me. The trip will be short but I think rewarding for all of us who love our country.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].