Thank you very much Secretary Ace Durano, our Secretary of Tourism and our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development for Central Visayas.

King kanakung cabalen, Councilor Victor Ferrer; our host, Congresswoman Neri Soon-Ruiz, our host city mayor, Mayor Cortes; all the other officials of the PCL; all the other guests including the candidates who are all here to meet all of you.

Congratulations to the PCL for this End-Term General Assembly. But I am glad that even if it’s an end-term assembly you still have a theme and the theme is: “Be a Pro-Active Partner on Climate Change… Be a Leader.” Congratulations to you for continuing to be relevant until your last day in office.

And indeed this is very relevant. The Philippines is ranked 9th most vulnerable country to natural disasters. Our country is a victim of climate change although it is not a culprit. We have what they call a good carbon footprint. Our carbon emissions are only 1.6 tons per capita. The world average is 6 tons per capita and the world is trying to bring it down to 3 tons per capita. But we already surpassed the target, we’re only 1.6. So, we are good neighbors, good citizens of the world. And we should congratulate ourselves for that.

Yet, we are disproportionately vulnerable to the devastation of Mother Nature. This devastation is accelerated not by us. This mistreatment of the fragile environment is not by us but by human beings in other parts of the world. And yet we are a victim because of the fact that we’re an archipelago of 7,000 islands, and we’re located at the first stop of Pacific typhoons, and the majority of our people live in low-lying areas that are prone to climate hazards. So that is why there is much reason for us to do adaptation to climate change brought about by others, even as we take our own measures to help mitigate climate change.

Part of adaptation is our disaster preparedness measures which are all very well within the scope of your councils — ranging from early warning signals to forced evacuation. And I congratulate our Local Government Units, whom you represent, for having become very good at this — warning, evacuation and other adaptation measures. Congratulations to you!

Even national government we have a Green Philippines Agenda that consists of measures to help mitigate climate change:

First, reforestation. Why? Because when you have forests the trees absorb the carbon dioxide that we exhale, so it reduces global warming.

Second, managing solid waste and promoting clean water and clean air. Why? Solid waste produces methane which is very, very bad for climate change.

Third, clean energy. For instance, just last week we were here in Cebu and we inaugurated a Clean Coal Power Plant that emits less carbon emissions than the previous technology. But even at that the investor, the Metrobank Group, is also investing in reforestation of the area around so that whatever carbon will be emitted by the coal plant will be absorbed by the trees that they will plant to make it carbon neutral.

Our fourth area of Green Philippines is protected areas like parks and sanctuaries. For instance here in Cebu, the central mountains of Cebu have been declared as a protected area, areas like Malapascua where we went diving last week, and also areas like Olango Island where the bird watching is are protected areas, and there are many of them in your different jurisdictions.

Many of your councils have your local version of our Green Philippines Agenda. Many of you have incorporated in your local legislative agenda many measures to clean up our air, to clean up our waters, to clean up our land. Many of you have passed local ordinances on waste segregation, recycling and reducing the use of pollutants and non-biodegradable products, and other environment-friendly practices. So for those of you whose councils have passed all these measures, congratulations for your contribution against climate change!

To support the Local Government Units in the performance of your tasks, not only against climate change but all your other tasks, our administration has seen to it that your IRA shares get to you as prescribed. Maybe you might have learned to take this for granted but before my administration you didn’t always get your IRA as prescribed. Even in the early years of my Presidency, when we had to scrape the bottom of the barrel for funds, not only did we make sure that you the LGUs would have your IRAs, but we also paid you what previous administrations owed you.

And when government coffers received a bonanza from our tax reforms, we passed on to you the LGUs your fair share. That is why last year the LGUs received a first-ever for all, for you, a windfall of P40 billion pesos which is 40% of the additional P100 billion pesos we were able to collect from the Value Added Tax. So, I hope you felt all that money in the treasury of your Local Government Units.

Indeed, much has been done, yet much more remains to be done.

Our Administration is devoted to smooth transition to a new government. The people come first. Our accomplishments to date must be passed on to new leaders to continue the forward march of progress. To that end, let us do everything, we will do everything to make sure the new President and his team hit the ground running when they assume office.

There is no more important legacy than to leave the nation with a free and fair election and a smooth transition to a new government. Our people deserve to have confidence that their vote counts and that our democracy works.

To protect the integrity of the vote and the election results, we encourage and welcome independent, outside election observers to verify that the elections are in fact free, fair and open and the results valid, free from any political interference. Here in Cebu there is a very credible election watchdog, the CCFREL, and that is something that we encourage all over the country both from the Philippines and from outside.

It is important to have independent verification to give the people the confidence that the election works and the transition to a new government comes in smoothly. For my self, I will be staying out of the election process. I will trust the Comelec to ensure the new voting machines work, the votes are protected and counted, and the results are delivered in a rapid manner to the satisfaction of voters.

In the meantime, we will remain totally focused on governance and advancing the key programs we have advocated since coming into office, namely: infrastructure, education, healthcare, job creation and economic stability, including adapting our country to climate change. First the typhoons and now El Niño that’s part of the work that you and I have to do until our last moment in office.

This election is about hope and building a brighter future for the next generation. The next government must continue to build on the investments we have been making to move our nation forward in the areas of investment that create jobs, new vibrant sectors like climate change adaptation technology, and to invest in our people through better education and healthcare. And for the LGUs especially healthcare because health is a devolved function to the local governments.

Well, it is your end-term assembly; it’s also my end-term. I think that you and I can say that we will be leaving the nation in better shape than we found it.

Much remains to be done, but we have made good progress on many fronts. Therefore I am glad to be able to join you today to open your assembly and to use this opening of your assembly to say, for all your support through the years, I sincerely thank you.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the opening ceremony of the Philippine Councilors League (PCL) End-Term National Assembly 2010. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080402/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27725&Itemid=38