Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the launching and induction of officers of the Philippine Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Inc.

[Delivered at One Rizal Park, Manila Hotel, Manila, November 10, 2007]

Today’s launching of the Philippine Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry paves the way for a new generation of Filipino-Chinese businessmen.

Congratulations to your newly-inducted Board of Directors, headed by Chairman Emeritus, Francis Chua; Chairman of the Board, John C. Co; and President, Anson Tan.

Through your leadership, we look forward to the PCCCI working hand in hand with the government to create more jobs and broader business opportunities.

I commend your deep concern to further our country’s economic growth and progress in spite of the seemingly relentless political noise and partisan intrigues going on around us.

I know you want results, not rhetoric, action not political posturing. I ask you to tell the politicians that you support in the elections to get on with the people’s work.

I know you are tired of negative political rhetoric that does nothing to bring about the legislation that will create a new future for our nation.

I ask you to call on the legislators you support in the elections to stop partisan wrangling and start legislating. Congress has demonstrated that when it sets aside self-interest it can produce legislation that improves the quality of life of all Filipinos. The most notable recent example is the bill that reduces the cost of life-giving medicines.

But much more needs to be done to improve human rights, secure budgets for healthcare and education, invest more in peace and order and advance our national interests with other nations on trade, economy and security issues.

The Filipino-Chinese community has been instrumental in realizing our gains in the fight against poverty and for peace and security.

Eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government and our society. As we enter the holiday season, it is essential that every person of means helps those in need. The government is doing everything in its power to be a catalyst for this process.

Rice is not only a staple for our people, it is symbolic of our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. We are committed to ensuring that the needy throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season. I ask you to help me in this project.

We can’t say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and hungry amongst us. Let us be a society measured by our ability to live by our faith.

The strength of your partnership with the government will help take us to our long term vision is for the Philippines to reach the verge of first world in 20 years. To do so, we will need a robust middle class, world class infrastructure and strong institutions of government. Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affect us here and now.

According to an independent survey that came out last Monday, those living in poverty have declined. But we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why, during the holiday and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices. I ask for your help in this hard work.

This week I ordered the release of P1 billion to boost the government’s food production and distribution program to mitigate hunger for the rest of the year.

Part of the food distribution program is to create an NGO network to support feeding programs under the responsibility of the DSWD. I ask you to be part of that NGO network.

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hard working men and women of this nation put their family first. The best gift a family can give to a child, and any nation can give to its people, is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, justice and self worth. That is why we will continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level. We will continue to bolster our college scholarship program for those high school students ready for higher education. I ask you help me in this scholarship program.

Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women, our children would fall short of their dreams and aspirations. We are deeply indebted to the hard work and dedication of all of our teachers. Their work is noble and patriotic. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino. I ask your help to make them feel such praise and respect.

Through the end of my term, I aim to provide increased political stability, continued economic growth and sustainable peace and order. With your help we will not let the nation slip into election year instability. We want this to be an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

Be assured that I lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election and new leadership. We will not falter in keeping our hand on the ship of state. With your support we will also continue strong, focused leadership in the international arena to advance the interests of our nation and our people, including our relationship with China.

Our special relationship with China is marked by a glorious history of trade that has grown to make China and Hong Kong together our largest export market today. More opportunities lie ahead, which your leaders can help us develop.

Like the fabled maritime trade routes between the Philippines and China, the greater cooperation in trade and investment facilitated by the prime movers of Filipino-Chinese business can lead to an economic boom for us.

My goal is to leave this nation stronger and more stable. To provide even more jobs and build more and better schools. And to lift up the poor through investments in infrastructure, healthcare, better housing and improved social justice.

Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress.

People want to know are we strong, are we stable, are we growing as a nation. Is everyone benefiting equally, is there social justice in the land, do people feel good about themselves and the society in which they live.

Unity of purpose is driven by a common desire to know where we are going as a nation, that are leaders are strong, hard-working and committed to the best interests of the people.

Unity is about action, not discussion. It is about working together not just talking together.

Within unity there is and must be room for dissent, even conflict as part of the process of moving the nation forward. At the end of the day, unity is measured by collective hope, commitment and confidence.

I look forward to PCCCI being a true partner for development in the years ahead. United, we shall make a progressive, modernizing Philippines a reality.

Thank you and mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). Launching and Induction of Officers of the Philippine Chinese Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140005/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2285&Itemid=38