Thank you.

Many thanks, Ambassador Buensuceso, for your kind words. Thank you for introducing me. Thank you for introducing the leaders of the Filipino community here and our Honorary Consul General. Thank you also for taking good care of our Filipinos here and also for the relationship between our countries. Ambassador Buensuceso is truly lucky that he was an ambassador when we attend an important meeting. For example, when there was an ASEAN Summit in Laos, he was our ambassador there. Now, this very important Copenhagen Climate Change Summit, he is again the ambassador here, so congratulations to you.

Together with my husband, Atty. Mike Arroyo, and the various members of our Philippine delegation, so if I may introduce them starting from the left of my husband, Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa, congresswoman of Mindoro Occidental; to her left, Congressman Ignacio Arroyo Jr., who is the chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources which is very important in our climate change meeting; and to his left is Secretary Angie Reyes, our Secretary of Energy, who has a big role regarding climate change; and to his left, I suppose we can say is also a member of your Filipino Danish community, Secretary Cerge Remonde, because his wife is from Denmark, Marit Remonde; here on the other side is Secretary of Trade Secretary Peter Favila because above our discussion about climate change, we have people we are talking to, investors and businessmen here in Denmark; and to his right is the congresswoman of Bulacan, Congresswoman Neneng Nicolas, who is the Vice Chairman of Appropriations, and whatever we promise to spend to avoid climate change, or its effects, she will work on that in Congress; to her right is our new Vice Chairman of the Climate Change Commission, Secretary Sonny Alvarez, he is the workhorse of our delegation here in Copenhagen; and to his right is the one managing our Reconstruction Commission, that commission that formulates what needs to be done for our recovery from typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng which were brought to our country by climate change, Secretary Ric Saludo.

We all greet you, good evening to the Filipinos here in Denmark. To my fellow Kapampangans, good evening to you all. Oh, and that's that. Okay. To my mother's fellow provincemates, good evening to all of you. Is there an Ilocano here? Oh, you are an Ilocana. And to those from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening to all of you. Oh, very good. Thank you very much for coming to our gathering because we arrived at seven, our party is at eight, but when I entered, you were already here. So I said, let's just go up for a moment and wait for the luggage so we can change because I wanted to wear Filipino attire, but the luggage was delayed and my clothes were wrinkled, so I said, it's okay even if I'm in travelling clothes, just don't let our compatriots here wait any longer. Because I know that you have sacrificed, it's a weekday, so that you can come here tonight. And I am happy to see you all here.

As Ambassador Buensuceso said, you have been waiting for me for a long time. That's true, this is the first time I have come here to Copenhagen as president and I am pleased to have the opportunity to thank you for your concern for our country and also to give reports or words or statements on how you are admired by our Filipino compatriots there in our country.

Because saying that you are new heroes of our country is really true and we will never forget that fact. You are quiet in your heroism, you do not seek awards, you do not show off, you are motivated by the simple but profound values that drive our nation forward. Peace, hope, helping others, love for family, seeking good education and rights towards a good job and a decent salary that will bring food to the family and education to the children.

Among our heroes are many ordinary Filipinos, including of course you, overseas Filipinos, or what Filipinos abroad are called. You make the ultimate sacrifice in striving abroad to bring livelihood to your families that you cannot be with on Christmas Day. And through your contributions, the progress of our economy has been uninterrupted for almost nine years and even in the current time of global economic challenges. That is why you are always called the new heroes of our country. And that's not a cliché, that's not corny, that's the truth. You are new heroes of our country.

Here in Denmark, I learned that the Filipino community is not very large, only slightly more than ten thousand in this country. However, as Ambassador Buensuceso said, you are a unique community in this country because you support the Danish economy while also supporting our economy by bringing livelihood to your families. Your deeds are truly commendable and you are really admired by the people here in Denmark. So thank you very much for the honor you give to our country because you are all very good and you show your excellence here in Denmark.

Therefore, our government and our people honor you for your sacrifice and dedication to your work, your family, and our country. But I want you to know that we are working to create a strong and competitive Philippine economy with good jobs so that one day going abroad for a job will become just a career choice and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino worker. That is our aspiration for our country.

It is also important for the Filipino people these negotiations in Copenhagen. The prayers I heard earlier were full of hope that these talks here in Copenhagen will be successful. And to our two Filipinos who won awards in the CNN debate on climate change, congratulations! It proves the importance of this issue to us Filipinos. We in the Philippines value this problem of climate change and we are fulfilling our duty to avoid a global climate crisis. The Philippines emits a very small amount of carbon.

The average carbon emission of the whole world is six tons per capita and it is said that if we want to avoid the severe effects of climate change by 2015, the average emission should only be three tons per capita, is that right Sonny? But the Philippines, our emission is only 1.6 tons per capita.

So we have a good carbon footprint, we are responsible for our environment. We can be proud of that, much smaller than the average in the world and even what needs to be done. As the World Bank told us, “where we want the world to be on carbon emissions, the Philippines is already there.” So we can speak, we have the credibility to speak here in Copenhagen.

And yet even though we are responsible regarding our environment, the Philippines is disproportionately vulnerable to the devastation of Mother Nature accelerated by the mistreatment of the fragile environment by human beings not in our country but all over the world. Because when the world warms up, it’s not just the country that heats up in its own country, the heat reaches the entire country. And one reason why the effect is even greater on us is that our country is an archipelago with more than seven thousand islands and the majority of our citizens live in low-lying areas, exposed to the dangers of the weather.

The challenges facing the Philippines due to climate change are dire. According to scientists from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and reported by the United Nations, the Philippines is among the twelve countries most at risk due to climate change. In fact, we are at the top of the list of countries threatened by more frequent and more severe storms due to global warming. The changing global environment is really dramatically and negatively affecting the Philippines in spite of the fact that our own carbon emissions are very small.

Tropical storms of historic scale have inflicted devastation and a tragic loss of lives upon our country. You know the two storms that hit our country, Ondoy and Pepeng, destroyed four billion dollars worth of damage. This is almost three percent of our GDP and eight to ten percent of the production of our food-producing regions was also damaged because more than six hundred hectares of crops were destroyed. And six to eight percent of GDP was lost in the industrial areas of our country. Nine million people were affected, I am sure all of you have relatives who were affected. More than nine hundred died. More than two hundred thousand homes were damaged or destroyed. And this calamity came while we were struggling with the onslaught of the global economic crisis.

But we united as a nation. We have begun to rebuild the affected parts of our country, a large part of this is due to the international aid we have been receiving in recent months, we thank our friends and partners in development in times of need. And to the Filipinos here in Denmark who helped, who sent aid to relatives, to NGOs, to the government to help overcome the typhoons, thank you very much to all of you.

Now, here is the Philippine delegation in Copenhagen, working with other countries to formulate – as you all know because you are here – a plan to mitigate the severe effects of climate change and avoid a global climate crisis. Under a new world order, economic development and environmental protection should ideally be allies, not enemies. It is time for all nations of the world to acknowledge our collective responsibility.

It will certainly take many decades to solve this problem. But we need to start taking action now. And in order to have a fair agreement, developed countries should lead the way in reducing carbon dioxide emissions because much of it originates from them in terms of global warming. Their industrialization, especially during the early periods of industrialization, with smokestacks and the use of gasoline and coal, contributed significantly to climate change. Therefore, developed countries should take the lead in reducing carbon emissions. As for us, what will we reduce in our carbon emissions? We are, in fact, already at half of what is needed, what should be the goal of other countries. So, of course, we want to do our part, we want to contribute, but our contribution will be very small because right now we are already even below the maximum that they would want the world to have.

We also need to be a good example of a climate taker, not a climate maker; we are not contributing to climate change but are its victims. There are many such cases, so a substantial financial system is needed to fund the costs of preparing developing countries for climate change, which they call adaptation because we are affected and we have to adapt to climate change originating from other countries. And also for the creation and delivery of innovative technologies to countries in need, like ours. One of the benefits of our relationship with Denmark is the use of windmills, isn't Denmark the pioneer of wind power? Isn't Denmark one of the… that's why they hosted this climate change meeting because they also have a ‘k’ – a low carbon footprint because they have been using wind power and renewable energy for a long time, and Danish companies have investments in wind power in the Philippines. They have projects in Bangui, Ilocos Norte, and in Batanes, and many more are planned for the Philippines.

These new technologies are expensive. They say that a windmill has a 15-year payback period because of the large initial capital. If you leave it to the economy or the payback calculations, everyone will use coal because it is the smallest investment. Therefore, countries like the Philippines need help to afford these new technologies, and we have received significant assistance from Danish financing because they financed their own investors.

So, these are the things we need to do: ensure that the wealthy countries, which have contributed significantly to climate change, reduce their emissions, and also ensure that we, the victims of climate change, have sufficient capacity to do what needs to be done to adapt to the problems of climate change.

And we should not leave Copenhagen without a strong agreement in accordance with the responsibilities that everyone must accept, although the tasks assigned to each country are different. Humans created this problem, and humans will solve it.

Earlier, during the prayer, it was said that when God created our world, there was no pollution, so this pollution comes from humans, and humans should also find the solution.

And what I ask of all of you is… my call to all of you, support our government in promoting sustainable development for our country, the Philippines. I thank you all for your help and support. I am pleased to hear from Ambassador Buensuceso that when there is good news about the Philippines, you are happy, and when there is sad or bad news about the Philippines, you sympathize and defend it. I hope you will continue to guide our government, and I am sure you also feel the love of our country for you.

Thank you to Ambassador Buensuceso. And we thank our Honorary Consul General, thank you to the leaders of the Filipino community here who are helping to take care of our Filipinos here. You are over 10,000 Filipinos in Denmark. I hope that you are 10,000 happy Filipinos because you are 10,000 beloved and respected Filipinos, respected not only in Denmark but in your home country the Philippines.

Thank you very much and Merry Christmas to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133647/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27149&Itemid=38