Thank you very much Ambassador Espiritu, for your very kind introduction of me and your wonderful reports about the Filipino Community here and the work being done by our embassy.

I am very grateful to all of you. Good evening. Thank you for your warm welcome. Thank you for your patient waiting because we were late arriving from Spain. Thank you for all being here. I would also like to greet Mrs. Espiritu. We are very happy that you were able to come here tonight. It’s not a weekday so our meeting had to be after office hours. I know you will be back to work tomorrow so I am doubly grateful that you waited for me.

And well I was here last September, some of us saw each other. We are visiting Europe and we have to visit Europe to advance Philippine foreign policy through high level deliberations with our allies abroad. Our national security is central to our economic security – to generate foreign investments, create jobs and expand economic opportunity to every province of our great archipelago. To that end, we are being aggressively engaged with businessmen and women to continue to invest in our country.

The Philippines takes its global responsibilities seriously, from ASEAN to providing peace forces to global hotspots around the world. We believe in our commitment to be a true global citizen to advance the cause of human rights, economic progress and mutual security to secure global peace.

And our European allies are part of our history and part of our future.

We always talk about this, especially coming from Spain, we always talk about the four hundred years that they were there. And these are our generations now, we remember, our fathers, their stories about the Americans, but actually even England, they were in the Philippines for three years during the Spanish period.

So we have to continue to reach out to our European allies and let them know about the great strides forward we have made in the Philippines.

As Ambassador Espiritu said, the Filipino community in the U.K. has been continuously growing in recent years. Not only because many nurses are coming in, perhaps if they had one million Filipino nurses here they would, but our country can only provide a few and families have also come in. Then as Ed said, those born here. That’s why our Philippine community is growing and growing. Isn't that right Ed, when I was here in September, what did you say about their growth in the last five years from 50,000 it’s now 200,000 in the last five years. Our OFW’s are our day-to-day ambassadors to the U.K. and always, you are part of our agenda.

As I’ve said very often, you must have heard me say this before but I must say it again, we honor and value the contribution of our overseas workers for your sacrifice and dedication to your work, your family and our nation.

Ten percent of our Filipinos are abroad. The same is true for Portugal, ten percent of the Portuguese are abroad. New Zealand, 25 percent of their population is abroad. But New Zealand officials told me directly, the difference between overseas Filipinos and overseas New Zealanders, those leaving New Zealand are yuppies. So moms and dads in New Zealand are still sending additional allowance. But Filipinos, whether yuppies or older, send money to the Philippines. That's the difference.

We know that living in another country is not only prosperous and happy. Of course, we have those who are successful. Many of our nurses are successful. Our chefs, imagine, executive chef of large and well-known establishments, successful. But we also have compatriots who face trials. Leading this is what Ed Espiritu mentioned earlier, he told me about the work of senior carers facing new policies in this country.

Danil here, I am instructing Ambassador Espiritu to continue coordinating with our government, as well as myself, your servant, and our congressmen, to talk to parliamentarians tomorrow and various U.K. officials to address the problems faced by our senior carers. So this is a major item on our agenda tomorrow. And hopefully it will help.

But I’m proud to say that our ambitious reforms are helping to break the offshore cycle and supporting an economy that is growing at its fastest pace in 20 years, 7 percent itong taong ito so far. The economic gains we are seeing now are paving the way for the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job, and the day when overseas work is just another career option and not the only choice you have to earn a living. We’ve created 6 million jobs, new jobs in the last 6 years. By continuing down this path, we will increasingly be keeping our best and brightest right in the Philippines, close to friends and families, helping to build our communities and provide the next generation of leadership.

We’ve been looking forward to meeting you our hardworking OFWs on this trip. That’s why on our trip to England, you are the first agenda item. In Spain too, you were the first people I met before the Spanish officials.

And I am pleased to report to you that our country remains on the path towards economic progress. Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, or cut down on tax cheats, or sorry, let's talk about that a little later, strengthen the peso, and no one thought we could move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring down our budget deficit. No one thought we could pay our debts, and certainly not before they are due and no one thought we could raise employment, all that was … six years ago, but we have.

And this strengthening peso, the fact that we even have to discuss the rising peso, is a positive reflection on the strength of the economy. Because otherwise, the peso would weaken, what does that mean? And for your families in the Philippines, because the price of oil in the world is rising. Well, we rely on oil imports for our gasoline. But because our peso is strong, even with the strong increase in the price of oil around the world, when it comes to the price of gasoline in the Philippines and transportation, the increase is not that much. So the jeepney, bus, and taxi drivers and operators understand that, they understand that we have so far not given them a rate increase.

Anyway, that said, we have one of the world’s best central banks and one of the world’s best Central Banker, Sy Tetangco, and he is winning awards, Best Central Banker in the World and we continue to trust him to continue to manage our macroeconomic fundamentals.

Perhaps many of you know, the Central Bank is constitutionally, not constitutionally, legally independent. We made a law, we made a law during the time…. those with third terms here, fourth terms or… the Central Bank is by law independent back then, the Secretary of Finance was the chairman of the Central Bank, so it was under the Office of the President. But we made a new law, it needs to be independent so we cannot influence the decisions of the Central Bank. But in any case, I want to assure you we are mindful of the impact on our overseas workers of a strong peso as you send remittances home. And we are working on ways to mitigate the impact of the peso on your families’ incomes.

For one thing, we especially looked at the domestic helpers and such. The Department of Labor searched where they come from and the Department of Labor went there to provide a special program for the families of OFWs. And like what Ambassador Espiritu said, for OFWs and your families, it’s very important that you keep or even enhance your financial freedom during this time of a rising peso. And financial freedom does not stop at having enough funds to sustain a family’s basic necessities. Accumulating savings is part of financial freedom, sufficient savings and turning this hard-earned money into solid capital that is equally important. So we encouraged OFWs and your families to save and channel their savings into investments.

And that is why I’m glad that today, remittances are increasingly being used towards investments in human resource capital through education and healthcare for beneficiaries. They say, aren't you experiencing a brain drain with so many talented overseas Filipinos leaving? Actually, the talented Filipinos who leave send money back to their families so that relatives, children can study, so that brain drain is replaced. And also overseas Filipinos, we noticed are also now investing in physical capital acquiring real properties, including land purchases and home construction, the construction firms, the housing developers, they tell me that their business is expanding and expanding because forty percent of the homes they sell are sold to OFWs. That's how big your help is. And now there is also financial and capital investments. For thing, many OFWs fund small and medium enterprises of their relatives. But now I'm hearing a lot, I'm interviewing OFWs who are investing in our financial instruments. That's why Francis Lim, the president of the Stock Exchange came here to explain to our OFWs that this is a very good way to grow the money you send to your families in our country. And we hope this trend will continue.

Today as I said, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. And investments are pouring in, real investments or direct investments and our stock market has reached historic heights. What is it Francis, I heard from ….. It reached 4200, or….3800, so the highest, in our history. And the world is taking notice, I believe the Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for domestic and foreign investors.

The surge of investments has been anchored by the announcement of several major international companies that we call the Billion Dollar Club, including Texas Instruments, Texas Instruments chose wafer fabrication in Clark, they chose that and not China because they liked many things about our country. Hanjin of Korea built a shipyard of 1.6 billion dollars in Subic, they just finished, they just delivered the first ships, now they are building a second shipyard, they will make the components that are now bought abroad there, and where will they put it? In Mindanao, in Ozamis Oriental. Marubeni bought 3.5 billion dollars worth of power plants and will expand their Quezon power plant by half a billion dollars. And here in London, the Mittal family, owner of global steel in the Philippines will put 1.6 billion dollars for an Integrated Steel Mill. In fact, I will be talking to Mr. Mittal tomorrow to discuss the need to speed up his investments. That's why I'm with the mayor of Iligan City to ensure that the investment climate in Iligan is good.

And these kinds of investments are happening across the board in a number of industries. We’re working to ensure this will be sustained. We are committed to consolidating the gains in new revenue by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, healthcare and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. I’m very focused like a laser beam. Ano mang mababasa n’yo sa headlines, I’m focused on the economy. We will not sacrifice long term gains for short term political expediency.

Let's talk a little about politics. What happened in Manila Peninsula last week, you all saw it on television. It’s clear that the actions of these few desperate men reveal just how out of touch they are with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. You know, more than anybody else that Filipinos want political stability, a bright economic future and social justice. The actions of these misguided men undermine each and every one of the genuine aspirations of real Filipinos. Instead of working to bring the nation together by working within our democratic process, their actions merely are fuel for selfish motives and for personal gain.

But in the end, the rule of law prevailed. The transgressors will not hold this nation hostage with impunity. They will be punished to the full extent of the law. Justice shall be served and the interests of the people upheld.

Yung pag-usapan natin yung rule of law. The trial and conviction of the former president was a major step forward for the rule of law in the Philippines. It proved that no one is above the law when it comes to meting out punishment, including former presidents.

I honored the request for pardon because I believe it was in the country’s interest. It was a touch choice, but I have never been one to shy away from making tough choices when it comes to moving the nation forward. Now, I believe it is time to put this black chapter in our country’s history behind us and concentrate on what is really important for our people, which is to ensure that all Filipinos benefit from the fruits of our economic progress.

Like the migrants, many of the Filipino migrants who sought their success in other countries, as Ed Espiritu said earlier, I understand the situation of many of you whose children and grandchildren were born, raised and educated here in the U.K. Imagine, between the U.K. and Ireland six Filipinos are being born everyday. That’s why we now have second and even third generations of Filipinos. We hope that our second and third generation *kababayans* (countrymen) would continue to develop their identity and pride as Filipinos. Ambassador Espiritu said that our embassy in London, along with your Filipino organizations, are implementing activities that will give our second and third generation members the opportunity to learn our rich and glorious heritage as Filipinos. So thank you very much for that.

Tomorrow, as Ed said, I will meet with the Queen and meet with businessmen from this country, for our overseas Filipinos. And your achievements, for example, this Singles for Christ in healthcare with such a beautiful song, our chefs, and other successful jobs you have. And surely when they talk about you, they can only say praises, all praises for you and your families because that’s what I’ve heard from our Filipinos here in London.

And please excuse me, allow me to have the privilege of accepting their kind words addressed to you. Let me tell them, on your behalf, thank you very much to them for respecting you. I firmly believe that they will continue to have high regard for you. You are truly something to be proud of.

And be assured that I will lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election in three years and new leadership. I will not falter in keeping my hand on the tiller of the ship of state. And we will also continue strong, focused leadership in the international arena to advance the interests of our nation and our people.

Friends, *kababayans* (countrymen), I’ve been coming here for two years now consecutively. Maybe now it’s worth trying to visit the Philippines. I invite you to visit our country again so you can see the true state of our society, the new achievements we’ve made, the new things we’ve done – the roads, the construction ongoing all over the place, and the new factories being built and bring your friends from here, the Britons, so they can see where you come from because you are all so great.

There’s more of that back home. Because that’s what “ambassador” means, right? The good qualities you show. My message is I am only a representative of my fellow countrymen. It’s the same. As good as I am, that’s the message expressed by our overseas Filipinos, even if you don’t say it. Your message is how good you are, that’s how good our country is. So bring your friends even more, they will believe it even more.

So again, thank you very much to all of you. And as our Singles for Christ said, let’s not forget, we have Christmas, a time for loving one another because there is a Lord who loves and loves us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].