Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During an Official Dinner in Honor of H.E. President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Madame HJ. Ani Bambang Yudhoyono of the Republic of Indonesia

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, June 21, 2005]

President Yudhoyono and Madame Yudhoyono, Vice President de Castro, His Excellency President Ramos and Mrs. Ramos, Senate President Drilon, members of the Cabinet, excellencies of the diplomatic corps, members of the Indonesian delegation, members of the Senate and the House of Representatives, members of the Indonesian and Philippine business community, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, thank you Prime Minister Yudhoyono and Madame for visiting us in the Philippines with your very high powered delegation. Your visit was a vital opportunity for us to talk about many areas of mutual interest. Indeed, we have so many areas of mutual interest that our relationship is that of closer than neighbors.

Indonesia is the fourth biggest country in the world. It is the biggest Muslim country and the biggest country in ASEAN. It is the biggest archipelago in the world, the second being the Philippines. And of course, Indonesia is our next door neighbor to the south.

Indonesia and the Philippines are similar in many ways. President Yudhoyono and I are similar in many ways. We have both aggressively engaged the region and the world at a heightened level of diplomatic, political and economic relations.

I like to think that our two countries are both truly back on the map of Asia and the world. We both believe in the market system. We both believe in the power of the economy to lift up our countries from decades of poverty. And we help each other because we are good neighbors.

I thank Indonesia, Excellency, for your support for the peace process in Southern Philippines. Indonesia played a critical role in the 1996 Peace Agreement during the presidency of President Ramos, in the Peace Agreement between the Philippine government and the Moro National Liberation front that ended more than two decades of armed conflict.

Now, Indonesia continues to support the peace process as chairman of the committee of the eight of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and is a prime advocate and sponsor of the Philippines’ bid for observer status in the OIC.

I also thank you, Excellency, I thank Indonesia for your cooperation working together with us in our joint fight against terrorism. We are both determined to rid terrorism from our shores as we are both determined to eradicate the poverty which has become the ground for terrorism. Our two countries successes in tracking down and arresting those responsible for high profile terroristic and heinous acts are a testament to our common commitment.

For countries like us — like our two countries that have had a long experience with terrorism — we cannot ignore the possibility of renewed attacks including those that could be planned from terrorist cells, whether these cells are in either of our two countries or in other countries. That is why I value our intelligence sharing and cooperation, and our cooperative efforts are paying off in our two countries in the region and in the world.

As friends and neighbors we have stood by each other in times of difficulty. Indonesia send us relief goods and medical supplies following the calamities that visited the Philippines in the latter part of 2004. And then when Indonesia had its own much much worse calamity, that tsunami, the Philippines had the honor of sending medical teams to assist in the humanitarian and relief missions in Aceh and Miangas Island, and also members of the private sector like Don Emilio Yap give substantial contributions as well.

Your Excellency, with all of these that we are doing together — fighting poverty; fighting terrorism; working for the peace process not only in the Philippines, not only in Mindanao but also in Aceh; exchanging business among our own private sector members — your Excellency, I am so happy that you are here tonight so that we can once again reaffirm our steadfast friendship. The friendship of our two countries closer than neighbors and our resolve to enhance a relations to enable both of our countries to achieve the goals of peace and development.

May I therefore invite your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, to join me in a toast to the health and happiness and success of His Excellency President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Madame Yudhoyono, and the continued prosperity of Indonesia and its people.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during an Official Dinner in Honor of H.E. President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Madame HJ. Ani Bambang Yudhoyono of the Republic of Indonesia. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080943/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5077&Itemid=38