Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Governor Tet Garcia for your very kind introduction of me.

Thank you also Congressman Abet Garcia for your kind words about our national government's program; thank you also Mayor Raymundo for your welcoming remarks; thank you to the various officials of the province of Batangas and the towns of Bataan who are here today. And I would also like to greet Bishop Soc Villegas. And with me here, as Abet said, are the officials involved, primarily involved in the construction of this terminal: General Manager of the Philippine Ports Authority Oca Sevilla and Presidential Assistance for Central Luzon, Rene Diaz; I would also like to greet General Romy Tolentino of the Northern Luzon command and the various officials of Region III in the national government.

Today is a very happy day and I am happy and I hope the people of Orion and all of Bataan are happy because what we are starting, your passenger terminal, is another step for you to remain number one in the human development index.

Abet is thanking my colleagues, Oca and Rene, but we should thank Governor Tet and Congressman Abet because they relentlessly pressured the PPA until this passenger terminal was approved. And what kind of passenger terminal? It’s very beautiful. You saw the design, world class. Jun Palafox was the one who designed it. Jun Palafox is one of the top 150 architects in the world, the only Southeast Asian. He isn't here at our celebration today because he is in Dubai, he has multi-million dollar projects there. And you are all here, my colleagues, I have a message for Jun Palafox. From the head of the Saudi Arabia General Investment Authority because they are building a new city bigger than the neighboring countries of Saudi Arabia, the King Abdullah Economic City, they plan to build the tallest building in the world. They want Jun Palafox to bid on the design of the King Abdullah Economic City.

Let's go back to this. This project was approved by GM because Abet had a source of funding, the savings from the economic reforms, the reform of the national treasury made by Congress. So thank you Congressman Abet Garcia for your great help with that. These projects are a return for you because you were among those who sacrificed in our reforms.

Thank you also Governor Garcia, Congressman Garcia, Mayor Raymundo for naming this terminal after my father, President Diosdado Macapagal. My father and I are close to you because our town of Lubao, Pampanga is adjacent to Bataan. That's why I remember during the lahar period, the hospitals of Bataan were filled with Kapampangans during the Pinatubo disaster. In fact, the mental hospital here, when I was a senator, I requested that it be made national again… Regional because many people there had psychological problems due to the trauma of Pinatubo and they were sent here and not to other hospitals. So Pampanga and Bataan are very close. Bataan helped a lot of the victims of the disaster during the Pinatubo period.

Now there is a disaster in our region, not necessarily here in the Philippines yet but in our neighboring country Indonesia. Even as we pray for the victims amid the mounting toll of the Java quake and dispatch the Philippine medical and humanitarian mission to the center of tragedy where the survivors are most in need, I have directed the NDCC to coordinate with Phivolcs and the other concerned agencies in conducting earthquake-preparedness drills in schools, business districts and public places nationwide as part of our massive disaster awareness campaign. Our preparedness at all times, the continuous updating of our disaster monitoring and mitigation plans, and the solidarity of all sectors are important to minimize loss of lives and properties.

Let’s not be unduly alarmed, but by all means let every vulnerable community be prepared to meet any contingencies whether brought about by earthquakes, landslides, floods and other natural calamities. Earlier, because General Rafanan, our new regional director of Region III is the Chairman of the Regional Disaster Coordinating Council, I said let's start our earthquake drill right here in the province of Bataan.

I hope the people of Orion and Bataan will also support our other reforms. Thank you. One of our 10-point program that we call BEAT-THE-ODDS is to develop a network of infrastructure that connects the whole country. This is an example, although it is for outside the country, Orion-Manila is a very important route to connect the whole country. Importantly, Bataan is also included in our Clark-Subic Development Corridor, as Abet said. And this Clark-Subic Development Corridor is the northern portion of what we call the urban beltway. The urban beltway covers the Clark-Subic Corridor including Bataan to Metro Manila, to Calabarzon ending in Batangas Port. And in this corridor, this urban beltway, comes fifty percent of our gross domestic product.

That's why infrastructure here is very important so that our products can move faster. So in this area, our main infrastructure in the urban beltway are expressways and ports like this port of Orion. The expressway also includes Bataan in the Subic-Clark Expressway. And this is the ferry from Bataan to Manila, which is included in the nautical highway, but it is not yet complete. Because what we call the nautical highway is a network of highways and roll-on/roll-off ferries that should cover the Manila-Bataan route. Because if our products from the industries here are going to Manila Port, imagine they will pass through the Olongapo-Gapan road, North Expressway, cross Edsa and go to the south harbor or wherever. But if there is a roll-on/roll-off ferry, the truck will go straight from Orion, just board the ferry, straight to the south harbor or wherever it goes to any part of Metro Manila.

Now the story of the governor and Abet, there was someone who tried to build a roll-on/roll-off ferry here, but he saw that the ro-ro earned more going to Caticlan in Boracay so he moved there. We cannot prevent private sector decisions, but earlier because we rode on Sun Cruises, which is owned by the Magsaysay-Ho family, I spoke to their representative. You know Doris Ho is my generation and now she is in Tokyo because Doris Ho is an international businesswoman. But her representative, I said, can we talk to Doris since you have a passenger ferry service, can you also build a ferry service for vehicles roll-on/roll-off. And according to her representative, Magsaysay lines are really planning to establish a roll-on/roll-off ferry here.

Throughout the country now, the necessary projects are continuing, as I said, expressways and ports in the urban beltway — including Bataan; the roll-on/roll-off nautical highway — also including Bataan-Manila. In Central Philippines, which covers the Visayas, Bicol, the small islands of Northern Mindanao, Romblon and Palawan, tourism is our investment there. And in mainland Mindanao and Northern Luzon, agri-business. That's why the products of Mindanao need to go here through ro-ro. The products of Northern Luzon also need to go to Manila through ro-ro, avoiding the heavy traffic on EDSA and Macart… So that's also a big help if we have a ro-ro here in Orion to Manila.

Here in Bataan, as mentioned by Governor Tet, is the center of our reforms in energy independence because here is the Petron plant which is a partnership of the Philippine government and Saudi Aramco. And when I went to Saudi Arabia, I asked Saudi Arabia — because Saudi Aramco is owned by Saudi Arabia — to put a refinery there in Mindanao. Their answer was, they can put a refinery in the Philippines but they want to put it here in Bataan, because of economics. But to help provide jobs in Mindanao, they will put ethanol distilleries there and they can also put a Jatropha processing plant so that Mindanao will not be left behind in development.

Because if we talk about jobs, actually the oil refinery is capital intensive, so there aren't that many jobs for a given peso of investment. So if we want jobs in Mindanao, as they say, the human development index in Mindanao is much lower than in Bataan, it is better to put several ethanol distilleries and Jatropha plantations, which can provide more jobs. The important thing in the refinery is an efficient cost of production so that the selling price of refined oil products is low and for them the answer to that goal is the plant here in Bataan. So congratulations to you!

We deeply appreciate the move of our oil firms to hold off upward price adjustments for diesel. The transport sector and the commuters are truly grateful for this break at a time when they need it most. The government shall continue to work with the petroleum industry to temper the impact of oil price increases in the world market. We also appeal to our legislators to pass immediately the biofuel act to encourage more investments in alternative fuel sources. It is already finished in congress.

We could muster the vast agricultural prowess of the Philippines to our advantage and ease the woes of our people. The Jatropha seeds, you can buy them there in the Northern Luzon command because General Romy Tolentino is about to harvest his Jatropha seeds there in Fort Magsaysay. And that Jatropha can be planted even on marginal lands and when many people plant and harvest the seeds, Petron is also willing to build a Jatropha plant that will process it into diesel.

Energy self-sufficiency is the imperative of our time and we must exhaust all avenues and all means of institutional solidarity towards the long-term achievement of this goal.

So my countrymen, neighboring provinces, let us continue the activities that will accelerate development.

Again, I congratulate the people of Orion, the people of Bataan, on the start of your new progress. This Diosdado Macapagal Cruise Terminal we are starting is a very good symbol. I hope this will continue.

Thank you very much for your continued support for me.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Groundbreaking Ceremonies of the Diosdado Macapagal Cruise Passenger Terminal. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213123/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2713&Itemid=38