Thank you very much, Secretary Marianito Roque, for your introduction of me.

Secretary Boboy Syjuco, the chairman of TESDA; our other DOLE officials; our stakeholders; our presenters: Lita Hizon for the land-based and Marlon Roño for sea-based recruiters; all the different sectors that are interested, especially the workers:

Thank you all for coming.

I called for this second round of the job summit to focus on overseas employment. And I’m very glad to hear from the report of Undersecretary Padilla that there are 500,000 jobs available abroad because we have lost about 5,000 jobs. So for every worker who has lost his or her job, 100 are waiting depending on the skills.

In this second round, people on the ground, like labor attaches and welfare officers have been invited. I asked for at least one for Asia — where is our labor attaché or welfare officer from Asia? — okey, very good, thank you. (applause) For the Middle East — where is ours from the Middle East? — very good, yes. (Applause) Saudi and Al Khobar, okey. Of course, Saudi has 1.5 million of our 8 million people abroad. Europe, (applause) Geneva and Americas (applause) from Canada. We invited them, instead of only the officials of the head office of the DOLE. Because we need to hear the voice of those who are on the ground, who are suffering and struggling.

And I have often said that in recent months, we were lucky to be less battered than others during the initial surge of the global economic crisis, because we have worked hard to be lucky. Years earlier, we decided to swallow the bitter pill of reforms that later fortified our economic fundamentals and gave us financial space to do all the things we need to do now in order to ease the burden on our workers losing their jobs. We raised revenues; we cracked down on smugglers; we reformed our tax collection system, our banking laws and practices. We borrowed sparingly, we brought down our foreign debts and we spent prudently, even as we moved fast to improve our human and physical infrastructure, lalo na ang ating human infrastructure na kailangang-kailangan ngayon.

The result of our tough choices is evident. What Undersecretary Padilla said about 500,000 jobs being available – well, here in the Philippines, the Grant Thornton Business Survey, that I think our Cabinet members should disseminate, reports that many Philippine companies will hire more people and raise pay despite the global slowdown. So the challenge is to match jobs with skills. So Boboy Syjuco has a big role in this challenge. That’s what we were discussing earlier, with Boboy, about how big his challenge is because the report shows that the jobs are there, the problem or the challenge is the matching.

Because Nitoy is a career official, he has been in government for a very long time. So I said to Nitoy, isn’t our budget for TESDA much bigger now compared to before? Wasn’t the budget for TESDA 100 million, 200 million before? Nitoy said, “80 million even,” he said. So 80 million, 100 million, 200 million. Then when we came in, we made it half a billion, then we made it one billion. Now the TESDA budget is two billion. (Applause) And I said to Boboy, “and don’t worry, don’t try to have to live within two billion if needed. Because if you spend that two billion, we have a policy in government now for agencies — use it or lose it. So if you spend the two billion on the needs to match the skills, then the other agencies that are a bit slow to use their… those with weak absorptive capacity, then we will reduce their budget and transfer their budget to DOLE and TESDA.” (Applause)

So the message is, let us join hands against the global crisis. Let us join hands now to prevent the world crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis. Let us join hands to make sure that we stay on track towards sustainable growth. So to all of you, cheers! Thank you very much.

There is no need for many words. What is important is that we all work.

Thank you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Jobs Forum on Overseas Employment. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104453/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21526&Itemid=38