THE PINOY’S E-FACTOR

This summit on entrepreneurship symbolizes the commitment of the Filipino people to the economy. And I’m glad that you’re holding your summit on this day, it becomes a part of our celebration of EDSA 1. Indeed, we need a new form of People Power to drive entrepreneurship and that new form of people power is the innovative use of resources to build businesses and provide jobs—that is the definition actually of entrepreneurship.

There is great patriotism in setting up businesses that give jobs and feed the stomachs and spirit of our countrymen and their families. Filipino entrepreneurs are patriots, those here on the stage and those here on the floor, patriots who believe in our country and people and who invest in our nation’s future.

Earlier when I was given the t-shirt and it said, ‘do you have the E-factor?’ that means, do you have the entrepreneur factor because it’s like the ‘x- factor’—it’s something extra.

And what is the E-factor? Being an entrepreneur is a skill inherent in the Filipino. Just as Filipinos are natural musicians, Filipinos are natural entrepreneurs. Most Filipinos do have that E-factor. And I’m very happy that Joey has put together a mechanism to be able to bring out that E-factor to its greatest potential and reality.

The Filipinos are creative and persevering and that’s part of the E-factor. Successful entrepreneurs are known for their creativity and the Filipinos are known for our creativity. That’s why we excel in music, we excel in dance, we excel in the arts, and we excel in software development because of our creativity. But Joey talked about something else in addition to innovativeness and creativeness, one more trait that keeps entrepreneurs going and that is optimism. And I’m glad that Joey has chosen that as the theme for this morning’s session.

It’s not only Joey, the entrepreneurship advocate, that tells us: be optimistic. Be not afraid, Jesus Christ told his disciples.

This morning, I came across that phrase because I was very happy reflecting on this new testament exhortation on the occasion of something very very important happening to us as Catholics in the Philippines—the choice of Archbishop Rosales as cardinal. And though it is not exactly… And though it’s not exactly an integral part of the theme of this session, let me take this opportunity to be joyful as a catholic and to be optimistic as a catholic and to celebrate our new cardinal.

We share the joy and pride of the entire Filipino catholic community on this event. Cardinal Rosales deserves this honor for the leadership he has shown in spreading and upholding the faith and in guiding our people along the path of moral and spiritual enlightenment. It was an auspicious day that we got the message about his naming, because on this auspicious day, we reminisce the call of his predecessor, the late Jaime Cardinal Sin, for people power in the shining moments of EDS A.

Twenty years ago and today, we celebrate the guiding role of the church in defending what is good and right for the people. Our solidarity with Cardinal Rosales will be unsullied in the fight against poverty and in building a God-centered society.

Growing the economy through entrepreneurship and steadily denting poverty will help us to overcome divisive politics and indeed build a God-centered society.

A Central Bank poll late last week found executives more bullish on the outlook for their companies than at any period since that Central Bank survey began—that is optimistic, that is being not afraid.

I remember when Joey’s father, Joe Concepcion was my boss in the Department of Trade and Industry, he would always tell us: ‘believing you can do it is half being able to do it’—that is optimism. And I’ve never forgotten that exhortation through the many trying times I’ve had as a public servant.

And so on this day, on the occasion of the 20th Anniversary of EDSA, on the occasion of our celebrating optimism as an inherent part of that E-f actor, let us resolve to not let politicking or destabilization put down or destroy what we have here before us—the Filipino spirit of enterprise.

Another thing I use to remember from what Secretary Concepcion use to tell us, and we put it all over the DTI establishments so that we could always remember, he would say: ‘yes, the Filipino can.’—that is optimism, that is entrepreneurship.

Long live the Filipino entrepreneur!

Artee Yap ask me to announce to you that I have instructed him, as my presidential adviser on job creation, to coordinate with the Land Bank and the DBP to set aside an initial amount of 50 million pesos to serve as an incubation fund with softer rates and longer term provisions for the financing use of deserving and promising start-up business plan winners that the Philippine Center for Entrepreneurship will endorse and vet during the business start-up period.

Be not afraid, our new entrepreneurs.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].