Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to my new and very worthy Secretary of Trade and Industry, Cesar Purisima.

I would like to greet the leaders of the organizations whom we inducted into office today. Congratulations, President Noemi Saludo. Congratulations, Jun Ortiz Luis. Congratulations, Mike Varela. Congratulations, Oscar Brillo. Congratulations, Rene Soriano. Congratulations to the officers of your organizations. Congratulations also to the other organizations whom I inducted into office though their presidents are not seated here in the front row.

I would also like to acknowledge, a future senator of the republic of the Philippines, ARMM Governor Parouk Hussin. Many thanks also to Don Emilio Yap for allowing us to use your beautiful venue. The newly-inducted officers of the different associations, members of the business community, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

It is truly wonderful that so many of you are here. As Noemi said, with so many people coming from different chapters and different associations, it feels like the Philippine Business Conference all over again.

And indeed, it is an important time for the cross section of the business community to be together once again because the nation is at a crossroads — whether to move forward toward a modern progressive nation or fall backward to the old formulas that led to the chaos that we inherited.

I, for one, am optimistic about our future. I think my secretary of Trade and Industry is optimistic about our future. For him to retire as chairman of SGV to join me in my administration at this time is a gesture of optimism about the future.

I believe we must seize the moment and offer the hope, the change and the direction that the nation and its people that we all want. We all want change. And as I go around and talk to the average Filipino, I see that the change wished for is in terms of a better life, particularly in economic terms such as jobs, prices, livelihood, and all the thins mentioned by Jun Ortiz Luis and Noemi Saludo in their speeches. I have been fighting for change for the ordinary Filipino. I want to bring us together as we move forward in forging a modern nation.

As the business leaders of this nation, I know you share my hope and my concern. You have a clear choice. You can help unify the nation around sound economic leadership, a concern for the average Filipino, and enhanced standing in the international community. Or you can take a gamble on untested leadership, failed governance and the prospects of the Philippines once again being the laughing stock of the world.

We can continue to have the confidence of international countries and companies that have resulted in investment of billions of pesos, or hundreds of millions of dollars, and millions of high-paying jobs here in the Philippines. Or we can lose that confidence, we can lose the allies, and we can lose the jobs that came with them.

The upcoming election is not about me — it is about you. It is about not going back to the past. It is about once and for all moving the Philippine nation and the life and livelihood of the average Filipino ahead.

This past short tenure of my presidency was rocked by sieges on the government and global economic constraints, but the vision of EDSA Dos lives on. We have made a strong start in a short time.

Our GDP expansion of 2003 was the fastest since the Asian crisis, and it is the fifth highest among the 21 economies of the Asia-pacific. Foreign investment is surging, the highest in many years at 23 percent increase in 2003. Inflation at 3.1 percent is the lowest in a generation that helps you grow your business, that helps the average Filipino keep prices down.

The jobs: more than three million jobs were created under my watch compared to only one million in the whole three years before my tenure. And workers given training for jobs surged to almost a million a year. Wages improved 11.2 percent even adjusted for inflation, and that is without imposing minimum wage legislation. It is because the market under my administration created better paying jobs. Strikes have been cut by one-half, the lowest number in about 20 years. And among the poorest families, the number of household heads earning a living doubled in this period of my tenure.

We have made important down payments on health care, clean water, more housing and a better education system. But these are only a start, we must do better, and we will do better.

We have rescued the economy from the precipice and stabilized the mess we inherited. And once again, the Philippines deals from a position of strength and respect in the international community. We are no longer a lap dog. We have a rightful place at the table in Asia and in the world.

And let me be very clear: the average Filipino and the Filipino family are my primary concern. They form the backbone of this nation and they deserve the fundamental change that we all aspire for them. I am impatient for this fundamental change. You should be impatient, too.

I will fight to change the culture of corruption. Today, you saw in the papers another result of our lifestyle check. I will stop the scourge of drugs and wipe out terrorism.

I thank Noemi for recognizing that we have lend out an unprecedented more than 20 billion pesos in just ten months to small and medium enterprises. I thank her for acknowledging the transport cost of products from Mindanao to Luzon have gone down in many cases by 30 percent because of the Strong Republic Nautical Highway. And my friends from Mindanao are applauding in affirmation.

I thank Jun Ortiz Luis for spending as much time on the accomplishments on kidnapping as I spent during the Philippine Business Conference on what we would do to solve the scourge of kidnapping.

You know, yesterday, I crossed out again the picture of another one of the ten most wanted kidnappers. Five of the top 10 have been neutralized. Angie Reyes and his team have expanded that list to 17. I came early to this meeting today because I have to leave early because I have to receive number 15 in that list of 17 kidnappers because he has been arrested.

And as we work on fighting the scourge of criminality with these successes, I will lead this nation to modernity, to economic strength, and to serving the needs of the average Filipino with a chance for a better life.

Change will not come easily. We’re already seeing how the forces of the past are holding the nation hostage and exploiting the fears of the masses. They are not fighting for change. They are fighting to reverse the course of history.

I will fight every day to ensure that we move forward, not backward. And to ensure that government fulfills its basic promise that the average Filipino should enjoy dignity and prosperity.

I will fight to lift millions out of poverty by creating 6 million new jobs in the next 6 years. High-paying jobs built on bringing international investments to the Philippines, making the Filipino entrepreneur strong enough and courageous enough to put his money to in this high-paying investments. Making investments in people such as training and education, and opening up markets for Philippine products around the world

I will fight to provide full enrollment in the national health insurance program. We can aim for that now because during my short tenure as president we have been able to bring health insurance to the majority of the Filipino families today. After all, without good health, how can we expect our citizens to have a good job and provide for their families?

I will fight to build a 150,000 houses a year for our poorest and most deserving, and to continue to increase opportunities for all Filipinos to be able to buy the land they’re occupying or to pay regular rent and not be squatters. Without a roof over your head, how can we expect our citizens to do a good job and provide for the well-being of their families?

I will fight to ensure that every community has access to clean water. If we can’t have clean water, how can we expect to bring the dignity deserved by our average Filipino who deserves better?

I will fight to bring electricity service to a 1,500 barangays a year which in three years will provide electricity to every barangay in the nation, because during my short tenure, we were able to achieve a 90 percent barangay electrification rate. And now for the first time the majority of the poor households have electricity.

I will fight the corrosive impact of corruption by making government contracts even more transparent for the public to view, because after all in my administration, after many long years of waiting, finally, we were able to pass the E-Procurement Law and now we are beginning to implement it. This is part of the fight to broaden the use of corruption checks as what you have seen in the papers today that identify any government official who attempts to profit illegally from their positions.

And i will fight for continuing to strengthen our economic fundamentals that will set us on a path to economic transformation: balancing the budget, bringing in foreign and domestic investment, bolstering our banking laws, and erasing corruption as an obstacle to growth, prosperity and fundamental fairness.

So today, we find our nation poised for success, and I am ready to lead from a position of strength and experience. There is no room for half-measures, for fence sitting, for equivocation. Too much is at stake. It’s time to stand up and be counted. I believe with your help, we will move forward and modernize the nation and improve the lives of the average Filipino.

We could just as easily fall backward to a time when fewer jobs were created — one million jobs for three years? When investment was stifled, when corruption dominated our politics. Our standing in the world was low, and our nation was torn apart by disunity and strife.

My challenge to you, the business leaders, my challenge to you today is to think hard about the kind of Philippines you want, and join me in the fight for change that I have started.

I need you, the business leaders of our country. I need you to invest in the Philippines of tomorrow, not in the failed governance of yesterday.

The choice is yours.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Joint Membership Meeting and Induction of Newly-Elected Officers of Private Business Organizations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091035/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5490&Itemid=38