Thank you very much Secretary Vince Perez, the Secretary of Energy.

You may all be seated.

Thank you very much Vince for introducing me and for what I will report later to the people of Catanduanes.

Thank you also Mayor Bong Teves for your invitation for me to be able to come here to Baras. And congratulations because this is your first term as town mayor.

I greet Governor Lee Verceles, Lee is what we call him but what do you call him here? Jun. Jun, our Governor is a first-termer as Governor but he and his father are the only governors who haven't been hit by a typhoon during their first term. That's lucky.

I also greet Congressman Joseph Santiago, thank you for coming here just for this fiesta because the Congressman came from the Batasan because a colleague died, a congressman from Cavite and they came from the necrological services there.

I also greet all the officials of the town of Baras led by Vice Mayor Chito Chi and thank you Father Faustino, the Parish Priest for your prayers.

I am also with, because we have many constituents here with Governor Verceles — the president of the Philippine Health Insurance, Dr. Francisco Duque. And the one I tasked to bring the letter of the teachers to the DPWH to study what can be done, our presidential assistant Chito Monson where is he? There he is. That's your assignment, okay? You have a new Commanding Officer of the 22nd brigade, Col. Pedrito Magsino. He comes from very good work there in Southern Mindanao. So he is good, I sent him here so that your brigade commander will also be good. I also greet your police provincial director, Col. Gil Jamila Jetosis all the officials of Baras, all the officials of Catanduanes, my fellow provincemates here in Baras, good day to all of you and a happy fiesta to all of you.

You know, in going here, I am happy that even though your town is small and far – my father was the only one who could visit here – you have many initiatives that I saw for your progress. This includes improving your crop production. In fact, Congressman Joseph Santiago said that the abaca fiber used to make high fashion shirts comes from here.

Among the things you are doing is developing marine resources. However, sometimes the marine resources are overflowing and you are flooded. That is what Chito will look into with the DPWH. Expanding cottage industries, that's your sinamay, and promoting tourism here.

The growth of crop production, the development of marine resources, your production of cloth from your abaca, these are in line with our national government's program of modernizing agriculture and fisheries. Therefore, you can expect that I will fully support your projects under this.

Our Outstanding Agriculturist of the Year, Regional Director Fe Laysa, is here, so it's good that she is here. Fe is from Pili, Camarines Sur. That's it. I am directing Fe to allocate three million pesos for farm-to-market roads for Catanduanes.

As I said in my last State-of-the-Nation Address, I called on local officials to lead in establishing the Republic of the Philippines. I know that Catanduanes, a small province, has a small IRA, only 20 million can be used for infrastructure, so this 3 million for farm-to-market roads, I think, will be a big help to the province of Catanduanes.

I expect Governor Lee Verceles and all the LGEs, local government executives of Catanduanes, to help become partners in the challenge of a strong Republic of the Philippines.

The president needs local government executives because we are executives. Congressman Santiago is in the Legislative, making laws. Those who implement policies are executives, that's the local government executive extension of the national executive, which is me. So I need them, not only for infrastructure where we all need to help because it is lacking, but also to ensure the security and safety of citizens against criminality and terrorism.

Earlier, Congressman Santiago said that I might want to pass through Baga Manok where there was an encounter last July. But my PSG head said it would have been better if I had said it earlier so they could have prepared. But now it's difficult if the president suddenly goes there without the soldiers being pre-positioned because Colonel Magsino is here with us and not there. That proves that here in Catanduanes, things need to be prepared for. So that means we have a small problem regarding peace. That's why I need your help and support in the actions we will take regarding this. Because of the problem of peace, terrorism, rebellion, an iron fist is needed for the stability of leadership, to enforce relevant laws and discipline in order.

That is my main focus now as your president – the peace of our country. And that is what I expect you to focus on here in Baras and throughout Catanduanes.

As I said in my recent State of the Nation Address, the strong Philippine Republic we want to build, takes care of the people and takes care of their future. Because if Catanduanes is peaceful, we can better address the future of our many children here in the town of Baras.

To take care of the future of Catanduanes, another major goal of ours is to expedite service to the people. I am looking into what other needs you have besides the modernization of agriculture. I am looking into your needs especially in the field of health and in the field of electricity.

First of all, because it's a fiesta today, we have… One hundred of those, gifts for the 100 poorest families of Baras, as my gift to your fiesta. But that's for the fiesta. In other words, the families will eat today and next Sunday, but in the long term, what I am bringing with me today, together with Philhealth head Dr. Duque for our people of Catanduanes, are 1,068 Philhealth cards for 1,068 awardees here for health insurance.

I thank and congratulate Governor Lee Verceles because even with a small IRA, he spent five million pesos to pay the Philhealth premium for the poor in Catanduanes. So all indigents, 100 percent of the poor, are enrolled and have health insurance. That's why Catanduanes is number one per capita in health insurance coverage throughout Bicol and perhaps number two or number three in the entire Philippines.

But what does your card mean? What does health insurance mean? It means that if you have this health card—it means you have health insurance. So when your family gets sick and you seek treatment in one of the nine accredited hospitals in the province, including the provincial hospital, treatment is free, the insurance pays for your expenses. Now, childbirth is not an illness, but if it becomes a caesarean, requiring surgery, Philhealth will also be liable for up to eighteen thousand pesos (18,000) in expenses. I mention that because it seems like there are many births here in Baras, so many may need our Philhealth. Our officials say that many children are born because there are many brownouts. So because we are Catholic, Father, if we want to reduce the birth rate, let's reduce the brownouts here.

So let's talk about the power supply. I asked NPC because Governor complained to me about your frequent brownouts. I asked NAPOCOR, Secretary Vince Perez, why are there frequent brownouts here? Because I know power interruptions are a big disruption to life. I found out that there is a shortage of 2,600 kilowatts of electricity here, which is why brownouts are frequent.

So today, as the fiesta of Baras, as my gift to Catanduanes, I have something to announce to you today. I will announce what we have done in recent days to prepare for your comfort in the problem of electricity.

First of all, I have instructed NAPOCOR to lease two generator sets as a solution to your current power problem. These generator sets will arrive in Vrac on Sunday, August 11. It will arrive by overland transport. I wanted to bring them now, but, as you saw with those who met me at the airport, my airplane is very small, so the generator set won't fit. In fact, even a C-130 wouldn't fit the generator set, that's how big the generator sets are. So we are leaving Manila at the same time, I by airplane, it by land transportation. And it will arrive on Sunday, of course, to be set up and commissioned. And NAPOCOR informed me that these generator sets can begin operating on Tuesday, August 13.

So, let's cross our fingers, that by next Tuesday you will have relief with the electricity. But that is just your basic requirements. Because sometimes it's a little, sometimes it's a lot. So to cover your complete requirement, I have also instructed NAPOCOR to lease additional generator sets to cover your peak demand. Not only will those arrive next week starting Tuesday, there are more coming and their arrival date in Virac is the end of next week.

In the meantime, NAPOCOR is repairing the generator set in Marinawa here in the province of Catanduanes. They are currently working on it and I said, do everything possible to get the Marinawa generator running—Vince Perez said, be careful with the pronunciation, lest you say marijuana, I already said marijuana, Marinawa. I said to NAPOCOR, do that immediately so that on the day of the Baras fiesta, the Marinawa generator set can run today.

My fellow countrymen, it was good that I came here because it was necessary to know the problem, your most serious problems. Of course, all towns have big problems, but the most serious ones. Thank you, I had the opportunity to come here, thank goodness I learned about your most serious problems. That's what we're doing: looking at what is needed, looking at what to do because as your president, I know what is needed—that is my duty—and I also know how we can provide solutions—that is also my duty. To give you a reliable government, that is what is needed. And as president, I will do everything in my power to fulfill the most pressing needs of the people.

I know here, you need a peaceful and orderly life, a prosperous future. That is what we will all work for, all of us, let's work together here.

So on the day of the Baras fiesta, that is my prayer to San Lorenzo, the martyr, that he help us to provide peace, good progress, a good future, good health, and sufficient electricity to the people of Catanduanes.

Thank you very much and happy fiesta to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Town Fiesta in Baras, Catanduanes. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224802/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8374&Itemid=38