Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a visit to the Angeles University Foundation Information Technology Training Center

[Delivered at the Angeles University Foundation, Angeles City, Pampanga, February 1, 2010]

Thank you, thank you.

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Chairman Angeles for your introduction.

Thank you very much Congressman Tarzan Lazatin for joining us today and thank you Attorney Joseph Angeles for your warm words of welcome and for introducing the subject matter to our audience of Angeles University, faculty and students. I have here with me also my Presidential Assistant for Region III, former Mayor of Palayan City, Reily Fajardo.

I’m very glad to be with you again. Again because many years ago when you students were still children, I used to be a member of the board of Angeles University when I was a senator. (applause) I only resigned because I became vice president and the Constitution prohibits the vice president from having any employment anywhere else. So, I’ m very glad to be here again.

And I’m glad to do this as we start a comprehensive tour of every Super Region because before the end of my term, I want to review our legacy of accomplishments. And I’m glad to do it here in Angeles University. I will explain to you why in a short while aside from the fact that I feel at home here having been a member of the board. The Super Regions were designed to spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Metro Manila. The Super Regions are: Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Luzon Urban Beltway and the Cyber Corridor, where we are. Actually, we are in two of the Super Regions: the Luzon Urban Beltway and the Cyber Corridor.

But for today, we will talk about the Cyber Corridor. And as Attorney Angeles said, this is an industry, the cyber industry is something which our administration created almost from scratch. And that is why I am very proud of our Cyber Corridor. The Cyber Corridor is made up of the strongest potential locations for ICT investments, services and activities, including call centers, back office, software development like what Angeles University is doing for free for the Department of Health. It also includes medical transcription, engineering design, animation and game development. The ICT or the Cyber Corridor presently houses 750 call centers and BPO companies served by three high bandwidth backbone and digital networks.

The composition of the Cyber Corridor is jointly identified and periodically updated by the private sector, the academe and the government. For now it starts here in the north from Metro Pampanga and goes up to the south in Davao City. It includes Metro Manila and Metro Cebu which were the country’s two original ICT Centers of Excellence, and 10 urban areas being promoted at the so-called Top 10 “Next Wave Cities” to be the best new destinations of the ICT industry. These are: Metro Laguna composed of Santa Rosa, Calamba, Los Baños and San Pablo; Metro Cavite composed of Bacoor, Dasmariñas City, Imus and Cavite City; Iloilo; Davao; Bacolod; Metro Pampanga including Clark, Angeles, Mabalacat and Dau, in other words the district of Congressman Lazatin. Metro Bulacan composed of Baliuag, Marilao and Meycauayan; Cagayan de Oro; Central Bulacan composed of Malolos and Calumpit; and Lipa. Pasig, Cebu, Quezon City and Mandaluyong are ranked among the top 50 cities worldwide suited for BPO.

But I’m very proud to tell you that next to Metro Manila and Metro Cebu which were our original centers of excellence, the third most popular destination for BPO investments is none other than here in our own beloved Pampanga.

We are starting the Super Region tour in your school because as Attorney Joseph Angeles pointed out, this is the only school in the Central Luzon and one of only two schools in the Northern part of Luzon to be considered as ICT Center of Excellence and Center of Excellence in Computer Engineering. (applause) And I want to start my Cyber Corridor tour in the school because I want to continue to reach out to the youth of this nation. You are the future. The future of this nation depends on you, the next generation.

When I said that you were very little children when I left Angeles University as member of the board in 1998 and you were very small children yet in January 2001, the Philippines has come a long way since January 2001. Most of you were little children at that time, so you probably don’t have much recollection of how it was like at that time. In fact, even for your elders, time has gratefully erased many memories of the tumultuous time less than ten years ago, when the nation teetered on political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made, few jobs were being created. The public sector debt of 3.8 trillion pesos was bigger than the Gross Domestic Product of 3.3 trillion pesos. Foreign reserves were razor thin.

It was a time of lower salaries and high inflation. And due to low tax revenues, insufficient investments had been made to expand healthcare, improve education, provide clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I did not seek the Office of the President in 2001; it was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

These actions would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth, the creation of 9 million new jobs, the addition of 53 million to healthcare, and a stable fiscal situation.

We are creating wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills-intensive service sectors such as ICT and tourism as the key growth sectors, as I predicted during my first State of the Nation Address in 2001.

From scratch with only 2,000 workers before I became President, we have created what is today a global powerhouse: the Philippine BPO industry. We achieved this by promoting strategic investments in key areas:

First, a connectivity infrastructure backbone. We encouraged the provision of more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. Thanks to these investments the cost of international calls went down from 40 cents to single digit. I see there it says, 2 cents. The number of internet users jumped from two million in 2000 to more than 24 million internet users today.

And so that no Taiwan tremor or tsunami can cut off our cyber services from their global clients, we encouraged PLDT and Globe to invest billions in international gateway redundancy.

The second investment we made was an investment in an appropriate policy and legal environment. We created the Commission on ICT, with the guidance that the ICT sector should be driven by the market and the private sector, not by government interference. Instead of interfering and regulating, what government did was to give incentives to developers of IT parks, assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites, and built more transport facilities to those sites. This philosophy drove the fast growth of contact centers. Now the market is leading the growth of the high value added segments of the offshoring and outsourcing industries, such as accounting, legal, human resources and administrative services.

Third area of investment was the development of human capital. More than 5,000 schools mostly high schools in the public school system now have computer laboratories while almost 4,000 schools have been connected to the internet. In technical education and skills training, we have invested three times more than the previous three administrations combined. A very large portion of this goes to scholarships for call center training such as what Angeles University is offering on top of its ICT education.

Thanks to these strategic investments, billions in investments have been poured into the country, creating half a million new jobs in BPO. Today, the Philippines have challenged India for BPO supremacy. Compared to 24 million dollars in 2001, the BPO industry has earned or will be earning 7 billion dollars this year. And that is not far behind India’s 9 billion dollars for call centers.

For the second time, the United Kingdom’s National Outsourcing Association awarded the Philippines as the Offshoring Destination of the Year in recognition of the healthy environment as well as the power and infrastructure support in making the country attractive to foreign business.

The 500,000 jobs created in the BPO industry are part of the legacy I will leave. A legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investments in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure.

Much work remains to be done, but I am determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines, one that is ready for the challenges of bringing the nation to the verge of first world in 20 years.

As I said, ten years ago you were small children, you hardly knew, you hardly remember what it was like. Twenty years from now, you will be at the prime of your life, you will be the leaders of this nation whether you will be in politics, in business or in civic life. And I hope that 20 years from now, when we’re on the verge of first world, the educational system and the opportunities made available for investments and employment in matters like ICT and other important job creating skills enhancing industries will have helped you become leaders of a country ready for the first world.

To all of you, Congratulations! Good luck! and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a visit to the Angeles University Foundation Information Technology Training Center. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235138/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27425&Itemid=38