Thank you very much, Mayor Monching, for your introduction of me and for the good idea of having these various cluster meetings.

At dakal a salamat naman Mayor Tarzan Lazatin king masanting a pag magwelcome yu kiring kekatang a kaluguran manibat king a Mindanao. And I’d like to congratulate also Mayor Dennis for hosting some of the affairs here, and of course Mayor Abalos and all of the mayors of Mindanao. According to Mayor Abalos some of you it’s the first time you come to Clark, so welcome to my home province of Pampanga.

We are meeting at a very important time in the history of our country when the world has been shaken by global economic crisis. But thank God, we are one of the few nations, out of the two-thirds of the world that went into recession, we are one of the one-third that have withstood the onslaught and kept our growth positive.

Part of the reason is that the bitter and unpopular medicine of economic reform that we did years ago — thanks to the help of our congressman like Congressman Tarzan Lazatin — helped to create a firewall that softened the pressures arising from the global economic downturn. Isn't it often the case that there are fires in the provinces and even in Manila, and if the shanties are all close together, they all burn down, but if you have a firewall, the fire doesn't reach the other side of the wall. And our economic reforms caused that firewall. That is why we were able to maintain positive economic growth not only during this global economic downturn when two-thirds of the world went into recession but for 34 uninterrupted quarters of our administration.

What we were saying before, that we would strengthen our economy with our tax reforms, has been proven here during the recession because the world recession showed our economy is stable and strong. Our growth in the second quarter of this year is even better than the growth in the first quarter. And our inflation is one of the lowest, our inflation is almost zero now, in the entire history of our country. So, we are ready for the economic rebound. And our macroeconomic stability is a major strength that will put us in a stronger position as an attractive investment and business destination.

For example, even in Mindanao, our business processing and call centers have reached, there's one in Davao, in Cagayan de Oro. Our business process outsourcing and call center industry continues to boom. Our tourism is way up. Our manufacturing sector which declined during the recession is picking up again. New construction continues unabated, if you pass through Metro Manila you'll see cranes everywhere, construction cranes, and our businessmen… our hotels are full of businessmen from around the world. So, overall I am quite bullish about our prospects for solid recovery.

Imagine two-thirds of the world went into a recession, we didn't, we not only didn't experience it but we also had a credit upgrade. And perhaps we should remember the situation now compared to 2001 when we were just starting. Because now, in our environment, many countries are suffering while we are rising. In 2001, Asia was surging but the Philippines was on the verge of bankruptcy. And do you remember before our administration you could not even get your IRA paid in full.

But since then, what did we do? What are those economic reforms? We put new tax revenues in place so that we could pay for better healthcare — Secretary Pingkoy Duque is there, I invited him to be with us today — so that we could pay for a strong education system, so that we could pay for more roads like those mentioned by Congressman Tarzan Lazatin that he witnessed in his district, so we could pay for more roads and ports. I mentioned the ports because our RORO system was for the very purpose of bringing Mindanao products to Luzon at a faster and lower cost, right, Mayor? It helped you.

Regarding Mindanao, we have built or completed many roads, for example, the Pagadian-Zamboanga Road, how is it, it’s probably finished by now. It used to be called the longest road because it took the previous administration so long to build so little but we completed it. Then the Cagayan de Oro-Surigao Road, we’ve also improved that and it has cut travel time and it has revived commerce in Agusan.

We designed housing policies with our tax reforms to lift up our poorest citizens so they can live and raise a family with dignity. Our tax reforms also, even if agriculture is devolved, funded agricultural investments, and a lot of it went to Mindanao which is our food basket. They strengthened our farmers as the backbone of the nation, and they gave our farmers the modern tools to feed our nation and feed their own family. And above all, perhaps for you now, your IRA is fully paid, right? Not only that, we even paid the IRA that past administrations owed you. And not only that because if the Value Added Tax increases, your IRA also increases. So, this year you participated in the biggest VAT increase in history of 40 billion pesos for the local government.

And I want to thank you for using your IRA bonanza to contribute to our country’s economic resiliency. And in addition to your IRA, I asked Monching if you had been briefed on the foreign assisted projects that the League of Mayors, League of Municipalities, are looking for, so congratulations to Monching and the leadership of LMP because they found through their global engagement creative ways of having, on top of your IRA, additional projects funded by various development institutions. I asked Monching if he presented the Canadian Executive Service Organization — so it was presented on the first day — together with our Commission on ICT, our own Commission on Information and Communication Technology. I understand that the Canadian Executive Service Organization and CICT helped to computerize the tax system of 43 towns in Luzon, so I hope that the towns of Mindanao will also benefit.

Then I also asked Monching if he presented the ILO program and — yes, he did — to enable mayors, the ILO-sponsored programs to enable mayors to share best practices on livelihood projects for your workers in your constituents. So for the additional programs to the IRA like this, congratulations to the League of Municipalities!

So the LMP shares the lesson that I have been imparting that global engagement is what has been an essential component of what has kept our country from getting pulled under the raging economic waves sweeping most countries. And as part of this global engagement, I just came from Libya. Libya is a key ally that strengthens our paradigm for peace in Mindanao.

Libya has always supported us. When we first had a terrorist crisis in 2001, Dos Palmas, I spoke with President Khadafi and he asked what kind of help we needed. And I said the help I wanted was to fight the terrorists because I didn't want to give a ransom. And he said, “okay, I will help,” and he has been helping. Libya has greatly helped in bringing peace and hope to Mindanao, and not only that because Khadafi was a leader in all of Africa with many Muslim countries there. He also greatly helps in building our deeper relationship with Muslim countries. And together with Brunei and Japan, Libya, those three are our international monitoring team of our ceasefire with the MILF.

Besides strengthening our relationship with them, I was also talking to the Khadafi Foundation, which wants to help through investment in Mindanao. What we discussed, just last night – oh, it was actually the night before last – was, before I leave, to put investments around Liguasan Marsh and Agusan Marsh. Let's help them create a good project.

That is a very important part of our poverty alleviation program which we want to do throughout the Philippines but especially in Mindanao where six of our poorest provinces are located, namely: Tawi-Tawi, welcome! to our mayors of Tawi-Tawi; Zamboanga del Norte; Maguindanao, welcome there! I saw the mayors there; Surigao del Norte and Dinagat Islands; and Lanao del Sur. Likewise six of our most food-poor provinces, namely: Zamboanga del Norte, Tawi-Tawi, Agusan del Sur – I saw a mayor from Agusan del Sur there – Maguindanao, Surigao del Norte and Dinagat Islands. They’re also in Mindanao. So, we are working to use the larger part, the biggest part of our resources go to our mission of alleviating poverty.

So, once again I ask you, mayors, let us work hard to fulfil our Philippine Reform Agenda until our terms end.

Let us fight for the Economy, Education, the Environment.

As part of our poverty alleviation, we have a National Anti-Hunger Task Force – that is under the leadership of Secretary Pingkoy Duque, so I ask him to come here today because six of the most food-poor provinces are in Mindanao. And I asked the National Nutrition Council to conduct more… no, the Anti-Poverty Task Force to conduct more frequent visits to the most food-poor provinces to identify the problems first-hand and to do what is necessary to address them as quickly as possible.

Now, because the National Nutrition Council cannot immediately go to all parts of our country, I asked them to create local Anti-Hunger Task Forces in the provinces to assist in locating the problems and resolving them as soon as possible. We want the system of national and local Anti-Hunger Task Forces to strengthen the cooperation of the national government and local government to face the problem of hunger in our country in a faster and more effective way.

There are already Regional Anti-Hunger Task Forces organized by the National Nutrition Council in such provinces as Sarangani, Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga Sibugay, Agusan del Sur, Maguindanao, Surigao del Norte, and the first one, Lanao del Norte. I even went to Lanao del Norte and in the interview, Governor Dimaporo, Kali Dimaporo explained what the Anti-Hunger Task Force of Lanao del Norte is doing, and I hope this can be done in all the provinces of Mindanao, especially the six most food-poor provinces of Mindanao. And I hope that our mayors will be active in those councils.

That is why I called Secretary Duque here to ensure that in those provinces that I just mentioned now we will organize local Anti-Hunger Task Forces immediately. So you have an output from this meeting of yours on top of the ones that Mayor Guico was able to brief you about.

Dear Mayors, you have laid your own plans to make your respective constituents more productive and to bring your towns nearer to your growth targets. And it’s good that you’re the ones making your plans, it’s good that the league is working together to help you make your plans better and implement them better. Because it is you rather than the national government that know best how to strengthen your respective local units.

Our part was to reform the internal revenue to assure you of funds to finance your projects. All of us are doing this, national and local, for our people. We are elected officials. They have placed us where we are so we cannot but give them the best of our efforts. And as you have enjoyed your two nights and three days of I hope pleasurable meetings here in Clark, I hope that you will go back home refreshed to continue to give your constituents the best of your efforts.

Welcome once again! Daghan salamat. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the closing ceremonies of the Mindanao Island Cluster Conference of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412095714/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26201&Itemid=38