Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo Senator of the Philippines Before the Senate

[Released on January 25, 1993]

WE NEED A DOSE OF IMAGINATION ON THE DEBT AND THE EXCHANGE RATE*

A large number of our colleagues at the House of Representatives have withdrawn their coauthorship of legislation that will put a cap on our debt payments.

The previous Congress has passed debt cap legislation before, but that at each instance, the debt cap provision was vetoed by then President Corazon Aquino. Few doubt that President Fidel Ramos will veto the same legislation even if should pass both Chambers of Congress.

There is danger here that this whole matter about a debt cap may become futile ritual where, on the one hand, the legislature or at least the Senate plays to out constituencies by passing bold legislation while, on the other hand, the Presidency plays to investors, bankers and creditor governments by regularly killing the legislative initiative.

Observers say that there has never been serious effort to override past vetoes on debt cap legislation. They doubt if there ever will be in the future. They surmise that the political costs are simply too high for either side to stake too much in this debate. That, they say, is the hard political fact that underpins this ritual.

But as we go through this ritual, there is a tendency for positions to harden and simplify. It is fairly easy to argue for a debt cap, pass legislation that will surely be vetoed, and then pass the blame for low economic growth through the Executive Branch. As all rituals do, the ritual passage and veto of debt cap legislation tend to narrow the space for more innovative policy and more imaginative solutions to the heavy burden of indebtedness. But this time we must go beyond ritual.

Both the executive and legislative branches, taking advantage of a fresh mandate and a new political and economic situation, should collaborate to bring new light on an old issue and reflect upon it in new terms. This is a time for bold rethinking. Senator Arturo Tolentino showed such bold thinking in the Tolentino amendment to the Senate version of the 1993 General Appropriations Act. We must go and expand our boldness.

We have all become familiar with the magnitude of the debt problem and the policy issues that are provoked by the large indebtedness. We are familiar with the terms that framed past debates on how to deal with the debt issue.

I shall, therefore, spare you the agony of going through the dismissal figures and the dense jargon thrown up by my fellow economists, sometimes to mystify rather than educate the layman.

But this will have to be said: while the so-called “non-confrontational debt strategy” pursed in recent years did produce a significant restructuring of our indebtedness, it also produced condition of virtually zero-growth for our economy.

The recent years’ preferred strategy, inherited by the new administration, can be most fairly described as one that produced mixed results. While it achieved the goals of maintaining international confidence in our credit and achieving a climate of financial stability for our economy, the consequence of low or zero growth implied by this strategy preserved the condition of poverty and unemployment and that is endured most severely by our nation’s poor.

Those who must endure poverty and seeming hopelessness will not readily agree with the Finance Department’s conclusion that the debt strategy was a success. The climate of apparent financial predictability, no doubt, pleases the banker. But the same climate strikes the poor as intolerably oppressive. Many of our people suspect the cure to be more painful than the disease. That explains why there is abundant popular support for unilateral action such as debt cap.

A recent study on the Philippine debt produced by the Center for Research and Communications, while joining the chorus of praise for the conservative, “non-confrontational” debt strategy our government has pursued for more than six years, also demonstrates the ironies of standing policy.

The CRC study demonstrates that the “non-confrontational” strategy has pushed up domestic borrowing so that today, while the foreign debt is still larger than the domestic debt, the foreign debt eats up 37% of our total debt servicing costs compared to 63% for the domestic debt. The heavier servicing load for the domestic debt, which comprises 39% of our total debt load, is due to the fact that interest payments for domestic debt is 184% higher than interest payments for the foreign debt.

Surely this is an anomalous situation that must be looked into more closely. The large slice of the national budget that is committed to debt servicing is unlikely to improve for as long as we are forced to pay exorbitant rates on our domestic debt. This is one possible area for joint intervention by the executive and legislative branches of government.

The accumulation of a large domestic debt is an item of irony in itself. It makes the total debt burden our people are forced to bear impermeable to whatever advantages there are in the restructuring of the external debt through bilateral arrangements, the Brady Plan, the PAP and negotiations with the Paris Club.

A large part of the domestic debt was incurred in the course of what finance people call “mopping up operations” directed against excess liquidity. A condition of “excess” liquidity in the economy may be variously defined. In our case, that conditions has been defined for us by the IMF. According to their economists, our money supply was too large. Our government was then constrained to intervene, using several monetary instruments, in order to bring down “excess” liquidity. Such intervention pushed up domestic indebtedness. A tight deficit ceiling imposed on us also constrained government to borrow extensively from the domestic market. Years of mopping up the “excess” liquidity created a regime of high interest rates, speculative “hot money” entering the economy and forcing the appreciation of the peso, and, more important, induced a recessionary trend that brought down our growth last year to nearly nil.

Having been forced into a recessionary condition by IMF constrictions, we are now likely to remain in that state because government is prevented from pump-priming the economy by the combined effect of a heavy debt servicing load and tight deficit ceiling.

I submit that the choice the Congress and the Ramos administration must jointly face is clear cut. On the one hand, we can take a business-as-usual posture, allow the existing debt policy operate, accept the high debt service load caused by exorbitant interest rates on the domestic debt, and watch our economy grow only marginally if at all. On the other hand, we may decide to embark on an entirely different task, simultaneously forcing down domestic interest rates or even adopting a more flexible ceiling on the budgetary deficit.

By maintaining the status quo, we risk a sharp rise in public discontent. One manifestation of this rising discontent with the no-growth implications of prevailing strategy is the growing support for unilateral action, such as in the debt cap provision. There is, of course, the larger danger of polarizing public opinion on the debt issue that will encourage simplified, and probably mutually unsustainable, options.

We must avoid the danger of policy-inertia favoring the retention of existing official attitudes towards the debt problem and, consequently, the problem of growth. By allowing policy-inertia to take its course, we might be missing out on potential advantages offered by a more pro-active, bolder and more imaginative disposition towards the problem.

There is a recently completed UP study done by Prof. Amado M. Mendoza that critically appraises the record of the “non-confrontational debt management approach.” The study recommends a broad mix of initiatives that government may undertake to reduce the detrimental effects of the current debt load on our economy. The proposed initiatives range from: a more vigorous diplomatic effort aimed at winning cancellation of official debts mustering support from international organizations and the churches; the formation of independent, multi-sectoral ad hoc commissions to investigate tainted commercial loans; a more aggressive negotiating posture vis-à-vis the IMF aimed at winning more flexible conditionalities; and, on the domestic debt, a determined effort to stretch out maturities of present government securities to relieve cash outflows in the near future.

The object of a new strategy is to create enough space for growth in the near term. Economic growth will relieve much of the social costs our people endure now. It will also, over the longer term, allow our economy to better manage out debt obligations.

It is true that a more innovative, more assertive government posture on the debt problem will create some uncertainties in the near term. There are, no doubt, inflationary repercussions that might have to be studied more closely. There would probably be some anxiety on the part of investors that will have to be relieved immediately. These are all very challenging concomitant problems to the exploration of alternatives paths away from the false security of the current low-growth strategy imposed on us by our creditors and the IMF.

Let me now allude to an urgent and related problem.

A confluence of debt policy-related factors and other causes have of late brought crises to the export sector.

On July 10, 1992, the government, through the Central Bank, made a historic decision lifting foreign exchange controls.

Naturally, the Central Bank decision was met with great elation by the private sector and the government for the decontrol made available, among others imported products in the supermarket shelves. But this is not the soul of this story. Foreign exchange decontrol became acceptable because for four decades our country has tried several mechanisms to improve its economic growth.

However, I have serious doubts whether President Fidel V. Ramos was warned by our fiscal and monetary managers of the serious side-effects of foreign exchange decontrol on the unemployment situation in domestic industry. It is clear that our economic managers did not thoroughly weigh the costs and benefits when they deliberated on foreign exchange decontrol.

Why do I say this?

The recent appreciation of the peso after foreign exchange controls were lifted brought down the exchange rate from P28.50 to, there was a time, P23. This is a result of weak demand for foreign exchange. For the export sector, this means that the pesos proceeds of foreign exchange earnings are less than before. More particularly last year, they were less than what had been expected when export contracts were entered into a raw material and labor costs were estimated.

A recent policy paper on exports and foreign exchange by Drs. Diokno de Dios, Fabella, and Paderanga analyzed this problem and offered policy advice.

According to this paper, tight fiscal and monetary ceilings enforced by the government under its IMF-approved program have caused the economy to stagnate. Because of this, demand for imported machinery has been abnormally low. This is one reason demand for foreign exchange is weak.

The same tight monetary program has caused interests rates to climb. Aside from dampening investments, this may have also attracted speculative portfolio foreign investments, contributing to an “excess dollar” situation.

Finally, other circumstances, otherwise favorable, have also contributed to the appreciation of the peso. These were the increased dollar remittances of overseas contract workers as part of repatriation after the Gulf War and the deferment of maturing payments on official foreign debt as part of debt rescheduling.

These are the factors that have brought about the crisis of the export sector.

Economic managers know, as well as we do, that an artificially high value of the peso—as a consequence of the July 10 decontrol —poses a serious threat to local manufacturers of export products. It is this threat that causes expectations of uncertainty among businessmen, but more than this is the deep wound it has inflicted on business sector itself, putting on the line hundreds of thousands of jobs, endangering millions of pesos in investments and threatening the survival of the export industry of this country.

Without any doubt the government is watching these developments with distress and understandably seeks to prevent a panic. I am sure the Central Bank has been using some of the financial instruments available to it to keep the waters calm. For example, the fact that local interests rates were high at the time the foreign exchange decontrol was implemented meant that the Central Bank timed the decision to attract short-term foreign capital so that the peso would not be difficult to support just in case the market behave violently upon the implementation of the foreign exchange liberation program. This is aside from the repatriate money owned by Filipinos which was involved in capital flight.

The Central bank also timed the foreign exchange decontrol when the repatriation of funds by Filipino overseas contract workers was rising due to the settlements arising out of the 1991 Gulf War. From January to August last year , OCWs repatriated close to $2 billion through official banking channels alone. We cannot be sure how much was repatriated through the unofficial financial channels or the so-called padala system. This was unprecedented in the history of overseas job contracting in this country.

Another proof of this determination to keep the peso value artificially high was the timing of the implementation of the decontrol. Foreign exchange liberalization was made right after the government completed negotiations to defer large foreign debt interest payments for 1992. This move alone save for the government a large sum of money coming at a time when the domestic recession had dampened the capital equipment imports.

I stand before this august Body today not only to relate the sad experience of the export industry of our country but to provide Congress with a true picture of this serious dilemma: Philippine export manufacturers could become an extinct specie before long if this problem is not properly addressed by the government.

Must we need to emphasize that in the export manufacturing business prices are negotiated with validity for sex months, unlike buying at the corner stand?

For business year 1992, Philippine exporters bought their raw material and signed export orders on the basis of P28.50 to the U.S. dollar. The labor rates were computed based on this rate which was done during the time of the Aquino government. So the question our government must answer is: How can we hope our export industry to survive, much less flourish, with the prevailing foreign exchange parity of P25 to $1?

The manufactured-product exports from Metro Manila, Cebu, Bicol, Davao, Bacolod and the rest of the productive areas of the country have nowhere to seek refuge but the government.

The government must now provide an alternative solution by creating the middle ground for our export-industry’s survival. The exporters of this country that earn yearly not less than $8 billion for the national economy deserve no less than the mobilization of the government’s resolve to a level that will allow domestic business expansion while affording export growth.

Here are the real concerns that need full national deliberation:

First: Foreign exchange deregulation has worsened the economy in our country and has provided support to peso despite expectations of a decline in value to reflect the true economic condition in the country. This support creates an artificial prop-up mechanism to the detriment of the export sector’s foreign competitiveness.

Second: The Central Bank’s continued “mopping-up” of excess liquidity to down inflation is itself causing the inflation. The peculiarity of the local market has shown that the tightness of money supply in business does not provide local businessmen with enough credit to finance investments in order to boost production.

Third: Continued shortages are the very source of inflation and thus, causing much of the instability in the economy. With low production, pressure on domestic prices will remain. In short, the “bitter pill” approach could bring about bitterness to workers because they themselves feel to the bone the creeping unemployment. More business closures are beginning to materialize as a result of this problem.

Allow me then to make the following proposals:

COURSE OF ACTIONS

Under the circumstances, the country’s monetary authorities should formulate a “win-win” approach to managing the foreign exchange problem. Let out exporters survive as we allow importers to live. This way workers who receive wages will stay above water. These wage earners are the same consumer of products imported by traders who enjoy a strong peso as happened with the foreign exchange decontrol. Actually, the real winner is the economy, Exporters generate the dollars needed for growth just as importers afford consumers to buy price-competitive foreign products. This game should not be zero sum but a “win-win” situation for all.

The Central Bank and the Department of Finance hold the key to the solution of the foreign exchange problem. The Central Bank and the Department of Finance should give equal weight to money supply and exchange rate consequences of fiscal and monetary problems that need balanced approaches.

Monetary authorities should not feel guilty about lowering interest rates. In fact, laxer money ceilings will help lower interest rate, stem any possible flow of foreign “hot money” and free Central Bank’s hand playing the foreign exchange market, which is the natural recourse it takes defend the peso.

The Central Bank should not hesitate to depreciate the peso to the real level it deserves. Once monetary ceilings are credibly larger, the peso should be brought back to P28.50 to $1 level that was before the July 10, 1992 decontrol.

Central Bank should not fear the impact of an adjustment in inflation and wages. The alternative is a dreadful to business as it is to economic planners: more unemployment as the local market shrinks and the export sector collapses.

The government, through the Executive Branch, can greatly boost the effort to solve the economic revival program through efficient government infrastructure spending. This should restore demand for foreign exchange to normal levels and perk up the exchange rate. Larger money targets will permit a larger government deficit without unduly raising interest rates.

Over the medium term, the country’s economic growth can only be sustained if government’s borrowing problems are solved, in order to ease the pressure on interest rates. Improving the tax effort, reducing the bureaucracy, and a harder push at privatization should be a better solution than scrimping on most basic infrastructure and social services.

I am sure the Central Bank as the chief manager of our monetary operation has, up in its sleeve, various other medicines needed to cure the ills that are afflicting the economy. However, if the Central Bank continues to close its eyes to this grim reality, the door of the President of the Republic must now be knocked for him to help exporters by using his powers, being the final arbiter in matters of economic life or death of an industry. I think the most crucial factor needed by exporters now is a political decision to use all the tools available for export recovery.

I stand here today in defense of our exporters because it seems not everyone in the government can see their plight. I am not talking merely of competitiveness but survival. As we all know survival is the greatest instinct of living things. Let us make our exporters survive in this hour of need.

The least the government can do is try to exercise its power as an “equalizer” using a firm hand.

In supporting these proposals, I must point out that the export sector is a key sector in industrialization. It supplies the need foreign exchange for capital goods and raw material importations. It also raises domestic income and employment that in turn increase demand for domestic goods. It is a source of innovation and therefore a source of growth.

In focusing concern on the export sector, we must realize that we can not achieve NIC-hood without a strong export sector. So our efforts to save the export sector from an uncompetitive exchange rate essentially is an effort to save the goal of achieving NIC status by year 2000.

I saw we must move out of the rut that otherwise we shall be consigned to until the end of this century.

The Ramos administration has taken some very encouraging moved recently. After we have filed suit against the commercial banks involved in the bribery accompanying the decision to purchase this nuclear monstrosity, we have been assured that the government shall cease interest payments for the nuclear plant deal amounting to $300,000.00 each day. That will provide our economy immediate, tangible relief.

President Ramos has clearly indicated his preference for national self-reliance. This preference may be put into test by defying the recessionary impositions of the IMF and opting for a new strategy that shall make substantial growth a possibility in the near term.

A national consensus for immediate growth will have to be formed. I suggest that the administration, with the support of the Congress, convene a national summit on the economic strategy for growth involving the various sectors of the Philippine society. The core for such a summit could be an expanded and empowered Legislative-Executive Debt Council.

Recall that when the Senate debated the onerous bases treaty forced on us by the US last year, we heard all sorts of doomsayers predict that rejection shall lead to economic collapse. We chose instead the path of boldness, put nationality dignity in its place of prominence and rested our fate on the conviction that our people shall surmount momentary difficulties and achieve better conditions in the end.

A few months ago, the last American detachment left Subic Bay. Our national economy did not collapse, as the doomsayers said it would. On the contrary, the community around the Subic Base is confident that the economic dislocation in that locality shall be brief and better opportunities shall be opened by conversation.

On the matter of the debt, I believe that we should move with the same confidence in the resiliency of our economy and the competence of our people. We should take the gamble. The moment is opportune. We should move out of the rut of no-growth and adopt a visionary strategy aimed at the immediate alleviation of the plight of our nation’s poor.

Moving out of the predictable but uncomfortable path of now-growth will engage the best minds of this nation and put to crucial test the willingness of the government to provide our people with decisive leadership. The uncertainties shall be daunting, but the rewards are great. If this challenge to shift our economic strategy is not taken at this juncture, our nation shall be confined to a recessionary purgatory until the turn of the century — and President Ramos’ bold objective of achieving newly-industrialized status by the end of his term shall be just another promise unfulfilled.

The decision, as always, is ours to make.

Thank you and good day.

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1996). Speeches of the senators : ninth congress 1992-1995 . Manila : Senate.