FORGING WINNING SOCIAL PARTNERSHIPS FOR GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS

Let me extend my warmest greetings to all the participants of this 25th National Conference of Employers. And my greeting to the labor leaders who were one with them in the social partnership. I share in your conviction that, working together, the Filipino worker and the Filipino manager can excel and join the ranks of the best achievers in the world.

You could not have chosen a more timely and appropriate theme for your silver conference, “Forging Winning Social Partnerships for Global Competitiveness.”

In a way, this theme a partnership has been the general guide for my administration since Edsa II, when I came to the presidency on the crest of a popular wave of change. I am fighting for change for the average Filipino.

With the will of the people and of God, I served as president for a short period of time.

I inherited turmoil. It was a difficult time, not only in the Philippines but throughout the region of Asia and the entire world.

But I can honestly tell you that we steered our country through peacefully and successfully because of our social partnership.

Together we have made a strong start in a short time. Together we stabilized the mess we inherited. Together in our social partnership. Today we have low inflation and high growth. We have huge new foreign investment, foreign investments have surged by 26 percent.

We have brought clean water and health care to millions. We have brought, you have brought new housing to hundreds of thousands. We have books in schools.

We have cracked down on crime and drug kingpins. By Tessie Ang See’s own accounting, we now have the lowest kidnapping rate in the last 11 years. We have thrown the books at corrupt official.

We created, you and I, more than three million new jobs – in the call centers and business process outsourcing that Rene Soriano was talking about, in the new investments of the likes of Intel, Sunpower Solar Panels, Matsushita Electric, Texas Instruments, Ford which has a table of its own right here, National Steel, other investments from some in the crowd that I see today like for instance, Yazaki Torres. And many of the others, the bio-diesel of Itto Carlos, and many investments that many of you right here in this hall have put in place. And today, anticipating what you will giving me later because I have been keeping track of your discussions, I am happy with your proposal that industry and government sit down to draw up a strategic IT/ICT plan for the nation so that we can consolidate and broaden our IT/ICT niches such as electronics assembly, business process process outsourcing and software development. After all way back in 2001 in my first State of the Nation Address, I already said that the growth sector of our future will be the skills intensive service sectors like ICT and tourism: Speaking of tourism, so that we can enhance our tourism industry, the other growth sector of the future aside from ICT, I have instructed our airport officials to stop requiring the removal of shoes as an inspection mechanism except for those going to the countries who themselves require this kind of inspection.

Because of your commitment to a social partnership, wages, minimum wagers have improved by 11.2 percent above inflation, which helped foster prolonged industrial peace. Tell me if I’m wrong Pat but from my figures, average mining and non-agricultural wages went up 29 percent to 271 pesos per day under our administration. From 210 pesos under President Estrada. Average agricultural wages went up 19.6 percent. Agricultural minimum wages to 238 pesos from P199 under Estrada. That is average minimum wages. If we talked about average wages, it would be even more because the new jobs created by the new investments in my administration have been the higher paying jobs. Because of our social partnership, the number of strikes has been cut in half and again, correct me if I’m wrong Pat. They are now the lowest in more than two decades.

Thanks to our unprecedented 20 billion peso expenditure a year on agricultural modernization, we have invested in irrigation, hybrid crops and Henry Lim can attest to this. And improve transport systems, and therefore, our agriculture has grown by leaps and bounds. As a result farm incomes have improved dramatically. For instance, copra was P2.50 per kilo when I inherited the presidency, now it is P22.50 per kilo.

And as coconut farmers incomes go up, you have very big indices going up of consumer spending like beer sales going up ten percent. And also, enrollment in schools. For instance in Luzon Province, in far away Infanta, coconut country. The bishop of Infanta, Emeritus, Bishop Labayan said, that copra prices determine the enrollment in schools, and now, there is a big enrollment in the schools, in the far away places of Quezon Province.

As a result also, of the spending that we have made on the agricultural modernization, again I’m sure Henry will attest to this that what I’m saying is true. We will be self-sufficient again in rice within two years. That is of course, if I’m still president. So that I can build on the policies that gave us such a strong start for change in modernization in agriculture.

In the next six years I pledge a pro-poor agenda. Working together we can and poverty and unite the nation. My pro-poor plan to unite the nation as I have been repeating over this past days consists of six pledges:

First, together with you create a million new jobs every year that I’m in office. And to protect our jobs as has been mentioned by Mike and the other speakers today. We have adjusted upwards the tariffs of 1,000 tariff lines, out of 5,600 total tariff lines, to give our locals a fighting chance against imports. In September last year under my direction, we were one among 21 developing countries which said “no” to a new WTO Agreement until the developed countries reform their system of subsidies for agriculture, and also because we reject the developed countries imposing their advanced standards on our procurement and investment rules. I have also ordered the abolition of several hundred general merchandise bonded warehousing units that in the past serve as bodegas of smuggled goods. And I appointed General Angelo Reyes who brought down our kidnapping rate to its lowest in 11 years, to head the task force against smuggling.

Second pledge, bring clean water to all 45,000 barangays.

Third pledge, bring electricity to 1,500 barangays a year and reduce the cost of electricity to make us even more competitive in this part of the world.

In preparation for this, again anticipating what you will submit to me later, I am prepared to consider industry-government cooperation in addressing some of your concerns about the power sector and the water issue. But I can tell you there will never be a power crisis or a water crisis under a Gloria administration.

Fourth pledge, reduce by half the price of commonly used medicines.

Fifth, build 3,000 new classrooms, grant a college or vochtech scholarship to every poor family, and a computer to every school.

Number six pledge, triple loans to the self-employed and small business owners.

These are what we pledge in election. This election is about you, not about me. The people have a right to hear from their candidates what a candidate will do. I am running a campaign on the issues. Not personalities. This election is about solving your problems, not about me. We must move forward together, be united in solving our common problems.

I call on you to hold me accountable for my pledges.

In the meantime, the question now is will simply throw these gains in our strong start out the window – by gambling on inexperienced and untested leadership without a clear vision or platform in the May elections. Or shall we hold hands in a social partnership in consolidating the strong start we have made and building on that strong start and realizing our dream of a vibrant economy able to compete with the best in Asia and provide jobs for our people?

The crucial choice we face today is a choice between moving forward to stability and prosperity, or making a U-turn back to crony capitalism and the midnight kitchenomics of the past.

I trust that you, ECOP. You the leaders and shakers of the business community, You, their partners in the business, Not only in the business but in the labor sector. I trust that you will lead our people in making the right and the responsible choice. And I thank you all for your support.

Long live ECOP. Long live the Philippines!

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].