Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the inauguration of the Road Network “Widening and Concreting of Imelda Avenue” and the launch of VAT Proceeds for the Elderly: “Help for Grandfathers and Grandmothers”

Thank you very much, Secretary Cabral, for your introduction.

Thank you very much as well, Congressman Roman Romulo, for your invitation. And with me now is the beloved and respected father of Congressman Roman Romulo, Secretary Bert Romulo.

I also came with them because we looked at the market before coming here, the Trade and Industry Secretary, Peter Favila, also from Pasig — is the house Valle Verde? — Valle Verde, okay. And thank you also to Captain Bobby Bobis and the various captains who are here now. Roman introduced many people to me. And of course our grandfathers and grandmothers from Pasig and various places in Metro Manila.

First of all, I congratulate the people of Pasig on the inauguration of your roads. We are here on Imelda Avenue but what we are celebrating are all the projects that Roman Romulo worked on and pursued, the roads here.

These roads are a big help to the people of Pasig and nearby areas. Your travels will be faster and more convenient. Isn't it true that with the speed of Pasig's progress, the traffic has become congested? So investors and those who do commerce have difficulty coming here. But now it's spacious and, not only that, during the last storm because of the drainage that was done through the efforts of Congressman Roman Romulo, I asked those from here, did you get flooded last time? No more. Okay. And you, what about you? But I see the people of Pasig, your constituents, Roman, Evelyn. In your area, do you get flooded? Oh, not anymore. Okay, good, she's a journalist. So it will really help if it's spacious and no longer flooded, it will really help to further grow the businesses along these roads.

And Secretary Cabral and I also used this opportunity to bring aid to the senior citizens of Pasig, “Astig Pasig,” along with many other senior citizens throughout Metro Manila, but this will be a program for the whole country — aid coming from the larger Value-Added Tax this past month.

In June, we released four billion pesos from the collection of value added tax on oil, two billion for paying the electricity bills of four million poor people. These are those who pay less than 100, ‘no? kilowatts? Are there any of you whose… is less than 100 kilowatts? Or, what, have you already received the electricity assistance? Oh, good. They are nodding, Espie. Okay? Because Espie said that most of Metro Manila has already received it. Okay, so there are still others, but you will receive it from Land Bank, right Espie? Land Bank are the distributing agents.

Then, from that VAT, we also allocated one billion pesos for college scholarships or loans for 70,000 poor students; this goes through the schools. The funds are already in the colleges. So the students will go to the college office to benefit from this.

And there is also a half billion peso loan to replace the engines of thousands of public vehicles with more fuel-efficient LPG, CNG or biofuel. I don't know if there are drivers here, jeepney or bus operators, they will be the ones given the loan. So please go to banks like the Postal Bank if you want to replace your diesel or gasoline engines with LPG, CNG or biofuel because it's cheaper.

And we also have a half billion pesos for installing fluorescent lights on roads, government offices, hospitals and other public places. And we expect Congressman Roman Romulo to ensure that all of these coordinate with the program of the Department of Energy. They will also be loaned money or, if it's too difficult, given fluorescent lamps. But of course, you will pay the electricity bill after. But fluorescent lights are definitely cheaper.

In the next ‘VAT Yield,’ there is an additional one billion for paying the electricity bills of the poor. Because Espie, how many are there? Eight million poor people who need help with their electricity bills.

Half a billion capital for the wives and families of drivers. And half a billion to increase the capacity of hospital equipment… including what Congressman Romulo said that we helped the hospital here, that is also a yield of VAT. And this fund of ours is also half a billion.

And now, a portion of the VAT yield is half a billion for grandparents who are not covered by GSIS and SSS. And if Roman said earlier that he is grateful that from now on, those earning less than 200,000 pesos per year will no longer need to pay income tax. That means, 12 billion pesos in total have provided relief, to the poor and ordinary workers. If he is grateful to me for helping with that, I am also grateful to Congressman Roman Romulo for working on it in Congress. So congratulations, Congressman Romulo!

This global crisis, its challenge: self-reliance against global imponderables.

Earlier, Peter Favila and I came from over there, from Karangalan Market. We checked the prices of rice. Ah, finally, we are seeing rice prices of 32 pesos, commercial. And I called Artie Yap, I said, how much is it there in Pasig? In Mutya Market, you can find commercial regular rice for P29; well-milled, P33 to P35. That means, it looks like we are controlling the food situation.

This success is a national effort through farmers' programs, along with greater price monitoring and greater severity against price manipulation, through the diligent coordination of Artie Yap, assisted by Congressman Romulo's sister, Undersecretary Berna Romulo-Puyat. Oh, there it is! And I asked Roman if LGUs and barangay officials are included in our… in bringing NFA rice to the barangays, and he said yes. So thank you to the barangay officials, and thank you also to the religious groups helping to bring NFA rice to the poor. So thank you all very much.

That NFA rice at 18.25 subsidized, and this price is cheaper than in other countries in our region. While it comforts us that our situation is better than many other countries, there is no substitute for solving the problems of rice and fuel in our own country.

And in what we are doing, we have to be honest and clear-eyed — there has been a fundamental shift in global economics. The price of food and fuel is likely to remain high. That 32 is already lower than the 40 before. But those 22 or so, that's what we're aiming for, so it might take a while before we see that in the market while there is NFA rice that is lower than that. Nothing will be easy; the government cannot resolve these problems overnight. But we can work to ease the near-term pain and invest in longer-term solutions.

So, part of alleviating poverty currently is our program for grandparents.

Among the estimated over 5 million so-called senior citizens, many of you regularly receive pensions, so you can be considered to have your own income. GSIS has old-age pensioners, almost half a million, including 123,000 widows and widowers of GSIS members. SSS, on the other hand, has old-age pensioners, almost 600,000 people, and if we include the number of widows, widowers, and disabled people receiving pensions, the number of retirees assisted by SSS reaches 1.25 million.

PhilHealth also has a listed almost 400,000 retirees who no longer need to pay their premiums. If we combine these retirees and the listed dependents of the members, about two million senior citizens receive benefits from PhilHealth every time they are hospitalized.

But we also need to help the more than three million senior citizens who are not covered by GSIS or SSS, and many are also not enrolled in PhilHealth. That's why 'Katas ng VAT' for the Elderly will prioritize this poorest sector. You are that sector, so you were brought here from different parts of Metro Manila because you were chosen in the DSWD survey. You will be given a one-time amount of five hundred pesos as assistance from the government to alleviate your poverty.

Half a billion has been allocated for this program, and it will help a million poor elderly. The most help from this will go to the poorest senior citizens. You deserve to be the first to receive assistance to reduce the hardship you are experiencing.

Therefore, my dream today is that we continue to support programs that provide relief to our citizens so that we can collectively bear the burdens brought about by the current times around the world – burdens that are heavy but we can be sure also have an end as long as we are united and helping each other. We chose this place in Pasig to launch this program because of the need for cooperation, and we are also doing this as a thank you to Congressman Roman Romulo because he is one of the most helpful congressmen for me.

To all of you, thank you very much. Congratulations!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s Speech during the Inauguration of the Road Network “Widening and Concreting of Imelda Avenue and Launching of Katas ng VAT for the Elderly: “Tulong Para kay Lolo at Lola”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115746/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1594&Itemid=38