Happy Earth Day!

Yesterday was Earth Day but today is a working day, so we are celebrating Earth Day here in our government. What is the context of this Earth Day? The context of our Earth Day is our relentless effort to build a modern nation that will one day join the ranks of rich and developed countries. That is, first world in 20 years. I have strong hope in the future of the nation and in the upliftment of the citizenry. Our national agenda can transform our economy and lift up the poor.

But, we must use every tool at our disposal; education, technology, loans for the poor or microfinance to help our poor countrymen rise and achieve development for all and for the environment.

So I am pleased that Secretary Ding Panganiban, head of NAPC, is here, Ed Pamintuan our champion of the Luzon Urban Beltway is here, is Flying V here? Yes, Flying V. The Rotary District 3800 is here, yes, isn't it? You are all here, including the Rotary Club of Cosmopolitan San Juan, and the Philippine Confederation of Grains Association is also here. I want to thank you for your agreement to work together to alleviate poverty by providing feeding and skills and values training to poor beneficiaries in several priority areas in the Luzon Urban Beltway, thank you all very much.

They are part of the economic engine to drive us to first world status in 20 years. But even as they do so, even as we do so, we must not do so at the back of the poor, nor at the expense of the environment.

No nation can aspire to become modern without thinking of our environment. It is very important that we focus on sustainable development. So every April 22 of each year, we have marked this every year as Earth Day in the Philippines.

We have another Cabinet member who is very important to our program for the environment. Aside from Secretary Reyes, Secretary Ding Panganiban and Secretary Pamintuan, likely next year we will have the Department of Education with us because today, I am directing the Department of Education to incorporate subjects dealing with global warming and climate change into the public school Science curriculum subjects. We want our young people to be aware of global warming and other climate change phenomena.

Because we want to press ahead up to their generation with a massive Green Philippines Environmental Plan, that is comprehensive in scope and thorough in execution. Well, our officials from the DENR are here, I would just like to make it clear to them and to all what is this Green Philippines Plan, although I’ve been saying it over and over again it’s time to say it again this time. This plan includes; first, reforestation; second, preservation of our reefs and waterways; third, scrubbing the land and air of pollutants that dangers the health of our citizens and fourth, energy independence.

On reforestation, we must take back our forest and replenish fallen trees with new protected forest to protect our land and our people. We must reforest that land and bring back the beauty of the Philippines, we all loved and want.

This coming May, I will be going to New Zealand. If you remember many years ago, New Zealand was helping us with our reforestation in Bukidnon. I remember when I was a new Senator in 1992 I planted a tree there. When I returned as President the tree had grown so big. And this is New Zealand’s continuing support for the Philippines, as to have expanded it to eco-tourism.

So when Prime Minister Helen Clark came here to the Philippines, her attending secretary was Secretary Reyes, right Angie? Because we talked about the environment and she visited their New Zealand project there in Bohol, the dolphins and whales on Pamalican Island.

Now, with my visit to New Zealand, one of the aids that New Zealand will offer, that’s why Leonard Gibb and Narda Camacho will also be going there, is further assistance to our reforestation program, number one program of our Green Philippines.

On the second program, item mode of program, first of the environmental plan, preservation of our reefs and waterways and designation of national parks and wildlife refuges. I want to turn our coral reefs and beaches after all the other wonder of the world. I want to turn them into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. And so as part of this, today, I thank the DENR, Angie and his officials for working very quickly so that we can have this proclamation signed today. What is this proclamation? It is a proclamation establishing a critical habitat and eco-tourism area within the coastal lagoon of Las Piñas and Parañaque and ensuring the maintenance of necessary ecological services from peripheral areas. This is our proclamation as a celebration of Earth Day and I will sign it now.

Iyong pangatlo, iyong anti-pollution. We want to tap the enthusiasm of young ang old alike, to clean up our environment. We need to rid our barangays and cities of trash. We need to build up more urban parks, and recreation areas, we need to purify our water and we need to clean up industrial sites that is an eye sore and are unhealthy. Unilever, thank you very much.

That is why today I am happy because together with our celebration are some barangays leading in the care of the environment and nature in their respective areas. Where are those outstanding barangays in our cleanup of nature? Are they here, Narda? Okay.

Here are also some businessmen, those who took the oath earlier. Including the junk shop owners, where are our junk shop owners? Who are doing everything to ensure that their business helps the environment and the health of the citizens.

And with us also is the green army of the DENR, Angie? And our eco-aides, who are closely monitoring against those who abuse our environment and nature.

And finally, energy independence, this is the job of the Secretary of Energy. The role of innovation in this context is vital along with political will. We need to develop a larger manufacturing base along with our booming service economy to create jobs. But at the same time, we need to be more self-reliant and be frugal in using energy. There is no reason we cannot do so through, we cannot do both manufacturing and energy independence. There is no reason we cannot do both through innovation, proper quality planning and united political and civic leadership such as what we have in today’s hall.

For example, we launched a program on bio-fuels, the law authored by Congressman Migz Zubiri, to become a Senator. Bio-fuels such as ethanol and coco-biodiesel made from crops. Our bio-fuels program will rely on investment and innovation to create jobs, skills and self-reliance while keeping our environment clean. Here, not only the Secretary of Energy is needed, but also the Secretary of Agriculture because of the raw materials. In this effort, let us emulate Brazil, which is a leader in bio-fuel, because we must continue to learn around the world and in our region.

We have the opportunity to learn from the experiences of other countries and open new paths towards sustainable development.

We must think outside the box. We will use technology and innovation to end the yearly dependence on foreign oil and the destruction of nature.

Our livelihood comes from Mother Nature. So to all of you who care for nature, thank you very much for your care and service as models of looking after our nature and environment.

Long live all those who love and care for nature!

Happy Earth Day again to all of you!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].