Dios ti agngina unay, kasinsin ko ni apo Mayor Mon Guico. (applause) ken congratulations kenni Vice-mayor Guico ken napintas nga airport na, private airport.

Kasama ko ngayon si Secretary Jesli Lapus of the Department of Education at saka si Undersecretary Ann Lontoc of the Department of Transportation. Let us also greet our Congresswoman Rachel Arenas (applause) and the different mayors of Pangasinan who have come to join us for the annual town fiesta of Binalonan.

First, I want to thank you all, especially the relatives of my mother for your continued support for me.

Second, congratulations on this beautiful airport and I would like to say, I spoke with Undersecretary Ann Lontoc earlier, about the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan for North Luzon. North Luzon is our agri-business superregion for Luzon. Along with the important infrastructure for agri-business in North Luzon are no-frills airports for agricultural cargo. So this airport is important because, as the ATO has said, this is 800 meters, if it becomes 1.2… Is it possible for agri even at 800, for agricultural cargo? At 800 meters, the Air Transportation Office is prepared to give a license to this airport for use commercially for agricultural cargo. (applause)

Ta ti Pangasinan ket ti kadakkelan nga probinsiya toy North Luzon, toy North Luzon Agri-business Quadrangle. And last month, President Ramos wrote two columns about Pangasinan. Kuna na, Pangasinan’s more strategic role today is that… Oh! I have to greet also ni governor tayo, Governor Espino. Sorry, okay. (applause) Because we’re talking about Pangasinan, haan laeng ti ili tayo nga Binalonan, Pangasinan’s more strategic role today is that of investment route and development destination but kuna na Pangasinan is still a laggard compared to even small provinces in seaports, airports and agricultural efficiency. Iso nga no kayat tayo nga ti kadakkelan nga probinsiya ti North Luzon agri-business quadrangle, ag-improve ti agricultural efciency, importante dagiti no frills agricultural airports kasla ti airport ti Binalonan. (applause)

Importante met sabali pay nga airport diay bangir ti Pangasinan. So I have also asked the ATO… The DOTC to make a feasibility study on where other airports’ no frills airports to begin with and eventually to develop into tourism airports dagidiay sabali pay nga ili wenno siyudad ti probinsiya ti Pangasinan. (applause)

Second, if we want to increase the agricultural efficiency of Pangasinan, it is also important that data is an important resource for our capital investment in the San Roque Dam which currently is an anti-flooding dam, to become an agricultural irrigation dam. So since we have six billion pesos per year for irrigation, it is important that a large part of our irrigation funds go to the downstream irrigation canals because of the San Roque Dam. And that is what I will instruct Secretary Arthur Yap to release maybe the first 100 million that is needed for the downstream irrigation dams of San Roque and because of the San Roque Dam, we have a neighbor in the municipality of San Manuel and to the other municipalities of Pangasinan, it will surely I suppose pass through Binalonan and also benefit the farmers of Binalonan. (applause)

Maykatlo, malpas ti airport ken ti irrigation, kuna ni Presidente Ramos, importante met nga ti Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway nga asidegen malpas this coming month, kuna na kuma nga agtuloy aging gana rosales, Pangasinan where we gave him the good news, not very long ago just like this one which is a private sector investment, a private sector corporation, consortium was able to win the unsolicited proposal contract for a build-operate-and-transfer expressway from Clark all the way up to Rosario, La Union. (applause)

Ikauppat, kuna na, sapay koma nga ti railroad ti northrail nga itatta, dagiti plano tayo mapan aging gana clark, sapay kuma, kuna that it should go all the way up to Dagupan. And so we will also ask the DOTC, Undersecretary Ann Lontoc, to also make the study so that the Northrail now which is plan to go from Caloocan to Malolos, to Clark should also be extended up to Dagupan. (applause)

And finally, awan kano ti napintas nga seaport toy probinsiya tayo. Of course, it cannot be here in Binalonan because we are landlocked. But it is important also for the DOTC, iso nga importante nga addadtoy ni Undersecretary Ann Lontoc, that the DOTC should also look to see where there should be the best place for a seaport for the province of Pangasinan.

So lima dagiti importante tayo, importante para ti masterplan ti Pangasinan — dagiti airprots, ti expressway, ti railroad, ti irigasyon ken ti seaport. And also ta ti San Manuel, asideg diay Cordillera, and there’s already a beautiful lake in San Manuel. We can also have, Ann, water transportation in San Roque that can bring us all the way to the Cordillera and close to Baguio City so that Binalonan will be able to go to Baguio City two ways — ti Kennon Road ken ti San Roque through a beautiful water transport. (applause)

So data, apo Governor Espino, data ket ti masterplan tayo para ti probinsiya ti Pangasinan and the reason why I am saying this here in Binalonan is that these are the challenges kuna ni President FVR, ken kuna na, likewise challenged is President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo whose beloved mother Doctora Evangelina Macaraeg-Macapagal comes from Binalonan, and also it is a challenge to Mayor Ramon Guico because not only is he a mayor of Binalonan, he is also the president of the Mayors’ League of the Philippines and therefore of Pangasinan. (applause)

Iso nga agyamanak nga addadtoy tayo amin, tano am-ammo tayo amin anya ti kayat tayo nga agbalin ti probinsiya tayo ken ti ili tayo and I’m happy to be here once again kasla dagidiay malpas nga tatawen to be here always together to remind ourselves that we are one family, one province and one nation.

Dios ti agngina kadakayo amin ken naragsak nga fiesta. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Inauguration of the Binalonan Airfield and Aircraft on the occasion of Binalonan Town Fiesta. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123354/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=969&Itemid=38