Thank you.

Thank you very much, Commissioner Defensor for your introduction. I think you know Commissioner Defensor’s sister also, Senator Miriam Defensor Santiago.

Sister Salva and the rest of the sisters, faculties, students and staff of Holy Spirit, thank you very much for the warm welcome.

Thank you for receiving me at short notice. I invited myself to come here. I wasn’t able to attend the concert where we featured the piano from Malacañang but I thought that I would therefore do one of my first visits to the students in your school which is just across from where I lived and worked.

I’m doing this visit because one of my New Year’s resolutions is that before the end of my term I should continue to reach out to the youth of this nation. And you, why? Because you’re the future. You, the youth are our future. And that is also why education is essential.

I think you all know, I think you’re all here in school because you know that a good education is the ticket to a better life. You know that education is the great equalizer which will allow every young Filipino a chance to realize your dreams. That is why our administration has invested so much in education and skills training. I don’t know if you know it, but from 90 billion plus pesos before my administration, the combined budget of DepEd, NEDA, CHED and the state universities and colleges has doubled to over a 180 billion pesos.

And what did we do with this money? For one thing, we built over a 100,000 classrooms, and many of these are in about a thousand barangays where there used to be no schools at all. And what is the reason why we’re doing this? Because the U.N. Millennium Development Goals is for us to reach… to achieve primary universal education by 2015. It’s very hard to reach this; in fact the U.N. says probably no country will get to reach this except Cuba — small country, so easy to build classrooms for everyone.

And why do we need to build schools, classrooms especially in the thousand barangays where there were none? Because if you’re in a far away barangay and the next school is two hours walk away, and your child is six years old, you won’t send your child to school. And we found out that 58% only is the enrollment of six year-olds to enter primary school, others enter much later, others don’t enter at all. So we’ve got to get them when they’re six year old and the best way to do it is to build a school at least for grade 1 and 2 in the same barangay where the children live.

It is important so that you can save on transportation going to school and also on the safety and the comfort of the parents whose children have to walk to school. We asked many parents, why don’t you send your six year old to school? And they’ve said, well, transportation is one problem, the other thing is although school is free as far as tuition is concerned in public schools, they cannot pay for the miscellaneous fees and they cannot pay for the uniforms. So we have removed in the public schools the requirement for uniforms and in primary school we have removed the miscellaneous fees. That’s why the government has to spend more. In fact, what would be covered by miscellaneous fees? In fact, one time, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines came to see me. Now that miscellaneous fees are taken out, they said — at least miscellaneous compulsory fees — what happens now to our Girl Scouts fees? And I said, well, in grade 5 they can start paying, but in grade 1 to 4 they shouldn’t, otherwise they might not go to school because of the pressure to pay for all these miscellaneous fees. And they said, but it’s the grade school, it’s the primary school fees that keep the Girl Scouts going. So I said, well, we’ll just have to contribute more to the Girl Scouts from the government rather than getting them from our students.

We also have another program to have the poorest one million families in our country send their children to school. This is our Pantawid Pamilya program which provides them with an allowance. One million poorest families in our country have an allowance of 800 pesos to P1,400 a month, depending on the size of their family, but depending on certain conditions. One of them is that the children from 3 years old up to 16 years old should go to school, whether day care, pre-school, elementary or high school. And we hope that will increase our access to universal primary education. Because as I said, you know more than I do that education is the ticket to a better life.

So, aside of course, the most basic is to make sure that children go to school, the nearest next thing is once they go to school, we’ve got to make sure that they have a good education. And today I was just having lunch with the newspaper, Business Mirror, and one of the columnists who are a foreigner said he sent his children to public schools in Makati. And he was saying that although he’s from Hong Kong, although he is a foreigner, the school facilities may not be as nice as they have in America, one big difference is that our Filipino teachers are much more devoted to the teaching profession than teachers in many other schools. So, a tribute to our teachers.

The quality of teachers is indeed important and if you are going to have additional schools, classrooms, we certainly need additional teachers. So in our administration, we increased the number of teaching jobs by 60,000 and we also increased the salaries of public school teachers. A teacher who used to receive 9,000 pesos now earns 14,000 pesos in the public school. But one of the things that we need to do is to make sure, as far as a good quality of education is concerned, that if you’re going to have a good chance for a job after college, you must be good in English. This is a great… a very competitive world.

During our generation, and maybe even in Sister Genoveva’s administration and Commissioner Nenalyn’s administration, the medium of instruction was English. We were very competitive; we were second only to Japan in economic development in Asia. Then sometime later, in the 1970s, that was removed as the medium of instruction and we started to lose one of our big sources of competitiveness. Now the world is even more competitive, and one of our big assets is the Business Process Outsourcing where you would have a very good job, a very chance to have a good job if you speak good English. Unfortunately… so what we did was to restore English as the medium of instruction but one of the problems we found is that our very devoted teachers grew up in the generation where English was no longer the medium of instruction, so some of them did not even had their own problems with English. So we had to spend 1.5 billion pesos for teacher training, especially in Math, Science and especially in English.

So, we had now increased the use of English as a medium of instruction from 40% of hours to 55% in elementary school and from 45% to 70% in high school. I guess you are noticing that in your own school. And we also increased Science and Math hours by 50%. Well you wouldn’t able to notice that, because when we talk about 50%, I mean from ten years ago when you were still very young, so you’re having much more English training now, you are having much more Science training now, you’re having much more Math training now than about ten years ago because we want to make sure that you will be more competitive and you will have a better job when you get out of school.

I was talking about what we spend on public schools, but we also spend a lot on private schools. You know because we have had an increase in teachers’ salaries in public high schools, we’ve had spending classrooms in public high schools. In my father’s time, when he was still very young, he had to go to San Fernando, Pampanga to go to high school because there was no high school in Lubao, our hometown. Now there is a high school in every barangay in Lubao. One of the problems here is that private education has started to suffer because you have to pay your way through private high school but your public high school is free, but we don’t want the private schools to die especially schools that give a good Catholic education like the College of Holy Spirit.  And the way we’ve done this to help out is to increase the scholarship funds of GATSPE and education vouchers for private education. In fact, in private high schools — I don’t know if the ratio is that way here in Holy Spirit — almost half of all private high school students are government scholars. And I asked Sister if the College of Holy Spirit participates in that. You do participate, isn’t it, Sister? You do participate in the scholarship programs. So many of you, your tuition is subsidized by the government. That is our way of helping the private high schools because we want you to continue and we want you to flourish and we want to keep up your good standard of education.

This scholarship is also provided for college and post-graduate education. As I said earlier, almost half of high school private students have scholarships in college and post-graduate, it’s over 600,000 scholars. In technical education and skills training, we have invested three times that of three previous administrations combined. As a result of our investments in education, the National Achievement Test scores have improved a lot in our administration. Forty-four percent to 65% in elementary schools; 36% percent to 47% in high schools. Much better than before, but I think still needing a lot of improvement.

And so to further improve our educational system, we have a Presidential Task Force on Education headed by a private educator, Jesuit educator Father Bienvenido Nebres of Ateneo. And this task force has come up with a proposal, a masterplan of a Main Education Highway towards a Knowledge-Based Economy which envisions seamless education from basic education, meaning pre-school or daycare, all the way up to vocational school or college and even beyond.

Because as I said, school is important for a successful life. But on top of making your lives have a better chance to be successful, I also want our educational system to instill in our youth a pride in our nation and a desire to get involved in the civic life of our country. There is a need for you, the students to get involved in a positive way in the civic life of the nation. And that is why I have decided to visit you today. Because I want to give you the message that the Philippines has come a long way since you were little children in January 2001. I’m sure you remember very little of that time because you were little children. But time itself has gratefully erased many memories of that tumultuous time less than ten years ago, when the nation teetered on political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made, few jobs were being created. Our public sector debt was even bigger than our GDP ‘cause our GDP was P3.3 trillion, our public debt was P3.8 trillion. Imagine a public debt bigger than the whole production of the country. And so understandably, foreign reserves were razor thin. It was a time of lower salaries, a time of high inflation. Very few taxes were coming in, that’s why insufficient investments were being made to expand healthcare, improve education or even provide clean water and electricity to remote barangays. Those things were very difficult to do.

So into this dismal picture we stepped in.

Today, I was hearing mass — where some of the Holy Spirit sisters often come and join me for mass, in my daily mass — and the priest said because there was… the sermon was about asking things from God and praying. And he said, “Reflect on the gifts that God has given you. How much of them were given to you because you prayed and asked for them. How much of them were given to you even if you did not ask for them.” And I started to reflect, and really it’s very hard to tell to be able to make that comparison. But one thing I can say, in 2001, I did not seek the Office of the President. It was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from the onerous task, I rolled up my sleeves and I was determined to turn the Philippines around.

I focused myself like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew, however that to reverse years of economic decline I had to instill fiscal discipline. I had to grow the economy. I had to invest in human and physical infrastructure. And these things that we did would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would eventually, nine years later, deliver 35 quarters of uninterrupted growth, which other administrations have not experienced for the longest time since 1966. The creation of 9 million new jobs, again, with other administrations did not create a million jobs a year. The addition of 53 million to healthcare, health insurance from 29 million before I came in to 82 million today, and still on top of all that a stable fiscal situation.

And so that people and goods can be delivered faster, cheaper and safer from one end of the nation to the other. We built RORO ports, airports and more roads and bridges than in the past three administrations. And you from the province I hope you can see — no, you will not see ‘cause that was ten years ago — and now, but travel is much better now.

But this is very relevant to you: from scratch, we created what is today a global powerhouse, the Philippine Business Process Outsourcing industry. We were able to do this with vision, determination and smart government policies. First of all, we promoted strategic investments in telecommunications connectivity, and so billions of dollars came in to the country in investments, creating half a million new jobs in call centers and BPO alone, and counting. In fact, I’m sure many of you when you get out of school, you would like to be working in one of those very nice call centers and BPOs. And we have a million, a half a million jobs today, and more jobs are available.

How did we do all of these? How were we able to afford all of these?

We have never shied away from taking on tough issues. Most notably, my popularity dipped when I went against the grain and championed the passage of more taxes especially the Expanded Value Added Tax. Even before I did it I knew it would be unpopular, but someone had to get the nation’s fiscal house in order and bring in revenue to invest in the people. It was the right thing to do. It has served people well. It has served a lot of you well through scholarships, through the infrastructure, through the jobs available. And on top of all that, our government’s finances are in much healthier position than nine years ago. Revenues are up. We have enough revenues both for debt servicing and for investing in you, our people. I said earlier that when I started, our debt was bigger than our GDP. Today, our debt is only over 60% of our GDP. Why? Ah, and our foreign debt to GDP ratio has also come down. It used to be 70%, now it is down to just 30%. Why? Because our GDP has grown so much over the past years, it has doubled from 76 billion dollars when I started, to a 168 billion dollars today. And even per capita, it’s more than doubled. When I started, per capita income was $967. Today, its $2,000 and that puts the Philippines now no longer in the rank of the poor countries but the rank of a middle-class country.

And this doubling of per capita income, this doubling of GDP, this increase in GDP compared to debts was enabled because our average growth is higher than all past periods, and our average inflation is lower than at any time since my father’s administration way back in the 1960s. In fact, during this global financial crisis, we were one of few countries to avoid negative growth. We even secured a credit upgrade during the financial crisis of the world.

In fact, if we compare, ‘cause I’m ending my term, if we compare the state of the economy at the end of each President’s term: in 1986 there was an economic crisis; in 1992 there was a power crisis; in 1998 in the middle during the transition from one government to another, there was negative growth because of the Asian financial crisis; in 2001 there was a political crisis. What we have now is an upgrade of our credit outlook. And this is the only administration where the peso is stronger in the end than in the beginning.

And for those who refuse to see progress, just look at the skyline of Manila or Cebu or Fort Bonifacio or Santa Rosa in Laguna. Today, it’s a skyline with new, modern buildings, construction cranes, better roads, hotels, shopping malls that you enjoy, small businesses. This is part of the Philippines we have helped nurture and create.

Also, we inherited a culture of lawlessness and kidnapping that was directed in fact at certain domestic ethnic groups like the Chinese and foreign investors. We worked to end kidnapping as a major problem. We also narrow the lair of hardcore terrorists in the South and we continued to confine and limit the communist insurgency. So compare to nine years ago, people are certainly safer today.

But, there is still that culture of violence. Look what happened in Maguindanao. So, one of the reasons why I’m here because I want to call on all the school age youth to help our society become more safe and let less violence. I want you to help me do a “no guns, no violence” campaign geared at young people trying to change the culture of violence. You can help be the guardians of non-violence as you interact with adults and others in our community. And this is especially important now because there is a gun ban during elections, and we especially want to reduce violence during election time because that is usually when violence flares up.

Free and fair elections are important. You our young can help begin to ensure that we have not just a free and fair election, but one that is free from violence. And I hope you can help me do that.

And as I end my term, I can say that we will leave a legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, major investments in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure. Yes, much work remains to be done. But a President’s work is never done. So, it’s never an excuse to strive to stay in office forever.

What is important is that we are determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines, one that is ready to reach the verge of the first world in 20 years.

And as I’m sure you can hardly remember what was there 10 years ago, 20 years from now, you will remember, hopefully, what we did today so that in 20 years from now you will be the leaders of our country whether in business, whether in government, whether in civic life. But I hope that when you have that role of leadership in a country that’s on the verge of first world in 20 years, I hope that the education that you have during this period will have prepared you well for your own role and your own duties as the leaders of a country on the verge of first world in 20 years.

To all of you, good luck and may you have a good future.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a visit to the College of the Holy Spirit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235318/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27389&Itemid=38