Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Dinner Reception for the UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura and delegates to the 31st UNESCO International Theater Institute World Congress and the Theater Olympics of the Nations

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, May 22, 2006]

Thank you very much, Cecille.

His Excellency UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura, distinguished delegates to the International Theater Institute Congress and the Theater Olympics of Nations, His Excellency ASEAN Secretary General Ong Keng Yong, Speaker de Venecia and the other elective officials, Secretary Romulo and the other members of the Cabinet, Ambassador Soliven and the other excellencies of the diplomatic corps, other officials of the Philippine government, theater artists, theater lovers all over the world, guests, ladies and gentlemen.

In behalf of the Filipino people, I extend our warmest welcome to you, director general and to all the participants, all the eminent participants and all the ordinary people participating in the forum of the 31st UNESCO International Theater Institute World Congress.

This Congress is an important contribution to intercultural, intercivilizational and interfaith dialogue to which the Philippines under our administration is fully committed. Dialogue is an attribute of democracy which is one of the hallowed traditions of Philippine society. Dialogue through theater is an opportunity not only to exercise democracy but also to focus on the global stage the creativity of the Filipino. Our creativity is among the qualities that it endeared the great Filipino worker in 140 countries all over the world.

On the other hand, we the Filipinos also learn from this Congress. Our Filipino faculty and students around the country benefit from the great cultural boon provided by the encounters and exchanges of the Congress. And I commend the Congress of the I.T.I. for revolving its theme around the millennium development goals, which shape Philippine policy in our Medium- term Philippine Development Plan. And very closely allied with this, I would like to thank your excellency because you have so heartily endorsed the Philippine proposal in the United Nations for a debt for culture, debt for environment, debt for civilization swap.

The Medium-term Philippine Development Plan seeks to cut our poverty in half together with the rest of the world. In our case, through a ten-point pro-poor, pro-growth and pro-peace program.

Culture is not in addition to this program; culture is a part of this program. Indeed, culture has its own separate chapter in our medium-term plan. Our plan recognizes that arts is a dynamic instrument for values formation.

And so, therefore, I thank you and I thank everyone participating in this Congress for coming to the Philippines to celebrate the greatness of culture, the greatness of art, the greatness of theater.

To all of you, mabuhay! Welcome! And thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner Reception for the UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura and delegates to the 31st UNESCO International Theater Institute World Congress and the Theater Olympics of the Nations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213232/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2763&Itemid=38