Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Jun Icban, our new Press Secretary, for your introduction of me and you may all be seated.

We brought Secretary Jun Icban because we brought the media to see this very good example of cooperation between the government and the private sector for housing for our fellow and beloved Filipinos.

Thank you very much also Governor Ningning Lazaro for welcoming us here and for welcoming your province to the new residents of Laguna. Thank you very much Gina Lopez, for all the things that you’re doing here and all the other places where you have made a difference in the lives of the people of the community. Thank you very much Mayor Berris and Mrs. Berris because with your welcome this resettlement site is bigger than the former town of Calauan so you have many new wards but you can definitely take care of the old town. You can also take care of the new citizens of the Town of Calauan.

And here also is General Manager of NHA Rico Laxa because he is among the government agencies that partners with other agencies and the private sector. And with us now is Secretary Arthur Yap, he is also from the private sector now but he temporarily resigned as Secretary of Agriculture because he is running for congressman, but I said his private sector position is temporary because even if he is the only one voting for himself he will already be a congressman because Arthur Yap is unopposed.

I greet everyone here, first of all Gina, she thought of the concept of BayaniJuan or Bayanihan where government agencies, the private sector, beneficiaries work together to provide relief in life. And the main partner, the NHA, because NHA is building the most houses here but Gina mentioned a lot earlier during the media tour of the private sector and private foundations and private individuals who are also contributing a lot of housing here in Calauan.

Earlier, Gina and I were talking, she said there was zero resistance to the move here, and that is different from what happened in previous administrations. And I told her about the train tracks where they also went, many on the train tracks, 90,000 families were relocated to various places with almost no resistance. What is the difference between our relocations and those of the past? Because the relocation comes with a livelihood — that is the most important. And one of the ways is the livelihood centers being built here, factories of private sector agencies, and TESDA continues the skills for livelihood.

Earlier we went to where the one making things, the master carpenter, Mang Roger is working. He is supervising the making of the furniture that will also be used here. He is from under the bridge in Paco Market so I asked him, what Mang Roger, I think you were afraid to leave there because I asked Mang Roger when you were under the bridge what was your job, what was your livelihood? He said I am a carpenter, I have construction projects that I work on. I think I said, Mang Roger you were afraid to move here because you might lose your livelihood, the construction in Manila, that was it he said. But when he arrived here there was also a livelihood here. That is what is good about what we are doing.

And also, to those who connected the electricity, congratulations as well! Gina said the other day when this area was dark and there was a lot of crime, drugs, even a rape, but we got electricity here and the electricity being made here is solar energy, solar power. So, it’s just expensive to build the posts and lights and then there’s no electric bill to pay, right Gina? No electric bill to pay so there’s electricity here. So, congratulations! to everyone and to the different companies helping: Telus; Consunji; well, ABS-CBN; Aboitiz; San Miguel; Sun Life, so many are helping. Thank you very much for your help to the BayaniJuan Foundation, because Gina is the moving spirit, she brought you all together. And Arty Yap, I had him seated here even though he’s already ex, from the private sector, we’re also courting him because he’s going to be a congressman. But that’s not just it because under him the Department of Agriculture also provided help here: tilapia, vermi composting, vegetable seeds, shredder, land preparation, household gardens. I don’t know if everything is done here but they are helping the BayaniJuan Foundation in their different endeavors.

And I also had General Segovia and General Anonuevo seated here because peace is also important if you’re relocating and building a community. So maybe the soldiers of General Segovia used the CAFGU training module because we have so many… those in white t-shirts, martial artists here who were trained by the military to help the police maintain peace here in your resettlement in Calauan. So congratulations to all of you!

Here, in what we’re seeing, we’re seeing a good example of three government programs being pushed by Gina’s BayaniJuan. First, to provide protection to people who have moved close to disasters because of their previous residences which they shouldn’t have lived in but have nowhere else to go. Gina and I were talking about those living under the bridge in Paco, they’re not extremely poor, there are CPAs — there’s Mang Roger who has a job in construction — the problem in Manila sometimes isn’t the lack of jobs but the lack of land. And that’s why even in prohibited areas, those near the river, near the lake, near Manila Bay are living there. So that should be given an opportunity and encouraged to move to other places like Laguna which we’ve brought closer to Metro Manila, becoming Greater Metro Manila because of our expanded SLEX and that’s one way how. The important thing now isn’t just Metro Manila but the Urban Luzon Beltway should be one unit only.

Secondly, environmental protection, especially the Pasig River. Gina is really passionate about that, the Pasig River. And when we were seated, I said, Gina let’s do more for the Pasig River. Look at the Pasig River rehabilitation, how we can do it through the Pasig River Rehabilitation, the things you’re doing as the private sector, maybe more can be done that way. Because the Pasig River is the biggest river in Metro Manila so it’s very important.

And thirdly, housing for the poor. Gina’s love for the environment is the reason why she’s addressing the pollution in the Pasig River. What is the source of the pollution in the Pasig River? First, the garbage coming from the houses around the river. Because our sewerage system is lacking so even those in houses who think they’re disposing of their wastewater in the right place, it’s not all treated very well. In fact, I tell all government offices to just put your 5 million pesos into your own sewage treatment plant so that when your water goes to the Pasig, your water is clean. Let’s help the utilities because it will take them years for their program to complete the sewerage system of the Pasig.

In the meantime, that’s what Gina is doing, helping to stop the dumping of garbage into the biggest river of Manila. And the most important thing is those dumping garbage who live near the river who shouldn’t be living there should be relocated and they are also facing danger every time the current suddenly gets strong and their houses are swept away. So the important thing is we ordered the cleaning and repair of the Pasig River. Along with the implementation of the relocation of informal settlers who used to live near the river, as well as the cleaning and rehabilitation that Gina did of Paco Market which used to be a big source of dirt dumped into the river. Now it’s so beautiful, it smells good, it’s no longer stinky.

This is so important, which is why from my President’s Social Fund, I contributed to the fulfillment of Gina’s dream to have an ideal relocation that addresses the needs against pollution and poverty and lack of housing. Because during our Administration, we have ensured that more and more families are able to own a home. The aim of our government is for families without their own homes to have a house or land to build a house on. During our administration, we have helped more than 800,000 poor families under the Socialized Housing and Land Tenure Security programs.

In addition to that almost 300,000 low-cost housing units have been built, so we have given more than a million families in locations across the nation a chance to meet their goal of home ownership including those from here. To have no resistance to relocation, it’s not just jobs that are being looked for, schools. So we congratulate Undersecretary Bacani and all the teachers and officials here, you have a big role to play for our residents to be happy here at the Calauan Resettlement Site. Congratulations to you!

This BayaniJuan Southville Project is a great help to the government's housing program. Nearly five thousand families have already been awarded lots here, and more than half of the lots have houses built on them. Many of the beneficiaries used to live along the banks of the Pasig River and were informal settlers from the Estero de Paco. Families who lost their homes due to Typhoon Ondoy will also be relocating here – around 2,500 families from Pasig and almost four hundred from Marikina.

So Governor Lazaro, Mayor Berris, you will really have a lot of new constituents. You might be a little surprised, but it's not like so many people are arriving here, right, for several years now in our administration? But the result of that is that Laguna will become one of the largest and most powerful provinces in our country. And thank you for taking care of the newcomers. Thank you also to Gina and all the foundations she embraced and all the government agencies she approached. Because of that, we have a very beautiful community here that we can be proud of at the new resettlement site in Calauan.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during an inspection visit of various project components of the Bayanijuan sa Southville 7 Community Center Project of the ABS-CBN Foundation, Inc.. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080140/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27848&Itemid=38