Thank you Secretary Favila for your introduction.

Secretary Romulo and the other officials of the Philippine government; our leaders of the business community: Donald Dee, Mike Varela, Francis Chua and the president of this conference, Mr. Lacson, thank you for giving me the resolution of the 32nd Philippine Business Conference; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; participants and delegates to this very important annual conference; ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, congratulations to this year’s awardees. Secondly, congratulations to the biggest delegation in this conference, the Mindanao delegation. And thirdly, congratulations to the whole PCCI for staying the course of excellence in global business. I am glad that your theme is once again — one. Global. Filipino. “Seizing Global Opportunities.”

Beating the odds and competing globally has been our common mantra, you and we in government, believing in the Filipino talent that can hold its own in the field of nations and economies. You are our standard bearers, the Philippine global business community. In world high-tech manufacturing, our semi-conductor and electronics industries enjoy a proud niche with 18 percent of the world market. As preferred location of BPOs, we are second only to India in the entire world. And we have companies like Palafox associates which exemplifies Philippine companies which have acquired a big share of markets previously dominated by foreign giants. Your success, the success of our awardees, the success of these industries and corporations I have just mentioned, the success of PCCI, your success is our country’s success.

I thank Francis for mentioning our upbeat economic indicators. These upbeat economic indicators increase our confidence in achieving our growth target for this year. And the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry has done so much in uniting the business community and concentrating on your business which is business.

The people have taken on the path of productivity and concord. And I thank the PCCI for having been a very reliable partner of development of the Philippine government. We, the Filipinos, are set to achieve more if we continue to join hands and remain focus on our agenda of economic growth and political stability.

Our speakers have mentioned the indicators, but they are so important for us to remember and take note of, I will mention some of them again. The money market remains firm, exports and imports are up, inflation remains weak, our stock market has surged to a record high as pointed out by Francis. Eight-year high now, isn’t it, Francis? We need to stay the course with the national leadership stewarding good governance, equitable revenue programs, a strong fight against corruption and a permanent campaign for social justice.

There is still a lot of work to be done. We urge all vital sectors of our society, and indeed the business community is one of our most vital sectors. We urge all vital sectors of our society to hold on to our gains. On our part, in government, we assure you that economic take off and lasting social payback are on the way. We improve our fiscal condition, we plug revenue leaks, we tighten spending even as we step up the campaign for more investments.

Together, you and we in government had a national competitiveness summit two weeks ago to maximize our gains. That has been alluded to by Donald Dee and the other speakers, and you have mentioned some of the things we have done since that summit are leading up to that summit. Let me again just mention a few of them because many have already been mentioned by the speakers before me.

On infrastructure, more than one trillion pesos will be strategically allocated over the medium-term by the government, the national government excluding what will be allocated by the government corporations and government financial institutions and our private sector partners. Each of our super regions that I introduced in my State of the Nation Address will get its appropriate share of roads, seaports, airports, railways and irrigation systems, depending on the natural competitiveness advantages of the super region.

We’ve already mentioned in our State of the Nation Address that we hope for North Luzon to be an important food exporter to the economies of North Asia.

I came across when I was walking towards here, the delegation from Cagayan province. So I hope that you will be very successful. Naimbag nga malem yo amin apo o bigat pay. I hope you will be very successful in developing your exports to North Asia.

We hope for Mindanao to develop its processed food industry because you are agri-business industry but especially — Joji, like Halal food — we hope to develop that some more for export to the ASEAN and the Middle East.

When we went on my state visit to Saudi Arabia, the Saudi Arabian business community was very enthused about buying more from the Philippines. They said it’s a business decision but also some kind of a payback to the 1.5 million Filipinos in Saudi Arabia whom they treasure so much and who have been contributing so much to their economy. And they mentioned that they would like to buy more poultry from the Philippines but we need to have them Halal-processed.

I congratulate the Boracay Chamber of Commerce for being the most outstanding in the Visayas and I mentioned that because what does Boracay mean? Boracay is our symbol of tourism in the Philippines and Boracay is the center of Central Philippines, our tourism destination, where more than half of all the foreign tourists to the Philippines go. And therefore building on that competitive advantage, we will build airports for preferred tourist destinations like Boracay, Bohol and Palawan to bring in more tourists.

Speaking of airports, we will open NAIA III as soon as the federal aviation agency accepts its safety features.

On human resources: we have ongoing programs — as you know, because we do it together with you — to improve the level of English, Math and Science from the elementary through the tertiary levels. And that’s for basic education. For high school, we have achieved almost 90 percent of our target to have computer-linkage in every high school. It’s not enough that high schools have computers, they must have computer-linkage so that our young people will be really hooked up to the world economy.

On transaction flows and costs: together we organized the public-private sector task force on Philippine competitiveness to oversee all measures related to cutting down documentation requirements, signatures and other forms of red tape that cause delay and open the bureaucracy to corruption.

On the way to Manila Hotel, Secretary Favila and I were riding in the same car because we wanted to discuss the things that are most important in terms of transaction cost and reforms — most important to the PCCI and to the business community. And he asked me to make sure to let you know that I am instructing Peter to draft an Executive Order that will exempt accredited exporters going to trade fairs from having to pay the travel tax, right Peter?

On energy cost competitiveness and self-sufficiency: the National Power Corporation and Meralco have filed with the Energy Regulatory Commission the customer choice program that will initially benefit consumers of over one megawatt, and when that starts to work we will try to work on smaller consumers. Meanwhile, I instruct the Department of Energy to listen to fears about inadequate power supply particularly in the Visayas and Mindanao.

On efficiency of public management: again, because of your recommendation in the Philippine Competitiveness Summit, we had issued the Administrative Order institutionalizing quality systems management in government.

On access to financing: I understand that private banks have reduced their interest rates and to cushion the negative impact of the strong peso on exporters without intervening in the foreign exchange market. When we met with the exporters of Cebu — and I congratulate Cebu for being the most outstanding chamber in the whole Philippines — part of your outstanding work was to give me very specific recommendations to help exporters maintain competitiveness without interfering in the foreign exchange rate.

And as a result of your letter and our discussions following that letter during our meeting in Cebu with the Cebu Chamber, the Central Bank announced the rediscounting, e-electronic rediscounting facilities so you can get your proceeds in 10 minutes flat, right, Peter? That should reduce red tape.

For the SMEs, we are strengthening the SME database to improve access to loans. I direct the GFIs to set up a system of sharing credit information on their SME clients so that the due diligence period will be shorter for loan applications.

I have mentioned this, Donald has mentioned a lot, much has been accomplished, but as I said earlier, much more remains to be done with a common spirit of patriotism and teamwork which the PCCI has always had with the Philippine government in my administration.

We must not stop our efforts until the foundation of our globally competitive Philippines is stable and sustainable. This is the investment of a lifetime. Let us not retreat from what we have started for the glory of the Philippines. Let us go on working for “One. Global. Filipino.” — Philippine economy.

Thank you very much. Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 32nd Philippine Business Conference. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409204419/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3013&Itemid=38