CELEBRATING OUR MODERN FILIPINO HEROES

Tonight, once again, we celebrate our modern Filipino heroes.

For both the Philippines and your host countries, you are examples of fortitude and sacrifice and love. You carry the Filipino heritage that flows in your veins and made you who you are.

Through these awards, our nation honors you for wide-ranging achievements. All of your accomplishments and more have earned you an accolade that will live on in the hearts of our people.

Last year, I signed three empowering laws for overseas Filipinos: namely, the Overseas Absentee Voting Act, the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act, and the Dual Citizenship Law.

Well, first of all, let me thank you because when you used your power to vote for the first time, you gave me a landslide overseas. Thank you for your support.

But we must increase the number of absentee voter registrants so that by 2007, the voice of Filipinos overseas will carry even more democratic weight.

Oh, let me acknowledge Tony Cuenco as well as Governor Tommy Joson.

Well, we have a new chairman of the Commission on Overseas Filipinos which has now become part of the Office of the President. And I’d like to task the Commission on Overseas Filipinos, now part of the Office of the President, to work closely with Filipino leaders and communities abroad on attractive retirement and investment packages for those who intend to remain home. Because we’re very proud of you bringing laurels to the Philippines while you do what you do abroad that made you get these awards but in the end, we’d like you to come back home to your loved ones when you’re ready to rest.

We must take our efforts a step higher than at present. Yes, we are now doing projects for returning Filipinos especially those who are overseas Filipino workers to make sure that they have something to come home to. But whether you come from places where you have contract jobs or whether you come from places where you have green cards, we hope you will come back home to something attractive as well. And we need to do this through the joint efforts of the Commission on Overseas Filipinos, the DOLE, the Department of Trade and Industry and the DFA.

You’re abroad and you hear news about the Philippines. Travel advisories and media reports sometimes paint a grim, unfair picture of conditions in the Philippines. But I’d like to tell you that things are looking up in the economy. The nation has shown solidarity and stubborn resiliency.

Our exports grew by 12.3 percent last October. And in 2001, there were only 1,500 call centers. Today, there are already more than 35,000 employing at least 56,000 agents.

We have a 6.3 percent GDP growth and we will push that higher and do better in 2005.

Through the support, you Filipinos overseas have been giving me, I’m able to have the political will to add to my experience to fight to improve the lives of the average Filipino. Which is what many of you got awards from for tonight — improving the lives of the average Filipino.

My experience tells me that nothing is more central to social justice, economic opportunity and the elimination of poverty than the fight against the long-standing culture of corruption. Corruption saps the strength of the country and must be cut out like a cancer if the patient is to survive.

Today, a two-star general is facing court-martial for graft. The military has a proud tradition of serving the nation. President Ramos comes from the military, Secretary Ermita comes from the military, its honor must be restored.

As commander-in-chief, I have ordered key personal changes not only in the armed forces but even among the undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and directors in the Department of National Defense in order to set an example and usher in a new day. But corruption is bigger than the military and must be weeded out across all sectors.

The nation needs revenue to pay for schools, improve health care, provide clean water and create jobs.

And I am very grateful to the senators for passing the tax on alcohol and cigarettes last night, as I’m grateful to the Congressmen for passing four revenue measures. Even as we speak, the House and the Senate are in bicameral conference committee so that they can rush to vote on this very important landmark revenue legislation tonight.

We have to work hard in legislation. We also have to work hard in the executive. It’s a crime against the people when pesos go to line pockets of corrupt officials and not to the needs of the people.

We must restore the faith of the people in their government against officials who betray the public trust.

There are so many things we have to do — restore faith, promote peace. We must have peace to strengthen the faith of our people in the national future. And it is important for the government to be the one who is magnanimous to stretch out the hand of peace.

Therefore, I’d like to take this opportunity today, tonight to announce a unilateral ceasefire by the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the war against the NPA starting tomorrow, which is the beginning of the Christmas season. It will last from December 16 to January 5th.

Going back to the war against corruption — not just the war against the NPA — money for investigating corrupt officials has increased along with more investigators. Passage of the electronic procurement law has reduced discretion, corruption and the cost of supplies.

The passage of new legislation, which is part of what the house has already passed and what we hope will be passed in the senate too after the tax on alcohol and cigarettes, is what is called the lateral attrition law or maybe better described as the accountability reform law. It will hold civil servants accountable for the revenue they raise — or they will lose their positions.

Private contractors, however, are often part of the corruption axis. They will not escape prosecution. By executive order, I’d like to let you know that I will ban all government contractors who have not paid their taxes or who have been implicated in corruption. Contractors can run but can’t hide from the wrath of

You, who live in advanced countries, in mature democracies know how important it is for the private sector to be as honest as you expect the public sector to be.

I invite all overseas Filipinos to welcome these initiatives that I have been describing towards national self-renewal with pride. I ask that you do what you can, from where you are, to help us keep confidence in the Philippines.

Tell your friends and associates abroad about our reform agenda to clean up government, to cut red tape, to reduce crime, to promote a friendly and predictable business climate, to have an atmosphere for a lasting and just peace.

I’m instructing the Commission on Overseas Filipinos and our embassies and consulates abroad — some of you are here — to help you spread the good news and to help you spread the news about our firm commitments.

With unity of purpose, our national spirit is fortified. The choice is ours to make. And I look upon you not only as heroes but also as partners for a secure and prosperous nation.

Once again, to our overseas Filipinos, our outstanding overseas Filipinos, who continue to love the Philippines, congratulations to all!

And thank you.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].