I welcome everyone who attended the Mindanao Cooperatives Summit.

Let us also congratulate Administrator Rosalinda Villaseca who is celebrating her birthday today.

Cooperatives are multiplying and expanding their businesses, which are the source of new jobs and further business growth. The government continues to strengthen cooperatives as an effective way for us to overcome poverty. We also affirm that cooperatives expand the spirit of volunteerism and give everyone confidence in their own endeavors.

I am pleased that the people of Mindanao know the effectiveness of cooperatives. The success of cooperatives here shows what can be done to combine profit, innovation and competitiveness with the goal of social justice. There are almost a thousand cooperatives here and more than a million members. For every ten adults living in Mindanao, one is a member of a cooperative. This is a good ratio, and I am confident that you will increase beyond the 100 best cooperatives in the country, thirty of which are here in Mindanao. I also hope that these thirty can participate among the largest businesses here in Mindanao.

The cooperative in Mindanao greatly helps in boosting the national economy, because its business volume reached almost P25 Billion in 2006, and you provided jobs for almost 30,000 people. I am also happy that sixty percent of your cooperatives are into microlending, because this is one of the most important programs of the administration for national development and job creation.

I know your issues, especially those concerning taxes. The matters that are in court will continue there in the courts, especially the issue of the qualification of the cooperatives. While, because there is a representative of the cooperative in Congress, I believe that many will support laws for the benefit of the cooperative.

We are grateful to the family of Congressman Guillermo Cua, representative of the NATCCO Party List, for their donated land to build a co-op training center in Mindanao. We have a contribution to help you build this HRD center.

Tomorrow we will sign the budget passed by Congressmn Cua and his colleagues in the legislature. It is a budget that reflects the will of the government to work together with Congress to invest in the people and keep the economy on a strong, stable path.

Through our efforts to strengthen cooperatives, we aim to help you fight poverty.

A strong and growing economy is the central pillar that we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. This is our motivation for getting up every day to work hard and focus like a laser beam to fix our economy. We have made tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and as we in the executive crack down on tax cheats so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people.

When we bring in investments including the cooperatives’ investments and create jobs, our people have a more stable and predictable life. And with more investments come more tax revenues that can be invested in schools, roads and bridges as well as healthcare, education and the environment. Over time, everyone will benefit.

Yet we are aware that no matter how much improvement there is at the top of the economic ladder, many of our people still struggle mightily. We are aware that many hard working men and women especially in Mindanao work every day just to put food on their table and provide adequate shelter for their families.

The high price of gasoline and everyday commodities hits our poor the hardest. While the high price of oil is a global issue outside the control of government, we have nevertheless taken and will continue to take actions to reduce the pain on our people of these high prices. We have cut tariffs. We have started providing targeted cash payments to the poorest of our poor to help them cope. We ask Congress to enact a Consumer Bill of Rights to protect our citizens from price gouging, false advertising and other scams that prey on our people.

Cooperatives can do much to reduce the pain on our people of high prices through bulk buying of inputs and transportation services and joint marketing. I instruct CDA Mindanao to work with DA, DTI, DOTC so that the Mindanao cooperatives can do more of these activities.

We live in a time of great challenges. The issues we champion define our being. We count the fight for a strong economy to cut poverty, the fight for a clean environment and the fight for a quality education the highest imperatives of our time.

Cooperatives have helped bring positive and lasting change for the nation. Cooperatives have helped create some of the 7 million jobs and brought in some of the billions in new investment. Cooperatives have helped bring unemployment down and bring down the incidence of hunger.

Cooperatives are among the first to benefit from our investments in people, such as education, health services and other essential services.

The government will seek the help of cooperatives to continue the growth of businesses because this boosts the economy.

The cooperatives in Mindanao are large and have helped in the progress of our nation. In the coming days, I will seek your help to accelerate the development of Mindanao, because you have already shown how much you can contribute to our progress.

I am confident that the cooperatives here will continue your role as one of the most important drivers of progress in Mindanao.

Many things are left to be done. I plan on working hard with you the next two years to fulfill our Philippine Reform Agenda until the day I leave office in 2010. I will count on you as we fight for the Economy, Education and the Environment. Will count on you as we work to fix the corruption that still plagues our nation.

I remain bullish on the cooperative movement, optimistic about the future of cooperatives and the future of our country. I am grateful for the privilege of serving Mindanao and the nation together with you.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo during the 4th Mindanao Cooperative Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123111/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1068&Itemid=38