Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina. Son of Licab, Nueva Ecija. Until now, his father is buried in Licab. Thank you for your beautiful poem and thank you for reminding me, according to what Governor Tommy Joson said, that more can be done if more help is given. Joey Lina told me to remind you that your IRA (Internal Revenue Allotment) is fully given to our administration. Not only your IRA, but the debts of the previous administration are still being paid to you. This includes what was withheld from you, called LGSEF (Local Government Support Fund). I have instructed the Department of Budget and Management to release the three billion pesos remaining in LGSEF.

I thank Governor Tommy Joson for inviting me again here to “Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija” (Cry of Nueva Ecija). I am grateful that he always invites me here in Nueva Ecija. It is a sign of support from the leadership and the people of Nueva Ecija for the Arroyo administration.

I would like to greet – even though I am with them – so, I greet my companion, Secretary Richard Gordon. He is here not only as Secretary of Tourism but also because he is the Cabinet Officer for Regional Development of Nueva Ecija. That means, in addition to the secretaries of departments related to your problems, you can still get help, double, from Secretary Richard Gordon.

I also greet all of you from the rice fields, the new capitol of Nueva Ecija under the leadership of my nephew, the mayor of Palayan City, Lorelie Fajardo. And her father, a Member of the Board of San Miguel Corporation, Rico Fajardo. Many from Nueva Ecija know that I have many relatives in Nueva Ecija. There are Macapagal women, eight sisters, all women, with only one brother. When they moved to Nueva Ecija from Lubao, that's why there are many Macapagals here even though they don't have the Macapagal family name because their grandmothers were women. That's why I can be considered a cousin of Nueva Ecija.

I would like to greet Secretary Obet Pagdanganan of DAR (Department of Agrarian Reform). I mean, I greet you, I'm with you. Obet is here because he is also a cousin of Tommy Joson. A cousin of ours, too, according to Rico Fajardo. And not only that, because many projects of DAR, foreign assisted projects, are located here in the province of Nueva Ecija.

I would like to greet… Ah, or introduce to you Secretary Milt Alingod. He is from Isabela. And I also have Secretary Cito Lorenzo of Agriculture with me. His message to you is this: “Of all the provinces in the Philippines, the largest amount of assistance received in agricultural technology is none other than the province of Nueva Ecija.”

I also greet, son of Nueva Ecija, from Talavera, my Presidential Assistant for North Luzon, Secretary Rene Diaz; also a son of Nueva Ecija, from Cabyao, our very, very good director of the NBI (National Bureau of Investigation), the bane of pyramid scammers, Director Reynaldo Wycoco; I greet Congressman from Maguindanao, Congressman Digs Dilangalen. Although he is from the opposition, I expect that he belongs to the democratic opposition and not to the destabilizing opposition.

Another cousin of my cousin. We are also talking about how many of my appointees, according to Tommy Joson, are from Nueva Ecija. This is a cousin of my cousin, from General Tinio, my Senior Military Assistant or Senior Aide, Commodore Abesamis. He is the replacement for General Boysie Braganza, who was my former senior aide, Senior Military Assistant, who is now leading the 7th division. And we know that the headquarters of the 7th division is here in Palayan, in Nueva Ecija. And I thank General Braganza that during the period of July 27, even as a soldier or official, no one joined the coup d’ etat from the 7th division. Perhaps part of that was General Braganza's leadership, also perhaps because many of those from the 7th division are from Nueva Ecija. So thank you for your support.

I would also like to greet – I mentioned Congressman Dilangalen – we also have a Congresswoman from Nueva Ecija who is here. She is our new Congresswoman. She was a member of one of my boards before becoming a congresswoman. She resigned one day because her case was won in the COMELEC (Commission on Elections), Congresswoman Leonila Chavez.

You mayors and town officials of Nueva Ecija, many of whom I already know and have visited, members of the Provincial Board led by Vice Governor Eduardo Joson IV, and barangay tanods (village watchmen) who have completed training. And I also greet General Braganza's partner in maintaining peace in Central Luzon, the Regional Director of Region III, Regional Director BG – that's what they call him – Quirol. And here is my fellow provincial, maybe with Nueva Ecija blood too, but I know he is my fellow provincial from Candaba – Police Director Ramsey Ocampo.

Friends, cousins here in Nueva Ecija, first of all, I would like to thank you again, people of Nueva Ecija, under the leadership of Governor Tommy Joson, for always inviting me to attend the celebration of “Unang Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija” (First Cry of Nueva Ecija) or “Araw ng Nueva Ecija” (Day of Nueva Ecija).

I have attended the day of Nueva Ecija many times. I remember once we even had a reenactment of the cry of Nueva Ecija. And thankfully, as I said to my people, we celebrate this because Nueva Ecija can truly be proud that it is one of the eight provinces that first revolted against the Spaniards. That's why there are eight rays on our flag. This represents, symbolizes the eight first provinces that launched a successful revolution against the Spaniards. I sometimes ask people, do you know what the eight first provinces are? They almost can't remember what those eight are. But because of Nueva Ecija, we always celebrate, we do not forget that Nueva Ecija is one of the great eight provinces that cried out.

And here in Nueva Ecija, I know, we really take pride in the role of the Nueva Ecijano in the history of the struggle to have our own republic. Aren't many towns in Nueva Ecija named after generals who led a successful revolution?

In this time, Nueva Ecija is important again in defending our republic, from the father of the city, Tommy Joson, to the barangay tanods who are always guarding our communities, you are needed in defending our Republic.

Tommy has done a lot against… Especially against the NPA (New People's Army). Tommy is even on the hit list of the NPA, right Tommy? Because his fight against those who want to overthrow our Republic is strong.

We really need to unite, especially a large province like Nueva Ecija, because if there is someone disturbing our Republic, we are all affected. So, my countrymen, especially the tanods (village watchmen) who have completed training, please inform the authorities of any information you gather about those who plan to cause trouble, especially about those with weapons. Because in that way, the wrongdoers will be caught immediately before they can carry out their evil plans.

To the barangay tanods who are graduating from training today, I congratulate you all. I congratulate Palayan because they were the first to have training. Now, all of Nueva Ecija is completing barangay tanod training. If we continue to be vigilant against these plagues of our society, our town will be peaceful.

I’m hopeful that the three weeks of hearings on the failed coup have shed light on its root causes and provocations. The findings of the Feliciano Commission will surely reinforce our consolidation measures in the armed forces, which are moving forward under combined force of justice and reforms. We must lend greater momentum to the speedy return of confidence in our political and economic stability. Enough of destabilization and strife. The energies of the nation must be refocused on the fundamental challenges of poverty, crime and terrorism.

I’ve called upon the officials and employees of the Defense Department to share obligations and responsibilities, implement important changes and be proactive. I aim to create an irreversible momentum of reforms to promote snappy performance, move logistics to the field, and reward courage and sacrifice. We shall push forward the institutional initiatives of Secretary Angelo Reyes. My priorities are: to reform the armed forces, push forward the peace process, and drive the anti poverty campaign. We must multiply our gains.

We have important accomplishments here in Nueva Ecija so that our blessings given to the people, not only of Nueva Ecija but through Nueva Ecija, to the entire Philippines, will flourish.

We all know that Nueva Ecija feeds the entire Philippines because of its large rice harvest. There are many facilities for agricultural development, such as the agricultural center, which I visited here to inaugurate, which came from the generosity of China.

On this occasion, I also want to announce that the bidding process has begun, so we will soon start the Cabanatuan bypass road. This bypass road is part of the Philippine-Japan Friendship Highway. Before, it had no budget cover. I looked for a budget cover. It will come from Plaridel, Bulacan to Cabanatuan City. It is almost 20 kilometers long and will have nine bridges. I looked for the budget for this. Do you know how much budget I looked for for you? Two billion is the budget allocated for this.

And I also learned here that there are those who plant onions – are you here, red onions? — I learned that you have complaints about the influx of red onions from abroad. Even before I came here, I investigated this. And according to the initial investigation, by investigators from Malacañang itself, it is connected to corruption in the department there in the Department of Agriculture. Proof that there is really a problem. Behind this problem, a representative of the D.A., of the Department of Agriculture who is helping to correct this problem received a threat to his life last Saturday. So this is a deep problem. We are facing it, so in addition to… Cito Lorenzo is here to remind us that in our administration, the largest agricultural technology assistance went to Nueva Ecija. Cito Lorenzo will ensure that he himself will fix the problem of the red onion farmers.

You can trust that your president, together with my Cabinet members here who are either from Nueva Ecija or who are making big contributions to Nueva Ecija, will always be by your side to support you towards the further success of our goals for the great province of Nueva Ecija, for our important region, for the whole country.

Every time I come here, I always remember the love of my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, and the father of Governor Tommy Joson. They were like brothers. And I am excited to enter the museum to see the pictures of our fathers loving each other.

Governor Joson, father, first became governor when my father took him in 1959 to be his candidate as governor. They were in the opposition then but won and then my father became president. So even though in… Since 1989, many have experienced different paths of politics, the Josons and I. Here we are together today, because it is not yet an election. We really need to think about unity, development. We have only one Republic. Even though we have many parties in our country, we have only one Republic. The threat now is not a political threat, it is a threat to our Republic. Let us unite for the peace and development of our country.

Let us strive for a strong Republic. Let us strive for a developed country. Let us strive for a happy and free people. Let us work together to fully achieve these aspirations.

So, cousins, fellow regionals, fellow provincials, countrymen, I greet you all. Let us remember the struggle of our ancestors in the first cry of Nueva Ecija. Let us continue to work for a strong Republic in honor of the heroes of the first cry of Nueva Ecija.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 107th Commemoration of “Unang Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija” and Graduation Ceremonies of Barangay Tanods. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194532/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7137&Itemid=38