Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Annual General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Waterfront Hotel, Cebu, November 29, 2007]

Thank you very much Secretary Remonde for your introduction.

Let me begin by greeting our host city mayor, Mayor Tommy Osmeña; (applause) and the boss of the mayors of the Cebu chapter hosting you today, Governor Gwen Garcia; (applause) of course your national president, Mayor Monching Guico; (applause) Congratulations for being the first LMP representative to head the Ulap. (Applause) To all our new officers and re-elected officers of the LMP who are here on stage and to all our mayors from all over the country.

How impressive that you’re all here in the first LMP convention ever held outside Manila. (applause) Congratulations on your election last May; congratulations to the officers on your election to the LMP and congratulations and thank you to all our local officials, especially in the areas hit and threatened by the recent typhoons, for your immediate response to the needs of your constituents. Some of you, some of them are not here yet because they have not yet finished attending to the needs of their constituents. But, I’m glad that enough of those affected by the recent typhoons are here to be able to tell me as I was walking through the aisle what you have been able to do to attend to the needs of your constituents. And I congratulate you for that! (applause)

You have shown our people that you are leaders they can rely on in their hour of need. A leader must be driven by a strong vision, whether for the municipality or the city in case of Mayor Osmeña, or the province in case of Governor Garcia or the nation in my case. A leader must be driven by the determination to deliver a better life. Let us all be driven by our faith in God and our faith in the people of our municipalities and this nation. (applause)

Let us get up every day and fight on behalf of the average, hard- working Filipino in your municipalities. We share the same values of family, hard work and faith. Family and opportunity for our children is a central guiding value of every Filipino. That is why we believe so strongly in education as the key to our next generation in order to get ahead and get a good job. And that is why education is the biggest item in the national budget as well as that is why your real estate taxes go to the school fund.

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hard working men and women of your municipalities and this nation put their family first. And the best gift any family can give to a child, and any nation can give to its people, is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, justice and self worth. That is why we should help each other continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level. So, if there are any of you who still have grade schools in your municipalities where the ratio is more than 50 students to one classroom for every shift of two shifts, please let us know so that we can prioritize the building of classrooms in your municipalities (applause). Please let Monching Guico know so that he can give me the list of the municipalities where the student classroom ratio is more than 50:01 for two shifts.

And all of these values we put in education is also why we will bolster our college scholarship program for your high school students ready for higher education. We have scholars in our CHED system and Cerge Remonde who is here, mainly because he is the cord for Region VII but, also because he’s the Presidential Management Staff Director General. I asked him to make sure that in our college scholarship program, the best high school graduate of every municipality will be a recipient and that will be called the “town’s scholar” of your municipality (applause). While we’re at it, talking about classrooms for your towns to complete the 50:01 ratio for two shift, and giving… Making sure that the best high school graduate this coming school year this coming graduation will be sure of a college education.

I also heard very loudly your applause on the request to allocate ambulances, fire trucks and patrol cars to all provincial chapters (applause). So, I told Cerge Remonde that in the chapters where not all have ambulances or not all have fire trucks or not all have patrol cars, then to allocate at least one ambulance or one fire truck or one patrol car to the provincial chapter. Okay, Cerge (applause), at least. At least because we have to check on how many have and how many don’t have. Remember your resolution is provincial chapter not every municipality (applause).

In any case, over the last six years, I think if we have an accounting of how many municipalities have received at least an ambulance or a patrol car or a fire truck. Many of you have already received from the national government. So, let us work on those who do not have any of these. And we will pass it through the chapter. So, the chapter will be responsible or will be credited for at least one of them. The rest we will have to deal with each other directly.

When we talk about giving what is due to our, to those who serve the people, I think we all also have to give the proper due to the teachers. And I was talking about making sure that every municipality is complete on grade school classrooms. Every municipality’s best student goes to college. It’s also important that the teachers of all municipalities are properly given their rightful due. Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women, our children would fall short of their dreams and aspirations. We’re deeply indebted to the hard work and dedication of all our teachers. Their work is noble and patriotic. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino.

And just as the national government helps the local government with your educational needs, I would also urge the local government as much as possible to use your school board fund to give our teachers a little extra something at least for this Christmas (applause).

Even the success, even the success of the recently-held barangay elections would not have been possible without the vigor and vigilance of our teachers who selflessly showed so that we can all exercise our right to suffrage. Their industry indeed, should not go unappreciated. That’s why two weeks ago we ordered the Budget Secretary to release an additional one thousand pesos to all teachers who served in the last elections (applause).

The augmentation we ordered brought to 2,500 the total remuneration teachers are receiving for the election. The 2007 budget authorized 1,500 honorariums for barangay election duty, but we adjusted this pursuant to our powers and procedures vested by law, from savings made possible by the prudent utilization of our fiscal surplus.

I’m also instructing the Department of Budget and Management and the Department of Education to coordinate with the Commission on Elections in revisiting policies pertaining to the release of pay for teachers marshaled for election duty so that the miscommunication that attended the barangay polls should not happen again. And I ask you– the mayors to check also whether the teachers in your municipalities were able to receive their full 2,500 pesos for election duty. And if you know of teachers who were not able to receive this please let Monching Guico know so that we can also do justice to the teachers who teach our children so well (applause).

This financial incentive to our teachers was extended to them by a grateful government not just for the services beyond the call of duty in the last elections but to the sacrifices they continue to endure in the molding of minds of our young. We have also assuaged their sacrifices by the two salary adjustments we’ve had in the last two years. And if Congress will pass our bill there will be another salary adjustment for our teachers this coming July (applause). Please let them know the good news.

Because you and I should count on our teachers to teach our young the values of honesty and hard work, especially as Monching Guico said in his speech that the League of Municipalities wants to promote the vales of good governance in what you will be carrying out in the next three years.

The people deserve an honest hardworking government just as they are honest and hardworking. Let us strive to stamp out corruption and set a new standard of governance for our municipalities and our nation as a whole. Corruption saps the lifeblood of our political system. It must be stamped out if the Philippines is to reach the verge of first world in 20 years which is our aspiration.

That is why in organizing our pro-performance system which where the secretariat is lodged in the Presidential Management Staff we have included the union of local authorities of the Philippines as an observer in our monitoring of projects to make sure that they are aboveboard as far as their implementation is concerned. We had a meeting recently and a representative of Ulap attended—the executive director.

Public service is an honor that the people of our municipalities provide their leaders, and the people provide their national leaders as well. But they do so with the expectation that those leaders will use that platform to deliver the programs and services needed to move our society forward. And I guess if you’re wondering why I’m only giving at least one remember that I am the President that gave you your IRA in full and even paid the IRA debts of previous presidents (applause). So, let us use our IRA to maximize the services for our people.

To reach the verge of first world in 20 years, we will need a robust middle class, world class infrastructure and strong institutions of government. And that is why in creating a robust middle class in ensuring world class infrastructure, in strengthening institutions I am very grateful to the league of municipalities for your two resolutions endorsing the ratification of the Japan-Philippines economic partnership agreement (applause). I’m sure many of your municipalities have either experienced a Japanese investment or more likely experienced the blessings of a project that was funded by Japanese assistance whether a JBIC loan or a JICA grant. Therefore, we know how important Japan is to our quest to reach first world in 20 years (applause).

Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affects us here and now.

Rice is not only a staple food for our people, it is symbolic of our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. Let us together commit to ensuring that the needy in your municipalities throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season. And that is why another project we would like to share with you aside from patrol cars, ambulances and fire trucks is to have the “tindahan natin” programs where you have the sari-sari stores that sell rice for only p 18.25 or p 18.50 no matter what the market price will be outside, because surely every municipality have at least an enclave where the people are very poor. And let us make sure that in those enclaves you all have a “tindahan natin” that we can capitalize (applause).

Those living in poverty have declined, in fact the poverty rate in our administration is the slowest in our history. But we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why, during the holiday season and beyond, let us do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices. And rather than having a new initiative every year, I thank Monching for giving us a report on your upland development program that was launched last year. Because that is indeed a very important program.

We cannot forever be increasing the area of lowland for agriculture. We must increase productivity on the one hand on the remaining lowlands which gets smaller and smaller simply from the housing needs of the people not to mention the needs of industry and services. But if we’re going to expand any land for agriculture it will have to be now in the uplands. And well, we have been to many upland areas– you and I, I think most of us have tasted upland rice. It’s very good and very healthy.

So, I would want that if we are going to be self sufficient in rice and make rice affordable to our poor, let us also make sure that those uplands aside from the high value crops like vegetables, we also plant upland rice because we need that to feed our people, to feed the hungry and the poor.

Monching was talking about legacy. And I’m glad that you think of legacy not just of what will happen today or tomorrow. Through the end of our terms, let us aim to provide political stability, continued economic growth and sustainable peace and order. And i know that patrol cars, fire trucks and ambulances are important for political stability, peace and order and sustained economic growth (applause).

So, we shall help you there as much as we can but, our commitment to the provincial chapter is one of each of these (applause). But as I said, it doesn’t stop us from making sure that all municipalities will eventually have at least one of these as we have been trying to do all these years from 2001. In fact, Gwen told me that she’s taking a big burden away from me because she’s providing all the municipalities of Cebu with these needs (applause).

The important thing is let us not let the nation slip into election year instability. Let us do what we can to make this next three years an era of peace, re-assurance and hope.

Let us assure the people that we lead with a steady hand to guide the nation. Let us not falter in keeping our hand on the tiller of the ship of state, because that ship of state at the end of the day depends on how steady the different municipalities are. I’ve always said that the hardest job after a president is a mayor. (applause) with due respect to governors like Gwen, I really think that mayors have a very very hard job because you’re the ones in the frontline and I sympathize with you and I try my best to help you.

So, I hope that (applause) as we move along, I hope that at the end of the day, you will be able to say that you have provided what your people expected of you or what the people deserve from you– an honest, hardworking government because you strengthened your institution with the good use of your IRA and because we had a good cooperation between the national and the municipal governments.

Maraming salamat and have a very successful assembly here in Cebu (applause).

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Annual General Assembly of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135813/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2261&Itemid=38