Thank you very much Secretary Bert Romulo.

Our honorable heroine of EDSA and who became an example for eighty more EDSAs around the world, President Cory Aquino; Where we went here in EDSA back in 1986 and defended democracy several times after that, President Fidel V. Ramos; Secretary Romulo; Co-chairman of the People Power Commission, Ramon Del Rosario; the various commissioners of EDSA People Power; the various Government officials here; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; our companions here today — and I am pleased to see in reading your banners that those who came here, the majority are representatives of 150,000 families who have benefited from our granting the right to purchase the land located here in Metro Manila and neighboring areas, this morning the last ones to receive land titles today were NAPICO of Pasig; representatives of civil society; my dear countrymen:

Today, Sixteen Years ago, the Filipino people reclaimed our freedom and democracy. Perhaps in the history of a Nation, Sixteen Years is just a blink of an eye, but between EDSA 1 and EDSA Dos is a generation. The majority who attended EDSA Dos were young people who were still babies when EDSA 1 took place.

The day after I became president thirteen months ago, during the fiesta of Sto. Niño which took place on January 21, 2002, I said I was telling the whole world that what blossomed in EDSA 2, and should be the fruit, is for the sake of the youth. To our youth, even though they are too young to attend EDSA 1, we see a new generation of Filipinos who grew up without fear; who recognize democracy as a worthy system for running our Government; and are fully prepared to hold with full heartfelt courage the banner of freedom and governance that does not belong to a few but belongs to everyone. I think, in my reflection, one reason perhaps why these young people led EDSA Dos is because they grew up in this culture, a culture of democracy, because that is the environment defended and nurtured by the President of EDSA 1, President of People Power around the world, the honorable President Cory Aquino. So let us thank her.

And whatever role was played by not opening the second envelope, the role it played in EDSA Dos, that which was played by the soldiers who broke away from the dictatorship and to join them, millions of citizens attended EDSA, these soldiers who broke away from the dictatorship were led by the Vice-Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, General Fidel V. Ramos. So let us also thank him.

In the colorful history of our country, many sacrifices have been made by our ancestors as proof of their love for their homeland. Rizal and Marcelo H. Del Pilar opened the eyes of their fellow Filipinos to the truth that we have our own country and the obligation of all of us that no one will love and care for our country but ourselves. Bonifacio and Aguinaldo fought for our independence; Quezon, Osmeña, Roxas, Recto fought peacefully for our desire to be free again; a whole generation fought for the dignity of the Philippines during World War II. And the sovereignty and freedom that were lost during martial law were also fought for in the barricades, in the streets, and, above all, by defending the principle that every vote of every Filipino is sacred, in the Snap Election in 1986, so we now honor Evelio Javier as an example and symbol of such regard for the Filipino vote. We also showed our spirit of course in gathering the rich and the poor here in EDSA in February of that year.

The judgment of the Filipino people is that the most meaningful event in our entire history is the People Power in 1986. The most important event in the Philippines in the 20th century, the 1986. This proved that the freedom and democracy created by our heroes were valued and defended by succeeding generations. When the Filipino people gathered and convened here in EDSA, in Baguio, in Cebu, and in other parts of our archipelago, we showed each other and the whole world that Filipinos will not allow themselves to be slaves to anyone.

Jose Rizal said a people who submit to slavery deserve to be slaves. We showed the world that the Filipino is not a slave or a coward. We showed the world that the Filipino not only treasures freedom, but is prepared to make the supreme sacrifice for freedom.

In this place, the people united. Soldiers, the poor, those with a name or without recognition, those with money or without, belonging to all walks of life and sectors of society, went to EDSA to come together and fight.

History and future generations of Filipinos should not forget what General Fidel V. Ramos, who became President, did. When the test of his conscience came, his answer was clear and courageous: he would not allow the aspirations of his countrymen to be set aside. In his view, he showed that he was not afraid to die just to restore the honor and dignity of the Filipino soldier. He went to Camp General Aguinaldo and there declared throughout the archipelago that even if he died, he would not accept the idea that there were no generals and soldiers with the courage to offer their lives for democracy and freedom.

When our beloved Cardinal Sin called on us to go to EDSA, millions voluntarily left our homes and abandoned the security of our families to take a stand.

When we gathered, families, the people gathered in EDSA, at no time did we remove from our minds the two reasons why the Filipino people were just waiting for the opportunity to show that we would not allow ourselves to be slaves to a dictatorship again. In the minds and feelings of many of us was the blood offered by Ninoy Aquino to prove to his countrymen that the life of every Filipino was created by God to fight for the freedom of our motherland. He said the Filipino is worth dying for. In the minds and hearts of every Filipino was the call of Cory Aquino, our very courageous Heroine who ran for president against the strength of the dictatorship, not to back down, she told us, not to back down in the face of the weapons, threats, and bribery of the dictatorship.

And if Fidel Ramos showed the dignity of the soldiers, Cory Aquino was our inspiration for the entire people, the conscience of the nation and a symbol of freedom that was about to be regained by all of us when we were in EDSA. And so we regained our Freedom.

In Manila, the powerless, the unarmed, guarded and ensured the safety of the soldiers; in Cebu, it started with the statements of Cory Aquino, that the fight against darkness is faith. Cory Aquino asked the nuns in Cebu to pray; Cardinal Sin called on the nuns in Manila to pray. In EDSA, and in the millions of homes throughout the archipelago, priests and nuns and Filipino families offered our prayers to Almighty God.

We said in the campaign in 1986, enough, too much, change, we said. This was the call of the people during the Snap Election, this was also the call of the people in EDSA.

Enough of covering up the desire of all of us to be free.

The abuse of Filipino human rights has gone too far.

Enough with cooperating with agents of darkness.

The corruption is excessive; the corrupt must be replaced to rectify everything.

We are here today because we believe the spirit of EDSA 1 and the spirit of EDSA 2 — which is only one spirit — continues to live. But the spirit of EDSA 1 and 2 has to be deepened and transformed, if it is to live on for generations to come.

People power must be transformed into a force for nation- building.

In 1986 and then in 2001, a million people trekked to EDSA and the EDSAs of our other cities. The people sacrificed, we all sacrificed our energies, our time, and even risked their lives first to topple a dictatorship, and then to topple a corrupt government.

16 years after EDSA 1, one year after EDSA 2, we still look with deep sadness at the plight of our poor, some of whom, unfortunately and understandably, have started to believe that EDSA doesn’t really matter much for them.

There is now a call to our people, to our leaders who have kept aflame the spirit of people power.

This is now the call, it is not a call to summon our courage to fight just with prayers and flowers, a dictatorship or a corrupt regime.

It is not a call for massing at EDSA and committing to stay here for days until an enemy of the people falls.

The people power call of today to our people is: bear the heavier responsibility for building our nation not just for four days, but day in and day out, for years, even for a generation.

So it was right what Jim Paredes said earlier, each of us needs a daily heroism. That’s why we have a box and we have papers that say this movement of Jim, that we should put our pledge – and Joe Concepcion read several examples earlier of pledges, pledges of various resolutions that have been submitted. Here it says, live out EDSA. Honest governance, response to poverty.

And this is what I put: as a Filipino, I will listen more. I will be more patient in listening to the people. This is my offering to the Philippine nation. Signed, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

If we could put our lives on the line in EDSA in 1986 and 2001, we can certainly sacrifice just a small part of our character, or our wealth, or our time in building a new Philippines. If we can tap even just one-hundredth of the tremendous energy and patriotism of EDSA 1 and EDSA 2 in the next few years, we can build a better, prosperous Philippines.

This new people power, the real EDSA 3 — not the one that happened last May but the one that we will do together through our little pledges that will be fulfilled everyday of our lives the next few years — this real EDSA 3 will not be as dramatic, it will not even be as glorious as EDSA 1 and EDSA 2; and there will be no date, February 25 or January 20, when this real EDSA will be celebrated because it is for every day of our lives.

And its heroes unlike the very clear icons, Cory and Cardinal, FVR, the heroes of EDSA 3 will be anonymous. But its struggle cannot be undertaken in days, but in years, even decades. Its battlefield will not be here at EDSA but in our country’s shanty areas and in the poorest farms of our Country. And yes, even in Basilan where the ultimate enemy is not the Abu Sayyaf, but the ultimate enemy is poverty.

Thus, this new people power’s enemy will not be a dictatorial regime or a corrupt government, this new people power’s enemy will be the scourge of poverty.

The rich and the middle-class demonstrated their patriotism at the past two EDSAs. But the new EDSA will require more of the rich and the middle-class: for you to give your time, your energy, and your resources. even as the rich have found myriad forms of toppling two regimes, the rich and the middle-class, they will find ways and means to help our poor.

And the new EDSA’s enemy will not only be the scourge of poverty, the new EDSA’s enemy will also be ourselves. It will require changing the culture of corruption in our country, in such mundane things, as mentioned earlier, as refusing to pay bribes for traffic violation or for getting a clearance from a government office; and of course giving up the culture of bribe-asking.

It will require a real concern for capital to give more of their profits to their workers. But it will also require our unions to look with more realism their wage demands. It will require our politicians to look at their positions not as posts for rent-seeking and ego trips, but as opportunities to really serve the people. But also it will require the citizens looking at government not as something we demand benefits and dole-outs from, but a people’s state we should always be asking, “how can we help the government do its job?”

Let us work together to fight poverty, to develop our country.

This is the new People Power for the first decade of the twenty-first century. This is the struggle we are launching. Help me in this struggle.

Friends, thank you for attending today. Thank you for attending People Power 2. And I know we are thanked for our attendance at People Power 1. Let us pray now — we prayed during People Power 1, we prayed during People Power 2 — let us pray again now because now the people are not waiting for drama but for the everyday small sacrifices from each of us.

Thank you very much and Happy EDSA Anniversary to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 16th Anniversary Celebration of the EDSA People Power Revolution. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230422/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7607&Itemid=38