Thank you very much, Secretary Ronnie Puno, for introducing me. And please convey my congratulations! To the police who arrested P.O.1 Aron Golifardo, the alleged gunman in the killing of Fernando Batul in Puerto Princesa. This shows that we do not tolerate crimes against journalists, against activists, and against any citizen of the Philippines.

To all of you, I also want to greet you. Here is Governor Magsaysay, good afternoon; here is Mayor Gordon, good afternoon; here is Congresswoman Magsaysay, good afternoon; earlier I saw Congressman Nantes, I don't know if he joined us; and of course our councilors, Chairman Datuin, President Fortuna, Councilor Fernandez, Vice President Apacible. I also want to greet the various officials, both appointed and elected, and to all the delegates to the 6th Philippine Councilors’ League Luzon Island Congress, good afternoon to all of you.

Our setting is very beautiful. I hope you are having a nice time here in Subic, which we want to be the best hub in the region before we reach 2010. And first of all, I want to thank you, you are on the frontline of governance. And at your level you see the problems of your communities. And of course not all of these can be solved at your level. But while you are not able to do this, you convey the solutions and the problems to the attention of the relevant authorities, including myself, the president. And because of this, especially through your conventions, we can find solutions together to the problems of your community. And I know that I can always count on you to pursue the welfare of the people. So thank you all, and perhaps we can tell our fellow citizens in your community that it is time for the people to reap the benefits of the reforms we are making in the national treasury.

And I hope you will tell our citizens in your community that we will ensure that together the people will get the majority of the benefits from the development programs. For example, earlier, we came from Casecnan Dam and opened the dam gates so that irrigation water can flow from Nueva Ecija to Bulacan, to Pampanga. And now we can also… I told the NIA to start studying the other side, the one going to North Western Nueva Ecija up to Pangasinan. Because we want to open many hectares of land for agriculture. So you councilors, let's work together so that you can allocate budgets in your council as a counterpart to irrigate new agricultural lands. Put in a counterpart, the national government also has a counterpart.

Why am I offering this to our Councilors’ League in Luzon? Because our economic fundamentals are steady and strong. We see that the peso has weakened lately. That recent setback of the peso is a result of transient developments in the economy that posed no direct long-term threat to our own economy. It is coming from temporary events in the world economy. I will not elaborate, our economic managers can take care of that, but I want to let you know — perhaps our Subic officials know — investor confidence is strong, right Chairman, Administrator? Hanjin, about a billion dollars is the investment here in the next ten years but starting with 100 million dollars now. And isn't the Chinese Communist Party of Heibe where Beijing is located, we’re negotiating with them for a 300 million-dollar investment. The important thing is the rent that is being debated.

But that shows good examples of investor confidence. Their confidence in the vigorous efforts of the government to balance the budget, improve the overall security situation. So I congratulate Ronnie, as he said — didn't you meet the other day? — he said, “give me two days,” he said to my colleagues… Ah he was with them, I wasn't with the meeting in the national security cluster, “give me two days, I will solve the mystery,” he said. Today, they arrested the guy. Actually, yesterday, it was just released.

And that’s what we should all work on, the security situation, and we should all work together so that the investors will continue to have confidence in our capacity to push growth and pursue political renewal. We expect the peso to maintain it’s trend and resiliency through time as the global financial market settle down.

While we push for economic reform, our final hurdle is our outdated, outmoded and out of touch political system. And so honorable councilors’ of luzon, your support for charter change is indispensable and I’m grateful for it to our officials of the Councilors’ League.

Aside from energy, I also ask your group to lead in an honest-to-goodness energy conservation program in view of the rising cost of oil pushed by events beyond us. The increase in the price of oil in the world does not come from us. First of all, the demand, China and India, the two biggest countries in the world have a very rapid economic growth rate so the demand is large. Then there were problems in Iran, problems in Nigeria, among the biggest producers of oil. But I am told by Saudi Aramco that the supply is not lacking, they can always come up with the supply. The problem is that due to the demand of China and India and the supply of Iran and Nigeria, speculation occurs, hoarding occurs around the world. So, those are not things of our doing. We are price takers in oil so we all need to work for energy independence.

I want to ask our councilors’ from all over Luzon to help us promote the use of oil substitutes like ethanol. Ethanol can come from cassava. Natural gas and coco-diesel, there are so many coconut plantations here in Luzon. Isn't there any here in Zambales? Pampanga and Zambales are among the only eight provinces that don’t have coconut but everywhere else in the country has coconut.

Do you know, Luzon councilors, that here in Luzon only one percent of our electricity comes from crude oil. We’ve been relying on coal and other sources but because somehow their price is also indirectly tied up to the price of oil, so we need to increase our independence from oil.

So I instructed the PNOC to release 500 million pesos to promote Jatropha, the purchase of Jatropha because the seeds of Jatropha can replace diesel fuel. You know the goodness of Jatropha, if we blend 10, 5, 10, 20 percent ethanol into our gasoline it will be cheaper and cleaner. Coco bio-diesel, if we put a one percent blend, they say the distance will be four percent longer. But diesel, coco bio-diesel… Ah no, Jatropha does not need to be blended, it can be a 100 percent substitute, we can completely do away with oil-based diesel if that is what we will use. So plant Jatropha on your lands that cannot be planted with other types of plants, because it grows very well on marginal land. In other areas Jatropha grows in sandy soil. Here in Pampanga, Zambales we are all lahar so Jatropha can grow very well in these areas. We need massive planting of Jatropha because Petron is ready to build a plant to convert Jatropha into diesel, what is needed is the production of raw materials.

This can be included in your local livelihood programs expected by our administration. And the goodness of this is that the Jatropha planted will create more jobs and increase the income of the people. So coordinate with PNOC and your counterpart in Jatropha.

Meanwhile, energy, the charter change, peace and order, please work closely with your police officers. This is one of the best police officers, Raffy Rafanan, I have appointed him here in Region III. so, please work closely with him and his other officers. There is Oca Calderon, the deputy director general of administration. Please work together with them and stand guard to keep the jobs and livelihood of your constituencies unsullied against crime and terror. And in fighting this, even General Tolentino — who I took from there, from Mindanao, fighting terrorists there — I brought him here to Luzon to help you fight terrorists.

Join us also in our spirited fight against graft by keeping an eye on various government projects and undertakings. Monitor them so you can see, for example, farm-to-market roads we put in money but the national government can hardly go there to inspect. So, I hope you look if they are really being done or the irrigation projects if they are really being done?

Our very beautiful Clark-Subic road. Mike Defensor and I were flying over it because, you know, we were coming from Clark going to Subic, we were really flying over the road. They have built so much. Watch over that to make sure there are no slippages and especially of course in your areas of responsibility. You are leaders of this nation as you are leaders of your communities. And it's our moral obligation to bring our people together to build a strong, secure and enduring nation well-respected in the international community.

It was just right that you held your meeting in Subic, because Subic is very international. And so I hope because you are having a nice time in this beautiful park-resort, I hope also that the world will see that the councilors of Luzon and the councilors of the Philippines are one with all levels of government in making lives better for our people and whoever comes to create jobs for these people.

To all of you, congratulations!

Thank you very much. Good day!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the 6th Luzon Island Congress of the Philippine Councilors’ League. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213205/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2717&Itemid=38