Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Launching of the “Nurse Assigned in Rural Service” (NARS) Project in Region 12

Thank you very much, Secretary Roque, for your introduction.

Thank you very much as well, Mayor Sema, for your words of welcome and words of comfort. What Metro Manila is experiencing now, the Cotabato area also experienced when the Mindanao River overflowed. So, I know that you understand the feelings of the people of Metro Manila. Our NARS trainees; other officials; friends; ladies and gentlemen.

I don't know if you remember, six months ago, at the height of the global economic crisis, as part of our Economic Resiliency Program, we launched NARS, N-A-R-S. That means – Nurses Assigned in Rural Service.

Its purpose is to resolve the problem of too many nurses without experience – those new graduates, without any experience – so they can be used, so they can be mobilized and promote the health of the people and bring the people closer to the government. The idea is to mobilize nurses who are waiting in their hometowns for work because of the crisis in America, the demand for nurses has decreased, so experienced nurses are chosen, those without experience are not hired. So we created this program – in this program, we not only utilize professionals who are not doing anything, we also add soldiers against disease.

Their term of service is six months. We started six months ago, now, the six months are over, and our nurses here in front with the tag are finishing their program today – last day, September. And we expect that now and you have experience, what Secretary Roque said that usually, you would even pay to train in a hospital, you have gained experience, so, your capability to be hired permanently has increased and DOLE will help in choosing you for permanent employment.

Now that the first six months are over – first batch, we have a second recruitment that will start tomorrow, October 1.

And on this occasion, those of you in the back, on this occasion, we are expanding the program.

So, DOH, please take note that my instructions are followed. We are launching today the second NARS, N-A-R-S. Now it’s called ‘Nurses Assigned in Rural Schools’. Those who join this will serve as nurses who will go around school districts because we don’t have school nurses in public schools. And Wow! You won’t lack work, you will teach hygiene, you will teach proper nutrition, you will teach sanitation, and on top of this duty, you will do this on top of your usual service of providing service to those in need of health care, and referral.

And on top of offering the presence of government health in schools, you, because you are there, will at least reduce the work done by organic personnel regarding health. So, this is our new NARS. So, we expect that this second batch will help not only the health of the community, but will also help improve our school system.

So to all of you, congratulations! You are part of the 5,000 new NARS trainees who will start your six months tomorrow and after that, you will be more qualified and hopefully by that time, the global economy will have improved and there will be a greater demand for our very skilled nurses in the Philippines.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the launching of “Nurse Assigned in Rural Service” (NARS) Project in Region 12. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134230/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26352&Itemid=38