Thank you very much, P.A. Jess Dureza for introducing me to everyone.

Our brothers and sisters here in Zamboanga Del Sur under the governor of Zamboanga Del Sur Aurora Cerilles; our Mayor here in Lakewood, Mayor Domingo Mirrar and all the officials of Lakewood and all the officials of the province and the various cities in the province of Zamboanga Del Sur; our Congresswoman here in the district, Congresswoman Nenette San Juan; and may I greet a very, very special guest who came all the way this far away to see how we can spread friendship and cooperation with the United States of America, American Ambassador Frank Ricciardone; our Neighbor, the governor of Sibugay, Governor George Hofer; other officials from Sibugay and various People’s Organizations from Sibugay like Prince Datu Tukan e Dakula VI, the Datu Dakula of Sibugay. Where is he now? Thank you for your gift to me; one of our children from Mindanao who is with my Cabinet, our Presidential Adviser for Jobs Creation Cito Lorenzo; Vice Governor Ariosa; board members; all mayors; Vice Mayor Magaso; all members of the Lakewood Municipal Council; Deputy Presidential Assistant Boyet Dela Cruz; Ato Vera Cruz; our other officials; another Neighbor, mayor of Pagadian City, Mayor Pulmones; our brothers and sisters throughout Zamboanga Del Sur because our celebration now, is a celebration of the entire province, a happy anniversary, golden jubilee to all of you. And thank you for your theme ‘Megayon’, which its meaning is the unification of our various tribes here, Christians, Lumad and Muslims.

I know that here in Lakewood 70 percent of the population are Subanen. So my special welcome to the Subanen here in Lakewood and in Zamboanga Del Sur.

It is really good that your theme is ‘Megayon’ because one of my principles for Mindanao is that everyone must realize that the Philippines is a multi-ethnic society where if you are Tagalog or Cebuano, you are Filipino. If you are Muslim, Christian, Lumad, you are Filipino. If you are Chinese, if you are mestizo, you are Filipino. And we need a lot of our different cultures, we need social justice for all. We need to institutionalize accommodation of all ethnic traditions and one of the good things here in Zamboanga del sur is that we have seen that there is really institutionalized accommodation of all ethnic traditions especially the Christian, Muslim and Lumad.

Here in Zamboanga Del Sur one of your good accomplishments during my administration is your help not only in my principle for Mindanao but also in my agricultural modernization. Perhaps we don't see it here in Lakewood because Lakewood is mountainous but in the plains there in the lowlands of Zamboanga Del Sur together with our various pioneers in the new technology in our agricultural modernization, nothing else but hybrid rice that can double or perhaps triple our harvests and income of our farmers.

And here in Lakewood, as far as I know because this is mountainous, perhaps there is no irrigation, your products here are exotic fruits, like durian and lanzones. I also know that maybe one day in the afternoon, the time will come that this very beautiful city of Lakewood will also become a tourist spot.

I also know that there is an investor who wants to start a palm oil plantation here in Lakewood. But they say, don't clap yet. But they say that in order for them to start the palm oil plantation, they need to cut our CADC first. That's not good. Don't believe it because that already happened in Lanao and what happened in Lanao, the forests were cut and then little planting of palm oil. And it wasn't completed the delivery because they said the land is too small. The road is too far, it's not viable. So the investment and the people there in that city have no jobs until now.

That will not happen in my administration. But my administration saw, investigated this case so I don't want that to happen, that sad experience that happened there, to happen here in Lakewood. So the important thing is to continue our other good things that we have seen, that there is a competitive advantage here. Your fruits are good and these little tourists that are coming for eco-tourism. But throughout Zamboanga Del Sur and it is also important if there is CADC, it is important that we continue our reforestation here in Lakewood.

This… Today, I have various gifts for your 50th Anniversary. First of all, we have seen from the d.a. that this farm-to-market road has been completed. And this farm-to-market road will be spent one million pesos here in Lakewood. This is under my project last year which aims to increase domestic demand through an agricultural modernization project. So here in Lakewood, Mayor Mao really chose the farm-to-market road and it is now finished.

There is also various assistance for your farmers here. There is no place here that is far from the town center, but I also want to announce to all of you that we have a multi-flyer farm with 20 pullets, 22 cockers and a 1,000 egg capacity incubator for your poultry raisers. And there are still 1,500 assorted planting materials.

That is our assistance for the city and Lakewood. But since today is our fiesta, not only here in Lakewood but in all of Zamboanga Del Sur. I want to convey to you a new focus of our administration which is assistance to our small and medium enterprises. Last year, I gave one million pesos to all cities for agricultural modernization like the farm-to-market road here. This year, our new focus is credit facilities for small and medium enterprises. I want there to be a project of one-town one-product. Perhaps here in Lakewood, our product for one-town is our exotic fruits. And throughout Zamboanga Del Sur, it is important that all cities choose what a good product is. So I requested that my colleague, who is also a friend until now, the provincial director of the Department of Trade and Industry, Alex Fernandez, come to our celebration. Where is Alex? Ok, Alex.

Through Alex Fernandez, the provincial director, will give… I will give Zamboanga Del Sur an initial ten million pesos for this small and medium enterprise project — one-town one-product. How many cities are here in Zamboanga? Twenty-six, so perhaps this ten million will go to the first ten that submit their project proposals. One Million pesos for every town. So, once this ten million is finished, Alex will return to me so that we can still borrow another ten million.

So, we already know here Alex, here in Lakewood the one-town one-project is really exotic fruits. So you need to organize them with the D.A. so they can plant and sell their product and this one million pesos is their capital for this project. It’s a loan, not a dole-out, it needs to return to my funds. Because what I am giving now is my advance but the papers will go through the Landbank of the Philippines. So they can be collected with payment because it needs to be an enterprise.

Now, for the other nine cities that will follow. As Secretary Cito Lorenzo said, one of the good and beautiful things happening here in Zamboanga Del Sur, Zamboanga Del Sur will now be merged as the leading propagator of new hybrid rice. So Alex, I want you to look for cities where we can propagate seed propagation of hybrid rice. Then give their organization and whatever enterprise capital of one million pesos. One million pesos per city that starts or continues its propagation of hybrid rice.

Now, once that is finished, we will go to the other cities here in Zamboanga Del Sur and my goal is to finish this year or perhaps finish the next 12 months that all the cities in Zamboanga Del Sur will complete their one-town one-product small and medium enterprises. Not micro Alex, ha. Small and medium enterprises. He said now that our neighboring governor in Sibugay next, we will also be given this same project in Sibugay.

Why is it like Jess Dureza and Nenette San Juan said that I am truly a Mindanaoan. Because I grew up in a neighboring province there in Iligan in Lanao Fel Norte. And in my grandmother’s house and land, we also have tourist areas because our barangay, our sitio is Timoga there in Iligan City. Perhaps many from Zamboanga Del Sur have already been to our house and our creek and the swimming pools of our neighbors. That’s why we see that my youth is very close here in Mindanao. I am not only a child of Mindanao because I grew up in my grandmother’s house in Lanao del Norte, I am a next door neighbor of Zamboanga Del Sur. Because Lanao del Norte is next door to Zamboanga del Sur.

Last week, the Aurora-Iligan road groundbreaking actually happened. I was invited but I don't like going to groundbreakings, because they often don't push through. But let's wait for the construction to start and finish so that our two provinces can become closer.

But even now I am happy that I finally came because I have long heard that Lakewood is very beautiful, but it wasn't on the map because it was very far away and there was no road before. But maybe now with our media friends from Iligan and with our national [representatives], maybe the cameramen, and even those from Manila, they will see how beautiful this place is in the mountains of Zamboanga del Sur.

So, my brothers and sisters, I am still happy that I arrived today because last week I went to their fiesta in Kumalarang. So I am here again today, but perhaps the important thing is no longer the visit of the president, but perhaps this will push through for our small and medium enterprises for the progress of Lakewood and all of Zamboanga del Sur for the next 50 years of the life of our beautiful and good province.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Megayon (Unity) Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224513/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8396&Itemid=38