Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Breakfast Forum with the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines (FOCAP)

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Mandarin Oriental Hotel, Makati City, October 25, 2004]

Thank you very much, Secretary Bunye.

President Galvez and the other officers and members of FOCAP; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you FOCAP for inviting me to be with you today. Well, you said you want me to be there next year in your anniversary. So, I told Twink, ‘okay’, let that be our meeting for next year, may 2005.

In any case, I welcome this opportunity to bring some of the most crucial issues into our discussion this morning.

My tenure in the presidency has gotten me used to facing crisis. The world is in constant flux, and the Philippines rides the tide of travails and uncertainties.

But mark my words, at the outset, the prognosis of doomsayers for the Philippines will not happen, not under my watch. And if we’re able to do the reforms that I have planned out for the medium-term, not even in our lifetime.

The Filipino shall move forward, and I for the next six years will provide the leadership for the struggle to beat the odds.

The price for me will be steep. My ratings will continue to slump as we suffer transient constraints and take the bitter pill to cure structural poverty and clean up the fiscal and economic and political mess we inherited. But I’m prepared to suffer the consequences of unpopular decisions needed to finance our development from our own resources to strengthen the bureaucracy and to demand fair and legitimate sacrifices so early in my term.

We will prevail in the end, as we push hard on change and reform rather than to surrender to the status quo, as we meet our challenges headstrong rather than sweep this under the rug as we take on the short- term sacrifices that we need for long-term gain.

Our obstacles are steep but not insurmountable. The Philippines will pass the test.

Confidence in our economy shall be bolstered by an earnest executive- legislative partnership to pass fiscal reform measures. We’re working to moderate the temporary dislocations affecting the poorest Filipinos that result from economic pressures or socioeconomic pressures, by safety nets which shall be put in place by the national and local governments working in teamwork.

Well, I’m glad we have some representatives of the military here. I asked Nonong Cruz to catch up.

Reform, professional loyalty, honor, discipline and morale shall be sustained by an Armed Forces engaged in its share of sacrifices and acts of redemption. The spirit of change shall be driven from within.

My administration shall not be… Will not be hobbled by reactionary forces or political has-beens out to exploit economic problems to foment social instability. I will deal with these destabilizers with an iron fist, even as I hold out an open hand and an open mind for those who are open to a just and dignified reconciliation.

The Filipinos shall rise to the apex of our potential as a nation through sacrifice and peaceful action. There are fundamentals in place. GDP grew by 6.3 percent this semester, up from 4.5 percent in the same semester last year and from last year’s whole 5.6 percent.

Tourism arrivals are higher by 28 percent compared to the same period last year. For the first eight months of 2004, OFW remittances reached 5.5 billion dollars, 9.42 percent higher than the same period last year.

This semester, foreign investments jumped by more than 800 percent of the same period last year. The stock market rebounded to its highest level in… Since year 2000, and interest in NAPOCOR privatization is sparking business confidence.

The atmosphere of law and order is setting firmly. I congratulate the gentlemen in uniform who are seated there — the officers of the Philippine National Police. We have cut street crimes by almost half. We’ve shut down the operations of the largest shabu laboratory in the country found in Cebu. Terrorists continue to fall into the security dragnet and the remnants of kidnapping gangs have lain low.

The court martial of Major General Garcia will soon start. I have given instructions to General Abaya that he should start it before he retires this Friday.

The honor of the Filipino soldier is at stake, and I’m confident that the judges in uniform will conduct themselves in absolute fealty to the constitution, the people and the command.

To cast the graft dragnet farther and wider, the military Ombudsman’s budget has been augmented so it can hire 25 new lawyers. An independent internal affairs office has been created to look into the procurement and financial systems of the military, and to receive grievances and complaints directly from the soldiers. We are vigorously carrying out the recommendations of the Feliciano Commission. I’m glad Rex Robles is here and I thank him for his contributions to that commission.

There shall be no whitewash in the investigation and prosecution of anomalies in the Armed Forces of the Philippines, RSBS and any other investigation for that matter.

The campaign against corruption is matched by more services and benefits to our soldiers. In my first term, I raised the salaries of soldiers and policemen to equal that of teachers. The allocation for the AFP housing program has been increased – that’s for the common soldiers and young officers. On the other hand, we are removing overstaying retired military personnel in military housing facilities and all privately-owned quarters in military bases. We’re also upgrading the state of AFP medical services and we’ve brought this nearer to the frontlines.

On the civilian side — but of course including also the military side because it encompasses all my presidential appointees – I’m transforming the Presidential Anti-Graft Commission into an effective institution similar to the Hong Kong’s independent commission against corruption with the help of no less than the founder of ICAC himself, Tony Kwok. To give PAGC, the Office of the Ombudsman and even the military ombudsman more resources to fight corruption, I’ve approved an increase in their respective budget allocations.

I have no sympathy at all for grafters and their lame excuses, but on the other hand, I will not allow the terrorist insurgents and their fronts and grandstanders to be my hiring and firing committee. And for the majority of the workers in our government, I have tremendous respect and sympathy. For the majority of public servants who toil in anonymous dedication while being exposed to the grim hardships faced by our people. I shall derive my strength from them.

Our collection agencies, for instance, are on the march. The garnishment of properties and bank accounts of tax cheats continues. This year’s tax collection may prove to be one of the highest in our nation’s history.

We’ve also made significant gains in the anti-smuggling campaign. Importers, brokers and customs personnel are being held under tight monitoring for unlawful conduct. The Bureau of Customs has a smugglers order of battle composed of 200 or more names under team surveillance not only from the customs police but from the AFP, the PNP and the Philippine Coast Guard because I empowered the Commissioner of Customs to be able to get assistance from this other law enforcement agencies.

In Mindanao, things are looking up. The main contingent of the international monitoring team arrived last October 9 from Malaysia. A ten-person contingent from Brunei also arrived last October 20th. We expect a total of about 50 members of the multi-nation monitoring team when it’s completed.

And while we continue to negotiate peace, the international donor community, the World Bank and the U.N. development program, are poised to implement various projects under the Mindanao trust fund once an accord is signed. Guns will be turned into plowshares in erstwhile conflict- affected communities. The U.S. is not waiting for the peace accord to be signed. They’ve started to provide the peace dividend even now. We are carrying the economy forward to the targets of our medium-term development plan. Let me spell out some of what we intend to get done by the time I end my term in 2010:

GDP growth accelerating to 7 percent;

A balanced budget;

Ten million jobs created;

Poverty incidence reduced to below 20 percent. Hopefully, 17.

We will create wealth by facilitating investments in sustainable mining, oil and gas exploration, the re-launching of massive reclamation projects and the development of the Clark-Subic corridor as the best logistics hub in the region.

We can create jobs by developing two million hectares of new lands for agri-business and promoting three million micro, small and medium enterprises.

We also aim:

To make food plentiful at reasonable prices to make labor costs globally competitive;

To reduce the cost of electricity through power sector reforms;

To modernize infrastructure and logistics to make transport and related costs efficient;

Mobilize and disseminate knowledge to make our workers and manufacturing processes more productive; and

Reduce red tape especially for small enterprises, exports and the average driver of his own car or his own jeepney.

These are clearly defined and attainable goals. Our economic plan which was unveiled last October 11 is plainly understood and attainable.

It can be done — but not through endless bickerings or empty political grandstanding. The only way we can reach the apex of our potential as a nation is to discard defeatism and summon the courage to embrace change and reform — not as a passing fashion but as a way life.

The Filipino spirit is indestructible. Our history is replete with natural and political calamities overcome by our abiding faith in god and our innate sense of nationhood.

But for too long, politics and government have been the focus of our lives. This too has to change. It’s time to ‘outsource’ public service as a duty of all Filipinos, not only of those in government. Government is not everyone’s fairy godmother. Its powers to transform lives are nowhere as strong as the collective will of the people to take their destiny into their own hands.

All Filipinos must recognize and fight for our own true worth as a people and a nation. I take this as a challenge that my leadership must address.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Breakfast Forum with the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines (FOCAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133022/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5700&Itemid=38