BRINGING OUR OFWs HOME

We must have a mandatory evacuation if we are to expect a zero casualty rate in a war that is increasing in breadth and tempo. Task Force Lebanon will undertake all means to get Filipinos to safety, including those who do not want to move or those facing problems with their employers. Our countrymen in dangerous areas should cooperate to stay safe and alleviate the worry of their families here in the Philippines.

The window for safe evacuation becomes narrower for each day that battles ensue on land. It is better to evacuate sooner rather than later when that window finally closes.

We have enough money to bring them all home.

Now that we have evacuated many of our OFWs without casualties — today it will be more than three thousand, more than ten percent will be able to return — by God's grace, we will now focus on and take action on the new livelihood of those returning from Lebanon. Like the example of factory workers who were burned, after they were rescued from the fire, they need to be provided with new jobs.

So, I met with Secretary Arthur Yap — he's here; Secretary Buboy Syjuco; Secretary Art Brion; Secretary Espie Cabral; Administrator Nitoy Roque of OWWA; Executive Director Una Amata of the National Livelihood Support Fund; and Nelson Buencaflor of Quedancor.

We will discuss the actions of the agencies to reassure our countrymen upon their return.

So, before we chat, let's go to what DOLE has prepared regarding the reintegration program for our overseas Filipino workers.

(Closing statement)

Okay. So, that is our answer for those OFWs who are afraid of what they will return to, and there is a new life waiting here. In fact, we no longer want to… As a policy, we no longer want to send workers to those dangerous areas. Isn't that our policy, Art? That's why we are not sending new workers to Iraq. So, here in Lebanon, we will not send workers either, and we are bringing them all home. But there is a new life.

So, I want to reassure our countrymen returning from Lebanon. And whoever is forced to evacuate from work abroad, our policy is to allow our citizens to work only in peaceful areas.

Your government is always ready to keep you away from danger and help you work and rise again.

So, like what I'm hearing from those present, -will you give jobs to those coming from Lebanon, but I've been in the Philippines for a long time and I still don't have a job here. How can we… Shouldn't these packages also be open to all unemployed workers?

Okay. So, this is open to OFWs, but because they are listed, they are being helped. But even if you are not listed, you are here in the Philippines, you can also benefit from these programs. So for example, look for the TESDA offices, look for the DOLE offices. DOLE, don't you already have an online list of available jobs, so let's do that.

So, I thank all our agencies that are helping with livelihood. Thank you very much, Secretary of Labor Art Brion. Thank you very much, Secretary of DSWD, Espie Cabral. Thank you very much, Chairman of TESDA, Buboy Syjuco. Thank you very much to the Director General of PMS, Artie Yap. Thank you very much to the Administrator of OWWA, Nitoy Roque; the head of the National Livelihood Support Fund, Lina Amata; the head of Quedancor, Nelso Buencaflor.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].