Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Romulo. Up to eleven o’clock this morning Secretary Romulo was the Finance Secretary, up to eleven o’clock he is now the Executive Secretary, the little president.

Mr. Chua and the other leaders of the Filipino-Chinese Community; officers of the various organizations who are here tonight; members; ladies and gentlemen; my beloved Chinoy compatriots:

On behalf of all my government colleagues, I greet you a good evening and a meaningful celebration of Independence Day.

It is a great honor to be with the leaders and members of large and respected organizations in the Filipino-Chinese community in your celebration of the Philippines' independence. I congratulate you on this occasion.

This program and dinner for Independence Day is just one of the activities of your organization. I know that the Federation of Filipino Chambers of Commerce is also leading the invitation to the entire Filipino-Chinese community across the country to raise the Philippine flag from May 28 to June 12 as a greeting to the national birthday.

More than 100 Chinoy NGOs are joining the Independence Day celebration tonight — and I thank you all, 1800 of you who are here tonight.

As I understand it, today you also deployed 10 medical and dental teams to provide free services to residents of Metro Manila. I commend you for what you are doing.

Therefore, the significant assistance of the Federation is felt during national occasions such as Independence Day and in the daily life of the country.

This cooperation began several centuries ago – in the past – since the launch of trade between the Philippines and China in the sixteenth century. This trade flourished, became healthy and became a permanent part of the relationship between the two countries. Now Manila and Beijing are active trading partners.

And because of this trade, the economies of the two countries have become stronger. Many Filipinos, Chinoy and Chinay have improved their lives, established businesses, and contributed a lot to the economy.

Many Chinese were also encouraged to settle in the Philippines, marry here, raise families and raise their children and grandchildren in Philippine society. This includes the family of my spouse, Jose Miguel Tuason Arroyo.

As I said in Binondo on April 23 as (the first president of the Philippines) to visit Chinatown, I feel comfortable whenever I am with the Filipino-Chinese community. I feel like I am part of your community.

This is because, as you know – because I have told it many times – my good spouse comes from the lineage of Son Tua, a Chinese businessman during the Spanish era. It wasn't long before Son Tua changed and is now known as the Tuason family.

There are many examples of prominent Filipinos whose roots come from China. This includes our national hero, Jose Rizal, and the ancestors of President Corazon Aquino are from Fookien.

When I was young, I remember the famous anthropologist Otley Beyer saying that the Filipino is 80 percent Malayan-Indonesian, 10 percent Chinese and 10 percent of other races.

I believe Mr. Beyer's arithmetic has changed significantly. It is estimated that among Filipinos with foreign blood, the Filipino-Chinese, or what we call Chinoy, are the most numerous in the entire Philippines – more numerous than the Filipino-Hispanic, Filipino-American, and Filipino-Indian.

The history of the Chinoy in the Philippines is a drama of sacrifice and hardship. The Chinoy today are recognized as one of the wealthiest in the country. But your past is a chapter of effort and sacrifice.

You are known for your diligence. You are also frugal. And your cooperation is admirable. Your unity is unparalleled.

Because you have an innate talent for business, you have expanded your livelihood. Most businesses have succeeded.

You have diversified. From local, you became national. And from national, you further expanded businesses to many parts of the world.

Now, most of you are successful entrepreneurs, model citizens, and leaders in the country's economy.

What is good is that you were not satisfied with just business success. You also paid attention to your neighbors, the entire society. You recognized your debt to the country and emphasized providing comfort to the world around you.

You have reciprocated the kindness of your world. This is the reason why the Filipino-Chinese community is active in community building and public service. Today, the Binondo Chinoy are a well-known example with your volunteer fire brigade that helps wherever there is a fire. You use your money and risk your lives to help your fellow human beings.

You have also strengthened the friendship between Filipinos and Chinese in many ways: through newspapers, cultural presentations, community festivities, sports in your area, schools and businesses. In a word, your social conscience is healthy, your civic commitment is strong, and your sense of community involvement is solid.

The work ethic of the Chinoy – diligence, thrift, sacrifice, planning for the future – is something that many native Filipinos should emulate.

Many Filipinos can learn from the Chinese and Filipino-Chinese. Our heroes, whether of Chinese blood or not, also have lessons to teach us, as we celebrate June 12. Let us also remember that our heroes taught many lessons to us Filipinos, such as sacrifice for the country, self-improvement, and national unity for the progress of society.

Tonight and on June 12, the day of our national birthday, may we rediscover the lessons left by the heroism of Jose Rizal, Andres Bonifacio, Emilio Aguinaldo, Apolinario Mabini, M.H. del Pilar, Tandang Sora, and General Pawa, the Chinoy who was a partner of the Katipuneros in the uprising against the Spaniards.

Tonight, I have some good news to share with you: the Senate and Congress have already approved the Administrative Naturalization Law.

The administrative naturalization law will grant Filipino citizenship to qualified and deserving aliens. This is a way for foreigners who want to become Filipino citizens to become legal citizens of the country.

This law makes the naturalization process for native-born aliens in the country less restrictive, through a special administrative process, in order to facilitate their integration into the mainstream of Philippine society.

I understand the predicament of aliens born in the Philippines who find it difficult to share the spirit of nationhood when they feel that the government has been half-hearted in making them citizens of the country which they want to serve.

Despite their being born in the Philippines and their continuous residence here, they continue to be regarded and treated under the existing laws just like all other aliens, mainly because of their foreign parentage.

The requirements set by law for their naturalization are not much different from those provided for other classes of aliens.

Regardless of which foreign lineage he comes from, why should a respectable and responsible individual born and raised in the Philippines be not welcome into being a full-pledged Filipino?

And if that individual can prove that he loves the Philippines as the land of his birth, that he acknowledges the responsibilities of Filipino citizenship, that he is willing to be a productive member of our society, and, more importantly, that he is willing to fulfill and respect the duties and responsibilities of being a law-abiding citizen of this land, then he should be accepted with open arms as part of the Filipino nation.

I thank Mr. Dante Go because he visited me on March 17 to tell me about a bill in Congress called the Naturalization Bill. He gave me many pieces of advice in drafting this law.

The passage of this law is a pivotal chapter in the history of local-born aliens in the country, majority of whom are Chinese Filipinos. With a faster and much-improved naturalization process, there will be less obstacles to those whose fondest wish is to live in the Philippines permanently and be acknowledged as productive members of our society.

Through this law, our country also hopes to reduce the brain drain caused by the flight of graduates educated and trained in this land but lured to work in countries where alien hiring is more liberal. We want these graduates to put their expertise to good use in this very nation where it is needed most.

The approval of this law is just part of the many improvements that my administration is working on to achieve unity, peace and stability for all sectors of our society.

This morning, a bill signing was held in Malacañang. I signed two important bills into law. One is the power sector reform bill and the other is the increase in salaries for our government employees.

This morning, we weren't able to include the naturalization bill because the printing wasn't finished yet. But after that signing, the printing was completed, it was signed by the Speaker, signed by the Senate President, and just in time, I can sign it tonight in front of all of you.

And as I said earlier, this is just one way for the nation to unite, whether native Filipino or Chinese-Filipino. There are many other ways for us to unite.

For example, let's build a monument to General Pawa, an outstanding Filipino-Chinese leader during the Philippine Revolution. I will await your advice on where to build General Pawa's monument.

And let's find a way to translate “Noli Me Tangere and “El Filibusterismo into Mandarin. Let's do this to further strengthen our relationship and understanding.

In our Constitution, it is stated that Spanish and Arabic languages should be taught as optional languages in colleges. Perhaps Chinese, especially Mandarin, should also be taught in schools.

Aside from the fact that we have 1.2 billion people in China, they are our neighboring country and have great potential for our products. In Asia, there are millions of Chinese. The Chinese language is now the most widespread language in the world. Therefore, Mandarin should also be made an optional language in colleges.

Filipinos should study the Chinese language. Because of this, I plan to direct the Commission on Higher Education or CHED to study the teaching of Mandarin in all colleges and universities as an optional language, along with Spanish and Arabic.

CHED should also make it a policy to promote awareness of foreign language education in colleges and universities. The modern Filipino should be proficient in various languages – Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Japanese, Bahasa, and others. This is because language plays a significant role in our lives in international trade, foreign relations, cultural relations, and general education.

Due to globalization, experts in various languages are needed. In interacting with other governments, businessmen, and capitalists, knowledge of many languages opens many doors.

Foreign languages are important not only in international conferences and global conventions but also in corporate boardrooms and government offices in Beijing, Tokyo, Berlin, and Paris.

And let us take our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, as a model – proficient in English, French, and German. He was also able to write and speak in Spanish.

What I need now is a tutor in your language. A volunteer from among my Chinoy friends.

And one more thing: let's set aside a day for the declaration of Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day, to commemorate the role of the Chinoy in our cultural enrichment and economic and social development of our country.

I have a personal interest in presenting these plans to you. I have been following the wars between races, of tribes against tribes throughout Asia for a long time, and the cycle of events is frightening.

We need to stop the cycle of events happening around us. That is why my mission is to end the cycle happening now in some parts of Mindanao, and the conflict between the communists and the government.

Let us lay the groundwork for harmony right now. Let us think of what will unite us rather than what will divide us. We after all desire the same things: a stable and growing economy that will sustain the good life for ourselves and our families.

Cultural integration is a long process that needs to be nurtured not only through policy but more importantly through the day-to-day interaction between persons and groups.

I hope that we will unite in one spirit, one principle, and one feeling. This is the call of my administration: nation, unite!

Good evening to all of you and thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s 103rd Philippine Independence Day Celebration of the Filipino-Chinese Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213633/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8649&Itemid=38