Maraming salamat Kalihim Joey Lina.

President of ULAP, Governor Dolfo del Rosario; Chairman of the League of Provinces, Governor Louie Villafuerte; President of the League of Vice Governors, Vice Governor Herrera; President of the League of Municipalities, Mayor Guico; President of the League of Cities, Mayor Tolentino; Your Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; James Marty Lim, President of the Liga ng mga Barangay; local executives; participants of the First Philippine Local Governance Congress; other guests; ladies and gentlemen; my dear countrymen:

Happy 10-10-10.

This is 10-10-10: October 10th 2001, the 10th anniversary of the local government code and on this day we begin by thanking and honoring the leaders who championed the passage of this the local government code 10 years ago — we start with President Cory Aquino who signed the bill into law 10 years ago today. We also thank Senate President Jovy Salonga and the late Speaker Ramon Mitra who exercised political leadership in shepherding the code through their respective chambers. We thank Senator Nene Pimentel and then Congressman Larry de Pedro who sponsored the bill in their respective chambers. And we acknowledge the Chairman of the League of Governors, Louie Villafuerte, who was a prime mover in forming the league of leagues which actively lobbied for the passage of this code.

These visionary leaders and their successors crafted a law that peacefully transformed our political system from a centralized government to a decentralized one.

Unlike many other nations like America, China, Germany, Japan, and Malaysia, where local governments existed before they banded together to create a central government, the Philippines’ history is one of central colonial government antedating local governments. The Local Government Code of 1991, therefore, was a move against the tide and it started us towards devolution. Today, 10 years later, the local governments face unprecedented fiscal, political, economic and technological challenges even after all the gains that Joey Lina spelled out because of the Local Government Code because I know that even under the past ten years, local governments have done a lot under the local government codes, there are still many challenges remaining.

That is why, on the first day of my assumption into office as President, I chose one of you to be my alter ego in the DILG, your former President of ULAP, Secretary Joey Lina. I know that Joey, as one of the authors of the Local Government Code in the Senate, led you before to ensure that local autonomy is protected and that you receive your IRA shares. Even now, Joey is still urging Emy Boncodin and me regarding your IRA.

And during my first weekend as President, I received a lot of pending travel permits from the Barangay Captains. I said, “Am I the one who should be giving travel permits to Barangay Captains?” So I decided that from then on, I would delegate the permit for local government executives to travel to the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government.

And following Joey’s advice, one of the first things I did when I became President was to nullify three executive orders of the previous administration that reduced your powers. I am referring to: the E.O. of the previous administration which required you first to submit your annual investment plan to DBM before you could get your 20 percent development fund. Upon the advise of Joey I also repealed the E.O. which authorized DBM to withhold part of your IRA intended for your contributions to the GSIS, Philhealth and other government financial institutions. And Joey also recommended to me that I should abolish the E.O. which required you to set aside five percent of your 20 percent development fund for anti-drug abuse programs — not that we are against anti-drug abuse programs, but we trust you, the local governments, to make your decisions by yourselves.

The law of course requires that you still submit your annual investment plans to DILG and DBM, but this time it is for monitoring and oversight purposes and not as a prerequisite for the release of your money.

Recently, I contacted your leaders in ULAP led by Governor Dolfo del Rosario. We studied about the IRA and I know that this is what you are waiting for from me. You know, many of us have known each other for a long time, you know my style — straight to the point, not too many motherhood statements — so these are our agreements:

First, beginning the year 2002 — in other words the budget we submitted now for next year — the President’s budget that we submitted to Congress automatically appropriates the IRA. If it is done for debt service, why not for debts to local governments?

Second, we abolished the LGSEF in the proposed 2002 Budget. You know the LGSEF was taken from you, placed in Malacañang, and then if you wanted a project because your IRA was insufficient, you would run to Malacañang, kneel and beg to ask for your own money. So now when Mayors approach me to ask for projects, I say, “You no longer need to come here, it is important that your IRA is fully received because the LGSEF is your money.”

Number three, last year in the previous administration and this year — because our 2001 budget is only the reenacted 2000 budget — your IRA allocation was P106 billion. Of the P106 billion allocated last year, the year 2000, the previous administration released P103 billion, so less was released. This year, 106 billion is still the allocation because it is only reenacted, but even if the IRA budget for this year as allocated is only P106 billion, we are releasing P121 billion. What does this consist of? That P106 billion, that will come out, now on top of the 106 billion provided by the previous Congress for this year, the following payments of obligations of the previous administration but which my administration is complying with even if the debt is not my fault, we are paying you the following:

P4.05 billion representing the IRA withheld way back in 1999. We’ll be releasing this one billion pesos a month, and before this month ends, we will release the full and last of four tranches of this reserve.

Another release we are making is the P2.5 billion representing the unreleased balance of the LGSEF for last year, the year 2000.

And if you remember that last year you did not get your December IRA, so even though it is not my fault, we will pay it, and that is why we will be releasing P2.25 billion representing one-fourth of the IRA for December 2000 because we know that you need money for Christmas bonuses.

And we are releasing five billion pesos representing the LGSEF for this year 2001. I have already instructed Secretary Romulo, the Chair of the Oversight Committee on Devolution, to convene the committee to effect the release of your LGSEF for the year 2001, and as much as possible, we try to base this on the codal formula as recommended by ULAP.

With regard to the unreleased balance of the regular IRA due last year amounting to P6.75 billion, I repeat, even though this is not my debt, it is the debt of my predecessor, we stand foursquare and acknowledge this commitment as part of our national obligation. Because I inherited a large budget deficit from my predecessor, your ULAP leaders and I worked out a scheme to address this debt and at the same time address the financial situation in which we are right now.

We will treat this P6.75 billion as a contingent liability to the LGUs, in other words a guaranteed liability.

I have tasked the DBM, DILG, DOF, and the Executive Secretary, together with ULAP, to securitize this unreleased IRA as bonds for LGUs to enable you to use your uncollected IRA shares now and not wait for when the national government can afford to pay them. The bonds shall be floated by a government financial institution to fund your activities to the extent of your uncollected IRA. These bonds will be guaranteed by the national government.

And if the private banks, the commercial banks, buy these LGU bonds, they will be considered as complying with the Agri-agra law. That way they’ll be encouraged to buy your bonds. In turn, I ask that you spend the proceeds of these LGU bonds on activities related to agriculture or agrarian reform para naman talagang sang-ayon sa Agri-Agra Law. And if you do this spend them for agriculture or agrarian reform, including the salaries of your MOUs, and your MAROs and the MOOE — so may things that you can justify as related to agriculture and agrarian reform — this will form part of your answer to the call of the times, as I enunciated in my State of the Nation Address last July.

If you remember in my SONA, I stated my vision and mission: to be bold in our national ambitions so that our country will win the war against poverty within the decade.

And to succeed, our national agenda must revolve around four components — four elements of the struggle against poverty.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century.

Entrepreneurship to create more jobs.

And the local governments can do so much to promote free enterprise and job creation, and therefore I ask our local governments — as Joey said you are already doing — to streamline your operations and slash red tape in order to promote investments under a free enterprise system. There must be continuity between national and local governments in their efforts to be investor-friendly.

Businessmen from other countries tell me when I talk to them that many reforms have already been made in the BOI, in the national agencies, so they are used to talking to only one account officer. But when it comes to local governments, they talk to someone else. That is what we mean by seamless efforts. That is what the BOI and local governments should have—just one unit so that our investors have only one contact.

The second part of our agenda is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. We will increase the income and yield of poor farmers, and I hope you will spend the proceeds of the LGU bonds that will be given to you, which banks will now allow you to use, rather than waiting until the national government can do so again.

And the third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. Caring for the sectors of society that are left behind by progress. And we know that in the local government code, the agencies devolved to you are precisely those agencies with a social bias — health, social welfare, agriculture — so it is really up to you, you are the frontliners in this social bias in our development plan.

And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society. Morality in government and society as the foundation of true development.

And so having talked about these four components of our national agenda, may I take this opportunity to enlist the local governments to stand in the front line of this war against poverty as we take strides in delivering better services to our communities.

During my State of the Nation Address, I called for a moratorium on politicking.

Today that moratorium is more urgent than ever.

The New York incident of September 11 has changed the global mood. World business conditions are more uncertain now. And so more than ever, we must now rely more on our own efforts and our own domestic economy. And more than ever, we must avoid lapsing into a sense of drift and losing momentum.

After the September 11 terrorist attacks, the Philippine government pledged to support the international coalition in the new fight against terrorism. And let me just take this opportunity to thank the local governments of Lanao del Sur, the Mayors League, because they visited me yesterday to tell me that they are foursquare behind the position I have taken on international terrorism.

This shows that the battle is not against Islam. The battle is against terrorism whatever the religion of the terrorists.

After the military action of the United Nations in Afghanistan, I reiterated our commitment.

And so, because we are now in this battle, we must strengthen our internal focus against terrorism. The Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police are going all out against the lawless violence engendered by the terrorist threats. But you, the local government units and institutions down to the barangay level, are the core of this effort.

And so I urge all of you to take an active part and even take the leadership, if you wish, in this battle against terrorism in your own local government areas I urge all LGUs to adopt the Patrol 117 approach initiated by the DILG for the quick response to crimes and violence. I likewise urge you to involve the participation of citizens in crime prevention.

The international situation arising from the terrorist attacks in America and the military action in Afghanistan asks all of us to reenergize and refocus ourselves towards achieving our nation’s priorities.

And because we have even added challenges because of these new events in the world today, we all realize that the IRA is inadequate to meet all the demands of devolution and all the demands of the new international situation. Thus, it is important that local governments must be bold in exercising your corporate powers to explore alternative financing options and increase your ability to raise local revenues. In this regard, I am happy to see the active participation of private financial institutions and the donor community in this gathering. They are celebrating with us and they are celebrating the role they have played in promoting devolution over this last 10 years

We and they are celebrating today the adolescence though not yet the full maturity of local government autonomy — well 10 years old is really just entering adolescence after all. As we celebrate a decade of devolution, let us buckle down to work once again and collectively address the challenges in our continuing journey for a meaningful autonomy so that this adolescence will turn into a truly mature autonomy in the next years to come.

Congratulations and Happy Decade Anniversary.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st Philippine Local Governance Congress of the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212705/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8751&Itemid=38