Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the 103rd anniversary of Independence Day

Thank you very much Secretary Richard Gordon.

My spouse, Atty. Jose Miguel Arroyo; my partner in running the government, Vice President Teofisto Guingona, along with the other members of the cabinet; His Excellency Antonio Franco and the other members of the Diplomatic Corps; our soldiers and police; members of the senate; members of the House of Representatives; so many are here today — our justices, including visiting justices from other countries; government officials; guests; you, my beloved countrymen:

Happy Independence Day to all of you.

On this day, we commemorate the proclamation of the independence of the Philippine nation.

On this day, we look back at the past.

One hundred and three years have passed since our independence was proclaimed in Kawit, Cavite; and where our flag was waved, and our national anthem was played, as the birth of a nation with the right to be free.

As your president, it is a great honor for me to greet all of you on the celebration of the 103rd anniversary of our country's independence.

Once again, every Filipino can be proud of the recent success of democracy in our country.

This year's Independence Day should be even more meaningful because of these new victories in our history. The people's victory at Edsa dos. The failed attempts of ambitious forces to take advantage of the public, and our national and local elections on May fourteenth — all of these reaffirm the Filipino's determination to live freely, democratically, and with dignity in the country.

On this day, we commemorate the past to relive the heroism of the Filipino race. And through this remembrance, may we regain the strength of unity and the determination to succeed and lead in any challenge we face in the coming times.

In this place, where Fathers Gomez, Burgos and Zamora were garroted; where our national hero Jose Rizal was slain; where the Spaniards killed many members of the Katipunan, we are reminded that our freedom was paid for with the lives of our heroes.

Here in Luneta, fifty-five years ago, the Philippine flag was raised again and the American flag was lowered and we became a free republic once more.

Here also in Luneta, my father proclaimed this date as Independence Day.

As we celebrate this very special occasion, let us remember not only our new victories but also the hardships and struggles of our ancestors to make a way for the freedom of the Philippines. Let their great sacrifice be our inspiration as we strive now to strengthen our beloved republic as a powerful economy and a life of dignity and peace for every Filipino. Let the lessons of the past, together with the century of the present, give us the diligence and inspiration we need to fulfill our share of responsibility as Filipinos in the twenty-first century. Before, we united in our love for the symbols of sovereignty and freedom displayed and heard in Kawit, Cavite: our flag, our national anthem, our aspiration that our homeland will never again be subjected to any foreign country.

In our unity in the past, the Philippines has shown that it can lead in the world.

The declaration of independence by General Aguinaldo marked the beginning of the establishment of the first republic in all of Asia. It was also the first successful revolution against colonialism on the entire continent. Our republic and victory against colonialism served as inspiration or the beginning of the desire of our neighboring countries to break free from the domination of foreigners.

The extraordinary unity of the Filipino people at EDSA in 1986, the People Power Revolution, was not only admired throughout the world, it also served as inspiration for other countries to successfully achieve freedom and establish democracy in a peaceful manner.

Our country has truly taken the lead. Once again, we united at EDSA Dos to liberate the people from widespread corruption. And when I was installed as the new president, I asked that we set aside discord and misunderstanding. Let us rebuild our nationhood together.

On this occasion, I reiterate my call to all our countrymen to unite once more. Let us strengthen our solidarity to alleviate poverty and once again lead in democratic ideals and actions in our region.

Our efforts are difficult. News has surfaced that American hostage Mr. Guillermo Sobero has been beheaded by Abu Sayyaf as a gift to me on the day of our independence.

We have not yet confirmed that report from a radio station in Mindanao. The armed forces are doing everything to confirm the allegations of the bandits.

I am praying that this news is not true. I still hope that the fear of God will prevail over the members of Abu Sayyaf.

Be that as it may, this only proves that Abu Sayyaf are merciless executioners and killers who have no compassion or forgiveness for human life just to obtain money. Money appears to be their god.

The anger of the people is overflowing. The kidnappings carried out by the Abu Sayyaf on innocent civilians are against the laws of Christianity and Islam.

Let the bandits not think that the government is softening.

My dear fellow Filipinos, our struggle for peace, tranquility, and freedom should not just be left as one chapter in our history. It should continue now and every day in our lives until we can save all Filipinos from the scourge of conflict, temporary hardship, and poverty.

Our efforts towards true peace and freedom will have no end until every Filipino – especially the small and the poor — lives peacefully, with dignity, and prosperously.

This is the unique aspiration that I hope will be the source of our unity now and in the face of any challenge of the times.

On this day, as we celebrate the 103rd anniversary of Philippine independence, I call on all Filipinos in all places to help rebuild our country towards greater peace, progress, and prosperity.

This day is the first day of freedom in the Philippines in the new century and new millennium. It is also the first day of freedom under my administration. I hope the entire nation will unite so we can move forward together.

With the unity of purpose of the government and the people, our motherland Philippines will finally achieve the comfort and vitality that she has long dreamed of.

My fellow countrymen, amidst the symbols of our sovereignty and freedom, I ask for your help and the aid of the Almighty. Join me, let us all unite and work together to restore peace and tranquility to our archipelago. Let us unite to fully combat poverty in our country. Let us help one another to rapidly advance our economy and bring greater benefits to all our citizens.

Beloved fellow Filipinos, on this day of our independence, long live us all, long live the Republic of the Philippines! Happy Independence Day to all of you! And nation, let us unite!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 103rd Independence Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213527/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8640&Itemid=38