PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN AGRICULTURE

Today, we will launch the changes we need to make to make our country more prosperous. As Vice Chairman of the Road Board Danny Suarez said on this occasion, we are launching the third phase – so three lights, three colors of light – three phases of the “Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin Program”.

This program uses one billion pesos to allow barangays to take care of the national roads that pass through your areas. And we will strive to do this throughout the country. Because if the road is not properly maintained, it deteriorates. Now, this program, so far in our third launch, will cover all national arterial roads and all national secondary roads throughout Luzon, because every citizen, every barangay must contribute to the whole enterprise. And from my understanding, from the experience during the first two launches, Unisan to Urdaneta and Southern Luzon, I learned and saw that the barangay captains were also very helpful to the workers in the implementation of this program.

Therefore, I am directing Chairman Soriquez and Vice Chairman Suarez that starting December 1, 2003, all barangay captains throughout Luzon who are helping will receive a 500 pesos a month supervision fee. You helped first, so you will be given a supervision fee.

What we are doing, our care for the roads, the national road that passes through the barangay, this program can serve as a cornerstone for the development of our country. The important benefit that this program can immediately provide is jobs. It was like during my father’s time, when the “Emergency Employment Program” was established by President Macapagal in 1962. Like my father, for me, creating jobs for our countrymen is the main priority since I became President. Thank you, and despite the criticisms against me by my opponents, Mar Roxas is here, or Mr. Palengke, but today we will call him Mr. Investment because based on the latest report on investments in the Philippines, investments here in the Philippines still increased by 22 percent. This is according to the latest report from the Department of Trade and Industry, which handles the Board of Investments and the Philippine Economic Zone Authority. And most of this money that came in came from foreign investments, meaning that, whatever some people say in our country, foreign investors still have confidence in us. There are businessmen who criticize, the important thing is the businessman speaks with their money, not just with their words. So our investors spoke, a 22 percent increase in investment. And according to the Japanese, the Philippines is the number 3 preferred investment destination, next only to Thailand and Malaysia.

What more could we achieve if we were united instead of fighting? The government’s sincere desire is to improve the lives of the citizens. When businesses like this increase, there will also be more jobs for our countrymen. So you, barangay captains, you officials here, I ask you, on top of supervising these roads well, I ask for our unity instead of us being divided and fighting, just because of the desire of some groups to impose their wrong beliefs on our country.

I appeal to all of you, barangay captains, if we want to end poverty, let us all unite because that is what we need if we want to improve the lives of our countrymen.

Therefore, let us work together for the success of the “Kalsada Ko, Aalagaan Ko Program” for the success of our programs that offer investments, and for the success of our other national endeavors. In that way, hopefully with our unity and basic reforms like what we are doing, when other investments come and more jobs are created on our roads. And with unity, we can achieve the development of our country and your communities will prosper.

Thank you very much and welcome to all the barangay captains.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].