MALAMPAYA: USHERING IN THE ERA OF NATURAL GAS

This is a great moment in our country’s history. At a project cost of almost $5 billion, the Malampaya Deep Water Gas-to-Power Project is the largest and most important investment of its kind in the history of the Philippines.

Today, we are witnessing not only the start of the flow of gas from point a to b. This flow represents the beginning of a whole new industry – a natural gas industry that will give us clean and environment-friendly fuel while making us now 52 percent self-sufficient in energy.

Previous to this, we were consuming up to three billion dollars of imported fuel every year. Malampaya will reduce that burden by almost $700 million a year. Over the 20-year period of operation of the project, we also expect to earn at least $13 billion in royalties. These enormous sums should go a very long way towards financing our plans and programs for the conquest of mass poverty and for our country’s modernization.

The Malampaya Project is a contribution to Philippine development of historic proportions. Its impact will be long and widely felt, far beyond the power and energy sector itself, in the daily lives of millions of Filipinos. Many of those Filipinos may have never heard of Malampaya, and maybe never will, because they are far in the hinterlands. But they will be reached and touched by the benefits of natural gas.

Let me therefore congratulate the officers, staff members, engineers, and of course the world-class workers of Shell Philippines Exploration, or SPEX, for the excellent first-class job they have done on this project. Let me also congratulate their partners — Texaco Philippines and the Philippine National Oil Company Exploration Corporation — Thelmo Cunanan is here representing the partners in the Philippines for sharing SPEX’s optimism. The Department of Energy, the National Power Corporation, and the Manila Electric Company, or Meralco, also played key roles in ensuring the commercial viability of this project.

This project was completed before schedule and under budget — that is the way we want to do it in the Philippines. I am proudest, of course, of the fact that the Filipino workers were centrally involved in the construction of the project’s upstream and downstream facilities.

Their core participation in this project is a testament to our world-class skills and our ability to produce first-rate work under the most demanding circumstances. Our friends from the United Kingdom have all been profuse with praise that our engineers and our workers, in fact, are better than many that they have encountered in their long decades of experience all over the world. Let us be proud of them. To the Filipino workers who helped in the successful completion of this project, thank you very much and long live you all!

And let me congratulate that Shell took great care to ensure that the environment is not compromised by such a massive undertaking. The 500-kilometer pipeline runs across some of the Philippines most environmentally-sensitive areas.

And I am glad to be assured by Shell officials that every precaution was taken to preclude damage to the environment. And in the process, they also undertook a number of significant sustainable development and social action projects around the country. And for this, Shell has received global acclaim for this initiative.

The Malampaya Project, which will span decades in its entirety, reminds us of the need to take a long-term view of our prospects and capabilities.

Long-term indeed, I still remember the time during the administration of President Corazon C. Aquino in 1989, I was at a meeting in the Central Bank and we got the great news that natural gas had been discovered off Palawan. And we were so excited and we said when do we inaugurate the completion of the pipeline. They said, 15 years from now, long-term indeed, but what was planted during the time of the Philippines’ first female president, the product of EDSA 1, was inaugurated during the time of the Philippines’ second female president. The product of EDSA, long-term indeed.

And it indeed shows us that we must remember to think long-term and plan long-term even as we seek to approach with a sense of urgency the immediate problems of our times.

And now therefore, speaking of the long-term, let me take this opportunity to set forth the directions and concrete actions that my administration will take to promote the natural gas industry.

First, to achieve the goal of enhancing natural gas utilization, it shall be the policy of our administration to promote activities in the downstream sector by opening the access for all land-based gas pipeline networks to ensure the inflow of investments in this area. I know that several Japanese, Philippine, European and Malaysian companies have already signified their interest of investing in a land-based gas pipeline network from Batangas to Manila and eventually to Bataan. And so therefore, to promote access to all, the Secretary of Energy will encourage these interested parties to organize a consortium for a land gas pipeline project.

Second, as part of the privatization plan for National Power Corporation assets, the government is willing to require the conversion of certain existing National Power Corporation plants into gas-fired power plants, in exchange, of course, for the Malampaya Consortium to consider reducing the gas price lower than their existing gas sales contract. This will provide a direct impact to the consumers through lower electricity rates and reduce future stranded cost under a competitive generation market. Anyway, we would like to point out to our friends from Shell that any drop in revenues from lower gas prices would be more than offset by higher gas sales volume for additional gas-power generation.

Third, in order to win the battle against air pollution and accelerate the benefits of cleaner air, the use of compressed natural gas, or CNG, for all public transport will be given top priority by this administration. We will start first with Batangas in the next two years, and ultimately for the whole of Calabarzon, including Metro Manila, by the year 2004 with the private sector taking the lead. I am calling on the DOE, DOTC and DENR to coordinate their actions to give this impetus by the private sector a boost and support the use of CNG for public transportation vehicles, but again for as long as the price of gas is significantly lower than the price of diesel to effect the conversion the government hopes to achieve.

Fourth, the development and use of small gas fields which have already been discovered and proven will be promoted for non-power applications. Initially, use of the Libertad Field in Cebu and the Sultan Sabarongis Field in Maguindanao shall be considered for use as bottled natural gas much like LPG for non-power applications by 2002.

There are substantial gas potentials from discovered and prospective fields in different parts of the country and the development of these resources shall be at the forefront of our agenda. To sustain the growth of the natural gas industry in this country in the long-term, however, we may need to explore the importation of LPG in the future to improve our energy base if no new gas fields are developed.

Malampaya’s success, however, makes us hopeful that many things are still under our waters. This success elevates government and private sector partnership to a higher level of expectations and results. The natural gas industry in the Philippines is still in its initial stage. We should therefore continue with this formula for a better tomorrow and quality of life for the Filipino people.

Once again, to everyone involved — from the time of President Aquino when the gas was discovered, through the time of President Ramos when the contracts for sales and purchase of gas were signed, and up to the last ones whom we saw on the screen, those who are going to run this plant — to all of you congratulations; and congratulations to Shell and its partners; and congratulations to the people of the Philippines.

Thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library