Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Pamintuan for your introduction of me and for your introduction of our subject matter today.

Distinguished Vice President Noli de Castro, it is unusual for the president and vice president to be together at one occasion, but now because our audience is very important like this one. Chairman of New Era University, Justice Cuevas and other leaders of our members of the board; President of the University, Dr. Osorio, thank you for your welcome remarks and congratulations on the many honors achieved by New Era University. Aside from Secretary Pamintuan and Vice President de Castro, we also have with us our new Press Secretary, Secretary Jun Icban; leaders of the Church; leaders of New Era University; teachers; staff and of course students, good morning to all of you.

I am happy to be here at the university to discuss what we call the Urban Luzon Beltway. I am pleased to be here because it is also an opportunity to pay respect and thank the youth of the Iglesia ni Cristo through you. I remember in 1995 there, of course all candidates were asking for help, I remember I was campaigning in the last days in Laguna, then I said, “Hey! their sample ballot came out, I looked at it, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo was number one on the list.” Thank you very much.

And then after that, thank you for your help, you always brought me and you also brought Noli during his first run in 2001 as senator. And in 2004, you also supported our tandem, so thank you very much.

Because you helped me become Vice President, I became President in 2001. It was a time when our country was at the brink of extreme political turmoil and financial bankruptcy. So as an economist, I know that to recover the economic downturn, we need to instill discipline in the national treasury, grow the economy, and invest in people and infrastructure such as what we call the infrastructure of our Urban Luzon Beltway.

That's what Ed Pamintuan was telling about the Urban Luzon Beltway. The Batangas Port that we built reaches the Southern Luzon Arterial Road or STAR, which we also built, now this STAR is connected to the expanded Southern Luzon Expressway or SLEX up to C5 near here which we expanded and are adding a Commonwealth overpass up to Luzon Avenue and Mindanao Avenue so you won't be stuck in traffic going to school.

We are also connecting it to the new Valenzuela exit being built going to the North Expressway or NLEX up to the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway which reaches the Subic Port that we built. That is the main artery of the Urban Luzon Beltway.

And what are the benefits of this for you who live here or in the surrounding areas? The STAR reduced the Batangas City-Lipa travel from one hour to just a few minutes. That which was finished… then before, now the STAR and the SLEX are currently being connected — according to Vice President de Castro, we will call this the STARLEX Road — this is from Sto. Tomas, Batangas to Calamba which is now very congested but we are building this expressway, it will reduce travel time from Batangas Port to Alabang by one hour.

And because we expanded the SLEX, the traffic from Manila to Calamba is being addressed. And because of that, more people have decided to live in suburban Laguna rather than in very crowded Manila.

That C5-Commonwealth-By-pass Luzon Avenue-Mindanao Avenue-Valenzuela-NLEX highway will reduce travel time between North Luzon and Southern Luzon by half an hour. And because of the NLEX expansion, travel time from Balintawak to Clark is also halved, so many people are now living in the suburbs of Bulacan and Mexico, Pampanga and Metro Manila is being decongested.

So I don’t know how many of you students at New Era live in Bulacan and Pampanga or in Laguna, I expect it will be more convenient when you go to school here at New Era.

And that’s it regarding this, we’re also able to ensure that more and more families are able to own a home because outside, land is cheaper whether the government buys it or the private sector buys it and it’s spacious, the air is good, more conducive to family life.

I remember one of the first important relocation sites was built by the Iglesia brethren in Nueva Ecija a long time ago. So you are pioneers in housing for relocation. You also have a big contribution to our housing in Montalban. So in our administration this is inspiring, so in our administration we have already built almost half a million affordable housing units across the country. And more than 300,000 of the half a million built across the country are here in the Urban Luzon Beltway. And that is being handled by Vice President de Castro in our administration as head of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council.

In the North, in Central Luzon, when the Americans left Subic and Clark, it had long become just a shadow of its former glory. But now, Subic and Clark are magnets of economic activity. International airlines bring half a million tourists to Clark. And in Subic, one of the biggest world-class ships in the world ever built was launched, because Subic Hanjin is now the fourth largest shipyard in the world.

The SCTEX connects us to these two economic zones and more than 150,000 jobs have been created in what we call the Subic-Clark Corridor.

Within Metro Manila, where you live, where we live, the rails have been connected and the LRT and MRT are being connected from Monumento to North EDSA. So look at the drawing, it's complete, our train system is now a whole circle. They are just testing the running of the train to ensure safe operation.

We also added trains to the LRT and perhaps if you remember, our administration extended the LRT to Pasig and Marikina from Recto in Manila.

The train from Kalookan to Malolos to Clark is also being built. But it will take more than two years to finish, it is currently under construction.

In the South, the Northrail and Southrail are also being connected to Lucena, so you see there, shouldn't there be a lot of informal settlers or squatters there in the South? Around Osmeña Highway, right? But in a good and humane way, Vice President Noli de Castro relocated them to various places in Laguna, for example, in SLEX, that's also what's being done here on the route of our train going north.

So many people now live in the NLEX area and SLEX area who were former squatters who were very crowded in Manila, now their lives are more comfortable and better. Noli de Castro and I visit them there, they are happier there and they also have jobs, they have a community, so that is a good result of our Urban Luzon Beltway.

Aside from connecting NLEX and SLEX, we also widened and improved the historic road of EDSA. This helped with the trip from Kalookan to Baclaran. And to reduce flooding, the KAMANAVA Flood Control Project is partly operational. The floodwaters in the areas of Kalookan, Malabon, Navotas are receding faster. So is the dredging of the mouth of the Pasig River.

If you remember Ondoy, the biggest rain to enter the history of the Philippines. The water rose quickly but in the area of Manila, around the mouth of the Pasig River, only a little was flooded and it subsided very quickly because you don't see it because it's under the river, the mouth of the Pasig River has been dredged by 6 meters. That's one of the things we're doing to avoid the extreme sinking of Manila, of Metro Manila because of climate change, really, more frequent and more violent storms will come to this part of the world of our country.

The NAIA, I talked about the Clark Airport but the NAIA too, in our administration, the International Passenger Terminal 3 was finally completed. And now, 170 planes carry 16,500 passengers every day. But we have a choice, the major airlines if you are going to America, of course, that's at NAIA, but if you want to go to Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, where else? Korea, budget airlines, even the Middle East, that's where Clark is, that's the center of our budget airlines, so you have a choice where to ride the plane.

And so that we can ensure the electricity supply, with the expanding population, we built the Biñan-Sucat Transmission Line to increase the electricity for a more comfortable life here in NCR.

For those who refuse to see progress, just show them the skyline of Manila or Eastwood or Global City today. This Eastwood, this Global, those happened in just a few years. It is a skyline with new modern buildings; construction cranes; better roads; hotels; shopping malls; small businesses. This is the part of the Philippines we have helped to nurture and create.

Everything that our government is doing is to make your future, the next generation, more stable. That's why I strive to come here to explain to you what we are doing for your future.

So, you, the youth, are our hope and inspiration. Everything we need to do should be to build a better life for each and every one of our youth.

So I thank President Osorio for saying that you are partners of our government for the development of our country.

Thank you for your long-standing support for me when you made me number one senator, perhaps many of you weren't even born yet. So your eyes have been opened, we are working together and I hope until the end of what we need to do for our country, we will continue to work together.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Urban Luzon Beltway Tour: Visit to the New Era University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232657/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27529&Itemid=38