Thank you very much for your very warm welcome. Hello.

Mr. President of Nanchang University; Mr. Huang, Governor of Jiangxi; officials of the Philippine government who are with me today; officials of the communist party of the Philippines here in Jiangxi; students and teachers of this great and beautiful university, Nanchang University, good afternoon to all of you.

I am so happy to be here this afternoon. You know, many years ago before I entered politics, I was a professor of economics. And it was my pleasure to be always with young college students like you. But that was about… Oh, maybe that was 1987 or so, I stopped teaching, I joined the government and it’s a great opportunity for me to be here once again to be speaking with young people. I like speaking with young people because it keeps me young. Thank you for this opportunity to speak with you.

I’ve been to China many times but this is my first time here in Nanchang. And it really gives me great pleasure to have a chance to be here to visit different parts of China because as a young professor many years ago, I became co-chairman of the Association for Philippines-China Understanding and we worked for the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the Philippines.

And I am so happy that today our relations are at an all-time high. When we were in Chile together for the APEC Summit, President Hu Jintao described our relationship as having entered a golden age. In 2004, I made a state visit to Beijing. It was my second state visit because I had made one in 2001. And in 2005, President Hu Jintao also made a state visit to Manila. That was the 30th year of our diplomatic relations.

During the period that China joined the world as a market economy, it has benefited the Philippines very much and our bilateral relationship. Our trade amounted to seven billion dollars last year. China is the third largest market of the Philippines. And our investments, hopefully with my continuing visits here will also increase between our two countries. But what can I say is that I am very proud of our Filipino-Chinese living in the Philippines. They are among our largest businessmen in the Philippines. They provide us with wealth but they also loved China and they also invest here in China.

In fact here in Jiangxi province, we have a big investment from a Filipino-Chinese, Mr. Carlos Chan, and he’s right here, somewhere here. He produces food snacks. So maybe sometimes when you’re having your snack between your classes, maybe you are eating the products of Mr. Carlos Chan, the Filipino-Chinese who is here in Jiangxi.

But today, I would like to speak with you more not only about Philippine-China relations but more about ASEAN-China relations. The reason why I have chosen this topic is that it is the occasion of my visit to China this year.

I am deeply honored to co-chair with Premier Wen Jiabao the Commemorative Summit in Nanning to celebrate the 15th anniversary of the ASEAN-China Partnership. It is important to commemorate special anniversaries like 15 years of partnership with open dialogue and trust between peoples and nations. This manner of keeping our relationship has never been more important than in today’s world. We are a globalized world which should always be speaking with one another.

I am not the only ASEAN leader who is coming here. All of the ASEAN leaders are in China to celebrate this very important milestone for China, for the region and the world — the 15 years of ASEAN-China collaboration.

President Yudhoyono of Indonesia will be here, the head of the 4th largest country in the world. Of course behind China, the largest country in the world of all. Prime Minister Badawi of Malaysia will be here. The new Prime Minister of Thailand, Surayud, will be here. The Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Hsien Loong will also be here. The Sultan of Brunei, Sultan Bolkiah, will also be here, I mean in Nanning. And so with all the other leaders of Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, Vietnam, all of us to celebrate with China our 15 years of deep friendship.

And I am very honored that the Philippines is the co-chair with China because we are the co-chair of ASEAN this year. And that’s why I take this opportunity to speak as chairman of ASEAN, and speaking as chairman of ASEAN, what I would like to say is that for one thing ASEAN takes some amount of pride and satisfaction in helping China become an economic powerhouse as a result of economic, political and cultural collaboration between ASEAN and China. China started its very rapid development 20 years ago. And 15 years ago, it was the first country to become a dialogue partner of ASEAN.

During the Commemorative Summit, we will be celebrating 15 years of substantive and fruitful relations between ASEAN and China. Further, we will assess current ASEAN -China dialogue relations and set out the direction for the next 15 years when you, the young students of Nanchang will be the leaders of Chinese society and economy.

China has surged onto the world stage. I’m sure you know that and you feel that especially your parents feel it. ASEAN has also surged with China. The change has been profound. ASEAN welcomes the deepening of ties through the ASEAN -China free trade agreement. This is an agreement between ASEAN and China that is built on respect, reciprocity and pragmatism. It will help all of our economies grow and strengthen peace and security in the region.

This ASEAN -China free trade area enables both parties to reduce and eliminate the tariffs for a range of products, and this reduction or elimination of tariff duties will have a positive effect. The free trade area will have a positive effect on the development of China because the ASEAN region represents a market of over half a billion people for Chinese exports and a supplier of much-needed resources. In turn, it will also have a positive effect on the development of ASEAN countries because ASEAN countries can reduce our dependence on western markets such as the U.S. and Europe for our exports.

The ASEAN -China partnership remains one of the most dynamic and progressive in the East Asian region. When China and ASEAN first began relations 15 years ago in 1991, the focus was on cooperation in economic and trade relations. Over the past 15 years, this relationship has evolved. It is no longer just economic and trade, it now includes cooperation on political security, development and other regional issues.

So it gives me great pleasure to come today to speak to the young people of Nanchang and say that relations between ASEAN and China have never been better or stronger. This is an important state of affairs that can only help the region and the world.

As I said earlier, we will be co-chairing, the Philippines will be co-chairing with China the Commemorative Summit. This is because we are the chair of the upcoming ASEAN leaders meeting as well as the host of the East Asia Summit. The East Asia Summit is a dialogue among ASEAN, China, Japan, Korea, India, Australia and New Zealand. We had the first East Asian Summit in Kuala Lumpur last year. And last year, both the ASEAN leaders… The ASEAN, incidentally, the East Asian Summit and the ASEAN Leaders’ Meeting will take place in the beautiful Philippine Island of Cebu this december. I mentioned that because the governor of Cebu is here. Please give her a warm welcome also. Doesn’t she look like a student from Nanchang University? Anyway, I take great pride in representing the nation and the region at these upcoming gatherings.

Now to go back to what I was saying earlier about holding the very first East Asian Summit that was last year, that was in Kuala Lumpur, that was in December of 2005, and at that time in that summit — it was the very first East Asian Summit — we talked about what is East Asia? What is the East Asian Summit? What is the East Asian community? And we agreed that the East Asian community is a long-term goal that would contribute to regional peace, security, prosperity and progress in the region. We also agreed that the East Asian Summit with ASEAN as the driving force because it was born out of ASEAN meetings with dialogue partners is an integral part of the overall evolving architecture of this region, the East Asian region. Right now composed as I said of ASEAN, China, Japan, Korea, India, Australia, New Zealand.

The East Asia Summit leaders in Kuala Lumpur last year agreed that the East Asia Summit, together with the ASEAN + China, Japan and Korea dialogue, the ASEAN + China, the ASEAN + Japan and ASEAN + Korea would play significant roles in community building in East Asia. There have been so many dialogues between ASEAN and other partners since 1991. But the very first one was China — that’s the ASEAN + China dialogue.

Later on, we developed the ASEAN + Japan dialogue. We developed the ASEAN + Korea dialogue. And because these are our three neighbors to the north, we developed the ASEAN + 3 dialogue where ASEAN dialogues together with Japan, Korea and China all in one table. And then later on, Australia and New Zealand joined us, and then India joined us, so it became bigger and bigger. So this is what now we call East Asia, and the dialogue of all of us together is called the East Asian Summit.

So because all of this started from ASEAN, dialoguing with other partners, other friends and all of this started in 1991, 15 years ago, because we signed a treaty of dialogue with China, both ASEAN and China have important roles to play. Singly, ASEAN has a role to play. China has a role to play. Jointly, ASEAN + China as a dialogue partners have a role to play. And in conjunction with the other members of the East Asian Summit because now on its second year, the East Asian Summit is becoming a strategic forum for the East Asian region.

Sometimes I am asked, “You’re friend with China, and then you’re friends with India, and then you’re friends with Japan. Is there no conflict in these relationships?” Of course not. China sees no conflict in its relations with… Ah, no. ASEAN sees no conflict in its relationship with China vis-a-vis ASEAN relations with Japan and India.

Why are we asked whether there’s a conflict? I supposed it’s because Japan and India are the other two economic powerhouses of Asia aside from China. After all, in the same manner as ASEAN’s relations with China, ASEAN’s dialogue relations with Japan and India are treated with respect, pragmatism, and reciprocity. ASEAN places great emphasis on the unique value of each dialogue partner.

Well, I have tried to explain to you where we are now from the first time that China became a dialogue partner of ASEAN. Other countries started to join us and now we have become one big East Asia community. Yet what is most important is not what has transpired between ASEAN and China or even between the Philippines and China for that matter. What is important is what happens next. What will our relationship look like 15 years from today when you, the students, who are sitting in the second half of this auditorium will be sitting on the front row because you will be the leaders of China? Will our economies have improved? Will there be less poverty and more prosperity? Will the world be safer and more secure?

These are the issues that we must focus our attention on. These are the issues that will be the subject of our meetings in Nanning and later on in the Philippines as we forge a vision of what the future will be like for the next generation, your generation.

All of these will be the subject of our upcoming meeting. And at the end of the meeting, we will probably issue a declaration on what our vision will be like.

Let me share with you some of my own thoughts about what I would tell our other colleagues in ASEAN and in China about the future: going forward, we shall continue to strengthen ASEAN -China partnership. How? For one thing, by promoting confidence-building measures. For example, there had been long conflicts, long-term conflicts between different countries claiming different or overlapping parts of the South China Sea. There is a claim by China, there is a claim by the Philippines, there is a claim by Vietnam, other countries. But what we have done in ASEAN + China, we have turned that area of possible conflict into an area of cooperation instead because China and the Philippines agreed that instead of fighting all the time over that sea, we will conduct joint research, seismic research in the South China Sea.

At first Vietnam objected because they also have a claim. But we were able to convince them to join us. So now we have been able to conclude a joint seismic research: China, the Philippines and Vietnam in the South China Sea. And we should go forward now, now that the seismic research has been done and the findings are being collated if warranted, we should consider having joint exploration in the South China Sea.

Another way by which we can strengthen and deepen the relationship between ASEAN and China is to intensify interactions, for example, more trade. The China trade with ASEAN has grown tremendously since China joined the WTO. But I am very proud that among China’s trade with all the countries of ASEAN, the fastest growing trade is China’s trade with the Philippines.

And let’s continue to do that. For instance, we have a lot of trade with China, Philippines and China. But I was looking at the statistics, a lot of our trade is with Guandong, Guanzhou, not enough with Nanchang, not enough with Jiangxi. So, my visit here I hope will be a catalyst so that we will talk more with one another and trade more with one another — your province and our country.

Tourism is another very important way by which we can intensify our relationship. China, you, the young people, I understand, have become very curious about the rest of the world, because China has become very rich over the past 20 years. Twenty years before or 25 years before, the Chinese hardly travelled outside of China. But now you are so curious about the world, and we the rest of the world are also very frequent visitors to China because you have so much history and you have so much beauty. I hope that we will be able to intensify tourism.

In the Philippines, for instance, the number of tourists that went to China in 20… No, no. The number of Chinese tourists that went to the Philippines in 2005 is almost three times the number of 2004, very rapid increase. But a very, very small percentage compared to China’s tourists going to the rest of the world, just a hundred thousand but from 30,000 the year before. Maybe this year, hopefully we can have 300,000. We would like to have more and more of people-to-people exchange. Filipinos very frequently come to China, I hope the Chinese go very frequently to the Philippines.

Well, I advertised Cebu earlier. Let me now advertise your sister province in the Philippines, the province of Bohol. The province of Bohol just like the province of Cebu, and just like the island of Boracay are all very famous for our beaches. And I hope that very soon, you, the young people of Nanchang will go to the Philippines on tours organized by the tour operators of your city and your province.

Another way by which we can intensify our relationship is to allocate adequate resources to steer the relations and cooperation for mutual benefit. For instance, I understand that China provides preferential loans to support projects invested in by Chinese companies within ASEAN. That is very, very welcome. And I hope that therefore as there are so many Filipino- Chinese investing in China — I think there are at least 1,200 Chinese-Filipino investments in China — I hope there will also be many investments in China going to the Philippines.

Right now what are we doing among ourselves in ASEAN? Right now, the ASEAN member-countries are currently channeling our efforts towards integrating our priority sectors. We have 11 priority sectors among us. Is that not right, Mr. Jose Concepcion, who is the Chairman of the ASEAN Business Advisory Council for the Philippines? These are agro-based products, air travel, automotive products, E- ASEAN — which is electronic ASEAN — electronics, fisheries, health care, rubber-based products, textiles and apparels, tourism, and wood-based product.

By integrating these 11 industries, we envision a region transformed into one single and efficient production base. ASEAN is working towards eliminating non-tariff barriers among us. Meaning, we will have no more outright prohibition in our products going to each other, and we will remove unnecessary technical requirements on one another’s export products, and we will eliminate quantitative barriers. Meaning, we will no longer have limits on the volume of products a particular ASEAN country imports from another ASEAN country. In this way, ASEAN becomes one economy even if we are 10 political countries.

As we do this integration among ourselves in ASEAN, we will be able to strengthen ASEAN ‘s role. We will be able to strengthen ASEAN’s bargaining position vis-a-vis other large markets, giant markets in the world. And together with ASEAN’s partnership with China through the ASEAN -China free trade area, where we let out products go in between ASEAN and China with no tariff or very low tariff, what a huge integrated market that will be that will benefit consumers and suppliers alike.

China is the fastest growing developing country in the world, aside from being the most populous. And therefore China has a strategic and important role to play in the economic development and security situation of the Asia-Pacific region.

The rest of us in East Asia and even in Asia-Pacific expect China to take the lead in promoting good neighborly relations and regional cooperation by handling sensitive issues with surrounding countries in a manner that is guided by the spirit of equality, respect, consultation and mutual benefit.

To summarize and in other words, we are hopeful that China will continue to pursue its foreign policy which as we can see right now is based on the maintenance of world peace and the promotion of common development. We congratulate China for that.

And to conclude, why am I saying that here in Nanchang University, in front of the young people of Nanchang? Because I am hopeful that Nanchang University being a producer of future leaders will forge future Chinese leaders who will carry on the vision of greater regional harmony, cooperation and engagement.

Xie-xie. Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech before the Students of Nanchang University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203724/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2999&Itemid=38