Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On the 14th Congress

[ Delivered at the House of Representatives, Batasan Pambansa, Quezon City, June 7, 2007 ]

Hello 14th Congress!

We are glad that the elections are over and most of the winners proclaimed. On this occasion of the centennial of the Philippine Congress, we affirm the unity and forward course of the nation. The Filipino people have united behind democracy.

We congratulate all the winners in the election, and all those who are still to be proclaimed. We thank all the candidates of whatever party or political persuasion who fought hard and well to win the vote. The campaign has had its contentious moments, but it’s time to be magnanimous, win or lose. The interest of the people dictates that we must close all chapters of strife and recrimination.

We close the chapter of electoral battles and open the chapter of national consolidation and solidarity. We call upon the nation to close the contest of the ballot and step up the contest of excellence in all fields all for one and one for all.

The overwhelming victory of our coalition in the House of Representatives and in the local governments is a continuing mandate of reform, unity, more work and less politics.

We all have a mandate to look forward and leave behind the contentious past. We look forward to the continuing support of Congress, and thank you for your prayers for our safe journey. It’s good to be home among allies resolved to work together to lift everyone up and make sure no one is left behind.

Our work must be a national enterprise where no one loses and everybody wins. The sun never sets from the work of a president nor of Congress in the modern world. We all must do our part in honing the competitiveness of the nation. We must make sure we maintain the momentum. We’re totally focused on the economy because only a strong economy will lift our people out of poverty and expand our middle-class.

We thank the 13th Congress for passing the tough reforms to move this nation forward. That was the first phase of our turnaround plan to stabilize our budget and spending and then secure increased revenue through better tax and customs collection and through an increase in taxes especially the value-added tax which you accomplished. And I thank you for that.

You accomplished what a painful but necessary steps. And you achieved that goal. And therefore because of you, the budget is under control for the first time in a very long time. And the people took the cue. With all their might, energy and will, they are rewriting our recent history.

Investments are pouring in, not only foreign investments but also investment in small, medium and micro-enterprises. And because of you, there is enough money in our budget to expand our investments in infrastructure and social welfare. Thus, because of you, we are poised to break the back of poverty.

The vision outlined in our State of the Nation Address is one that many of you in Congress share, and many of you want to see fulfilled. And I thank you because you found the resources to make these important investments possible.

After elections as a new Congress comes in, it is a season, it is a time of hope and unity. And we pray that this will be the advent of a new Filipino nation in the palm of the lord. This 14th Congress looks like it will be the most powerful Philippine legislature in terms of number, talent, and with God’s grace, unity. We are confident that Congress will use the power bestowed upon you to take us a significant step forward everyday in the next three years embracing a future of peace, solidarity, stability and prosperity.

Let the ideas that this Congress has stood for in a century… Over a century—freedom, liberty and equality — like our path forward. Congress, the Executive and even the Judiciary, let us all be together in order to give a good future for our people.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library