Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference for Human Development

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, July 6, 2001]

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Ging.

My other cabinet members; our honorable bishops especially his Eminence, and also Reverend Cari’o who is the co-chairman of the CBCP, and also Bishop Villena; my former boss, Secretary Concepcion; Mr. Jaime who is honorary co-chair of BBC; Bishop Gutierrez; Ambassador Dy; Itto Carlos; Architect Ferrer; other participants of this conference; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Thank you for this opportunity to be once again with the bishops-businessmen’s conference. I’ve been with you many, many times before. I remember being with you when I was newly elected as vice president of the Philippines and I’m glad to be with you again this time as president.

The bishops-businessmen’s conference reminds us that we are not only citizens of a country, but as St. Paul wrote in Philippians 3:20, also “citizens of heaven.

Notwithstanding the separation of church and state, there is really no conflict in promoting the principles of both church and state, because both church and state aspire for righteousness and truth.

I am reminded of what his holiness Pope John Paul II stated while emphasizing the spiritual goals of the great jubilee. He said: “the Christian community is called to walk with Christ along today’s man, sustaining him in the difficult search for truth and helping him in some way to perceive the presence of the redeemer where he lives out his daily life marked with uncertainty for tomorrow, injustice, disorientation and sometimes desperation.

This is also what I see as my mission for the people of the Philippines as president, especially for the people who feel injustice and desperation. I hope that what I can do as president will be to bring the face of the redeemer to these people. That is really what I would like to do as a Christian president.

And it is important to believe as, cardinal said earlier, Cardinal Vidal, about the timing of the lord, also that we may not know when the crisis will end, but the lord knows and his timing is perfect.

Some say it was wrong timing to arrest former president Estrada before the elections. Well, in the first place, that decision was not in my hands, it was in the hands of the Sandiganbayan. And if we are to practice new politics and morality in public service, if the constitution says the Sandiganbayan is separate and independent of the executive, we must respect that independence.

In fact there was a special committee of my cabinet members in charge of security who would meet on planning the details of having to carry out the arrest, and once or twice they met with me and they asked me, when do you think the arrest should be, before or after the elections, and I would say, that’s not my call, that’s the Sandiganbayan’s call. And as far as I’m concerned, anything that is not within my call, anything that is not within my control, I consider as totally within God’s control and I must accept whatever timing he gives because the Lord’s timing is perfect; and the Lord’s timing is perfect for when he will solve the crisis our country is in today.

If I could only tell you what I saw in the intelligence reports after elections! And how the timing saved the life of my government, but I cannot share them with you lest my critics will attack me again for revealing raw information. But I can say that what I learned afterwards affirm me in my trust and my faith that the timing of the arrest as dictated by the lord was the perfect timing. And so I ask all of you, bishops and businessmen, it is true, let us have faith, let us have faith in the Lord, his timing is perfect as there was each one of us will do our part. But if we will not do our part, if I will not govern well, and if the businessmen will say, wait and see, then the lord will not be obliged to give us his perfect timing. When the lord did his first miracle at Caena, first, he said that they must put the jug there. So before he could turn the water into wine, man had to do his part. And if we are to expect that god will exercise his perfect timing, let us all do our part. Businessmen and bishops have much power and the lord expects you to do your part. I know he expects me to do my part and everyday I seek to the song what my part is. So I’m very grateful for the prayer that was made earlier that it said give the president and her government the discernment to do what is right for the welfare of the people. I need that prayer because everyday I do that discernment.

Aside from despair and being unwilling to do our part. One of the evils of today’s evil society is growing materialism, growing materialism feeds greed. The comforts and glamour of physical or material power abets man’s natural desire for it. Earlier, there was much talk about corruption and, yes, we must fight corruption. But there are also things over and above corruption that we must fight because they may be not corrupt practices in themselves but they reveal a sense of materialism that is not right for public service.

It may not be illegal to earn P5-10 million a year from a government corporation position, that may not be corrupt in itself but it shows materialism if the executives continue to resist when the president has already called attention that it is too much for a bleeding people. I am speaking here of presidential appointees and nominees. I am not speaking of career executives who rose from the ranks and for whom the fruit of their labor is their only source of income. They, of course, deserve that fruit of their labor. And so career executives are not covered by the pay cut that I have asked for, only presidential appointees and nominees. I am stressing this because some recalcitrants in order to get support from the rank and file and the career executives are pretending to champion the career executives in their disguised counter-attacks against the drive for CEOs and board members to exercise simplicity and austerity. And so I call up on the CEOs and members of the board, do your part, do not drag the career executives into this quarrel because they are not involved at all.

On the other hand, I want to thank and appreciate and recognize those CEOs and members of the boards who have already agreed to their pay cut or have agreed to donate their excess pay to the government. There are a number of them and their names had been published in the newspapers.

Winning the battle against poverty within the decade is indeed the main goal of this administration. So I’m glad that the bishop-businessmen’s conference and the government are exactly on the same wavelength.

My colleagues in the profession, in the economics profession, said that this government has been sidelining poverty. No, we are not sidelining poverty. That is the work that I spend most of my time doing but that is not the work that makes headlines. So let me say that our work is indeed poverty. I leave the war — except for a new major announcements — to my defense officials and my military officials. I leave prosecution and retribution — except that make so much headlines — to my prosecutors and the Sandiganbayan. My micro management goes to the fight against poverty.

The battle against poverty in the world of the 21st century is set in a battleground that is truly a new economy. In this new economy, relentless forces such as capital market flows and advances in information technology create both peril and opportunity. In this battleground, our road map in our fight against poverty consists of four components that I have announced many times before and I believe I cannot announce them too often.

First, to tap the opportunities of the new economy, we need an economic philosophy of transparency and free enterprise, for these are the catalysts that nurture the entrepreneurial spirit to be globally competitive.

And so I congratulate the community of Cebu, the bishops and the businessmen of Cebu, because of your transparency drive. And as Secretary Concepcion said that the rest should replicate this, may I ask the bishop-businessmen’s conference to replicate this in the Bureau of Customs.

In the Bureau of Customs, well, I think, more or less, the smuggling has been reduced significantly. Why do I say this? Because the Bureau of Customs has exceeded its collection target — that means the leakage has gone down. But where, I think, the bishops and the businessmen can help in the transparency is in the daily transactions that the legitimate businessmen who need to import the raw materials and supplies for their ordinary business have to go through. Open drawers or whatever is the symbol of how they do it now that is where the bishops and the businessmen can help because lack of transparency not only erodes government coffers, it also erodes the working capital of businessmen and thus reduces profit margins, reduces jobs for our people.

Second component of our fight against poverty, to extend the opportunities to our rural countryside, we must create a modernized and socially equitable agricultural sector. Secretary Concepcion said that never have there been budgets for one percent, more than one percent of the budget goes to poverty alleviation. One reason perhaps is that agriculture really has never gotten more than P12 billion in any one year, and even in the year that it got P12 billion last year the release was about P6 billion. This year, because it’s a reenacted budget, the allocation is still P12 billion but because of the power realignment and the power to be able to float bonds, the budget that we will provide for agricultural modernization is P20 billion for the year 2001.

Third component in our fight against poverty: to address the perils, we must give a social bias to balance our economic development, and these are embodied in safety nets for sectors affected by globalization, something we have always talked about but never really attended to. And that is why Pat Sto. Tomas is working on that — she has given as a framework for that. And I hope that we will be able, at last, to have a really focused program for these safety nets.

Another embodiment of a social bias is, of course, safeguards for our environment, and a sectoral anti-poverty strategy which is being put together by the national anti-poverty commission.

Fourth component of our fight against poverty — our blueprint — is to ensure that our gains are not dissipated through corruption. Indeed, JC cannot forget what I said when I became president, we must improve our moral standards because as we do so, we create fertile ground for good governance based on a sound moral foundation, a philosophy of transparency, and an ethic of effective implementation.

Let me go to the third component because our main task is to fight poverty and therefore, the direct battle, frontline battle, against poverty is the social bias to balance our economic development. The sectoral anti-poverty program was formulated by the national anti-poverty commission under Ging after several months of consulting with the people from the time we took office last January 20th.

And as a result of their consultation, our sectoral anti-poverty strategy has five core thrusts. One of them is asset reform and I was told by a businessman, you know I read your five core thrust if I couldn’t understand what they mean, how can the poor understand what you are trying to do to them? So let me put asset reform in layman’s language — concrete and quantitative. What we mean here, for example, is that secretary Sonny Alvarez is not only supposed to safeguard our environment but he is also supposed to redistribute 100,000 hectares of public agricultural land a year for land reform. That is a specific objective and a specific assignment under assets reform.

More fundamentally, the secretary of Agrarian Reform must also distribute, per year, 100,000 hectares of private agricultural land, and I am confident that notwithstanding the controversies that Nani Braganza is getting into — because these are all inherited problems — I’ve told him, Nani, you give those inherited problem about old cloas that got returned, or whatever it is, to your most hotshot undersecretary because to me, what you will answer for is whether you will be able to distribute 100,000 hectares to the poor this year. And it looks like he’s on the way to doing it because we are now in July and he has already redistributed 70,000 hectares.

So the headlines may talk about the 5,000 hectares that we inherited that are still undergoing controversy. But there is no headline when he’s able to redistribute them to the poor. 70,000 hectares of no headline is true attention to poverty more than any headline we can make about the Abu Sayyaf and Erap’s detention.

To Mike Defensor, he set his own target because of what he has already accomplished. And I think because of what he has already accomplished, we will be able to grant security of land tenure to 300,000 urban poor families this year. Is that correct Mike? You’ll be able to do that? Where is he? He ran away. But he’s done it because when I was 100 days in office, I announced that we have distributed security of tenure documents for 100,000 families — a thousand families a day. When I finished my, now that I was looking and preparing for the SONA, I saw that he has done a 170,000 families so he’s still doing a thousand families a day. So I guess, if we have roughly 300,000 days a year, then he’ll be able to do 300,000 families. And that’s why I believe that this kind, again, of asset distribution, while it doesn’t make headlines — unless we do it right there in the community, and we have very nice photo opportunities — that is really putting the poor in center stage and not in the sidelines.

A second thrust of the anti-poverty strategy is, well — I erased the technical language but just to illustrate — it says, providing the financial and institutional support for strengthening human development services. Oh what does that mean? It simply means according to the targets I have given, I told Secretary Manolet Dayrit that within 12 months, my target for him is to reduce the price of basic medicines used by the poor to one-half of current prices. Also, I’ve also asked Secretary Raul Roco that when he constructs school buildings, he must make sure that every barangay will end up with at least one school building.

Then you have, as part of this sectoral anti-poverty strategy, safety nets for the poorest of the poor, such as livelihood, training, grameen financing; and in the P20 billion mentioned that we will be making available for agricultural modernization, when the budget was just P12 billion, the budget for irrigation was only P2 billion but the agricultural modernization law says that in the first year of modernization we should provide P6 billion for irrigation. So, the money was not for the mouth was. And three weeks ago, I asked Leony Montemayor, well, if we’ve only got P2 billion let’s spend that first. How much have you spent? He said P700 million. No, I said Leony by this time, you should have spent P3 billion. And I am very happy to say that last week he came to me very proud and said, we already have P4.9 billion obligated. By the miracle of budget management Emy Boncodin made available to him nearly P5 billion and he is very confident he will get that last P1.1 billion, and we will have P6 billion for agriculture specifically for irrigation in the year 2001.

My personal pet project for the urban poor — and I mentioned this already to the league of corporate foundations — is a special emergency employment program for the out-of-school, out-of-work urban poor of metro Manila. I don’t know exactly how many they are but I’m guessing there must be 300,000-strong, but I hope that we can give them some kind of employment whether it is fixing the leaking roof of their tenement house or the broken railing or cleaning the estero. And I am very happy to say that when I was flying over Manila today by helicopter, a lot of the flooding has gone down that’s because since three months ago, we started cleaning up the estero. There were no headlines when we cleaned-up the estero I hope there will be some headlines about how fast the water has gone down.

Another portion of the anti-poverty strategy is to empower the poor, to participate in governance and decision-making. And in your bishops-business conference this morning you demonstrated how the poor can indeed participate. In the NAPC which we are making as the most important forum for our anti-poverty fight, we have started and will continue to have institutionalized consultations. This will be the main avenue for the poor to participate in governance — through their duly selected representatives in the national anti-poverty commission.

And finally, protecting the underprivileged sectors against violence and exploitation. What does this mean? Domestic violence, sexual harassment. For among the underprivileged sectors those who especially need this kind of protection are what they call the five fingers of social work: children like street children; youth like those who become victims of the drug pushers; women victims of rape, sexual harassment and even sexual exploitation in the home — incest; persons with disabilities who are discriminated against in the area of work; and older persons who are neglected and made to feel that they are no longer useful. Then we have in our prayers the poorest people in our country today, the indigenous peoples. And I am very happy that Ambassador Howard Dee is there to make sure that they are not marginalized.

With regard to the grameen, or microcredit system, indeed I hope this will proliferate. The government’s direct contribution is supposed to be the people’s credit and finance corporation. And this is supposed to be, indeed the grameen replication of the government, but I am sad to say that there is so much red tape in PCFC that up to now the P2 billion portfolio has not really reach the poor. What a waste, P2 billion. We placed an O.I.C. there while we were looking for a permanent head, and I looked at the successful grameen banks, and I wonder whether she’s a member of the bishops-business conference but I think that I am really quiet impressed in Negros Occidental with its excellent grameen bank — the Negros women for tomorrow. So I hope the head of the Negros women for tomorrow grameen bank, Cecile del Castilo will agree to be head of the people’s credit and finance corporation. Help me convince her to accept the position cause I don’t know whether she will accept it yet.

Indeed the tasks are formidable but, as my former boss says, the Filipino can, yes, they are doable. And all of the quantitative schedule targets I have given are doable and all of the budgetary outlays that I have mentioned are doable because we vetted then in the cabinet. And from the examples of your plenary session on Tabang Mindanaw, the Payatas social housing initiatives, it is evident that our people may be poor but they have the sincere desire and the capability of helping themselves.

The theme of your assembly — “upgrading the quality of life through dialogue and partnership” conforms indeed with one of my core beliefs: the need to graduate from traditional politics of patronage to the new politics of institutionalized consultation with the people. As we dialogued, and we find out exactly what the people need in a particular community and we are able to together look for solutions, that is the new politics of consultation rather than the old politics of patronage.

And I am happy to note that the bishop-businessmen’s conference is now working with and engaged in dialogue with our government on issues that pertain to the poor. And as you have seen from our anti-poverty strategy, your concerns on housing, employment, health and education for the poor, as well as the protection of the environment and our indigenous communities are among the priorities of this administration.

In my speech after taking my oath of office as president, indeed I said that one of my four core values is to improve moral standards in government and in society. And it was in pursuit of this value that I issued administrative order no. 1 prohibiting agencies, government agencies from dealing with my relatives on the matters of contracts, supplies, and appointments to positions. It was in pursuit of this value that I devolved to the NEDA the president’s power to review contracts worth P50 million and above. And that resulted in something good because our ODA absorption which was terribly low last year has been praised now by your ODA sources as much better now. And according to Dante Canlas, one of the reasons for the bottleneck last year was that all those contracts P50 million and above were getting stuck in Malacañang so therefore the absorption capacity was low. But when I devolved it to an institutionalized agency which has its own set-up already mechanism for reviewing contracts and projects — the NEDA — then it move much faster.

One example were when you seek to promote morality, you also provide efficiency in government and better services. It has also in pursuit of this value that we are four-square behind the commissioner on Internal Revenue Rene Baez in his drive to clean-up his agency. The man is suffering for the good work he is doing. We are just grateful that in the TRO fight, the supreme ruled in his favor but no sooner did the supreme court ruled in his favor that now the very same people who sued him for the reshuffle are now suing him for plunder, no less, of a case that was done when he was still in the private sector and therefore he can only get a private lawyer he cannot even get a public lawyer to defend him in this case. And what you don’t know is that he has also been receiving death threats. So, you can imagine the pressure from his family and his dearest friends. And because the bishops are very close to heaven, and the businessmen are concerned with transparency in government — especially the BIR and Customs — let us pray that Rene Baez will stay the course, keep working because we do not want a resignation of somebody who has been fighting so hard, we do not want him to surrender to the forces of evil. We must all be behind him in action, in declaration and in prayer.

It was also in pursuit of the value of improving moral standards in government and in society that I banned the movie Live Show. I remember the first opinion survey conducted after that which showed my approval and trust ratings down. And according to the analysts, one of the reasons indeed for my decline was certain unpopular decisions including the banning of “live show.” but if that is the sacrifice I have to make as a president — to improve moral standards in government and in society — then I am willing to sacrifice my popularity all over again. Thank goodness, however, that in the last survey which just came out today — the lord’s timing is really perfect — my approval ratings and trust ratings have jumped up again. So, the lord is affirming me that I must be doing something right.

Today in the gospel, Jesus Christ said, go and learn the meaning of the word I desire mercy not sacrifice, and in today’s newspapers, the evaluation or the analysis of why my ratings improved again was the healing that I have been trying to do. So there may be some who demand retribution and they do not approve of what I do. But now I have been affirmed not only by the survey that came out but also by the gospel reading of today that healing is start of leadership.

Improving moral standards in government and in society includes fighting crime. We recognize the challenge of maintaining peace and order and a climate acceptable to the bishops and attractive to the businessmen. And the government, let me assure you, is not willing to be held hostage by kidnap syndicates. Thus we have gone full stride with a relentless pursuit of these syndicates.

I expect that the new anti-crime council that I am creating today — I asked Nonong Cruz to rush the papers so I can sign them today — led by the justice secretary and including the defense, interior, investigation, police and intelligence agencies, will boost the campaign against kidnapping. This council includes representatives of the Chinese-Filipino community whose advise is crucial and whose support is essential to our anti- kidnapping efforts.

And if you do not believe the statistics that show that notwithstanding the headlines of today, index crimes are down 10 percent since a year ago, perhaps I can cite some headlines from the first six months of the previous administration to refresh your memory: July 6, 1998, Inquirer, kidnappings up again, says anti-crime group; July 8, 1998, Inquirer, 2 Tsinoy Kids Kidnapped, 1998 not year 2001; July 8, 1998, 2 fil-chi schoolgirls abducted; Star, July 4, 1998, Muslim rebs kidnap 9 Zambo students; July 15, 1998, from the newspaper today, 30 jeepney passengers in Basilan abducted; Philippine Star, July 19, 1998, LTO auditor, 2 companions kidnapped; Inquirer, July 20, 1998, kidnappings result in -b capital flight; Philippine Star, Sept. 21, 1998, soldier’s son abducted, captive auditor escapes; Malaya, Sept. 11, 1998, Taiwanese family of 3 snatched; Bulletin, Sept. 11, 1998, Abu Sayyaf men kidnap 3 Taiwanese; Inquirer, Sept. 12, 1998, kidnappers take 3 Hong Kong traders, different from the Taiwanese; Sept. 14 1998, Manila Times, 1998, kidnapped Taiwanese son warns: we’ll close shop if Ma is not rescued; Times, Sept. 16, 1998, kidnappers strike again; today, Sept. 16, 1998, kidnappers test Erap, take 8th victim in just one week; Standard, Sept. 16, 1998, sixth kidnap victim in 7 days; Star, Sept. 26, 1998, DAR chief’s daughter kidnapped by influential landlord; Star, Oct. 7, baker’s daughter kidnapped; Star, Oct. 7, 1998, new kidnapping; Journal, Oct. 11, 1998, kidnap cases rise; manhunt on for killers of abducted Fil-Chi trader, that’s different from the earlier Fil abductions in the headlines; Oct. 12, 1998, Filipino-Chinese groups score new kidnap wave; Manila Times, Oct. 12, 1998, hotel owner abducted by law enforcers?; Malaya, Oct. 12, 1998, no ransom means getting killed; Manila Times, Oct. 12, 1998, kidnap-for-ransom cases up under Erap; Oct. 15, 1998, negotiator slain; 3 more abducted; Oct. 19, 1998, kidnappers grab another trader; Manila Times, Oct. 19, 1998, kidnappers strike again; Inquirer, Oct. 22, 1998, kidnappers taunt Erap, grab two more; Businessworld, Oct. 22, 1998, another kidnapping reported; Philippine Star, Oct. 22, 1998, Sayyaf rebs snatch Zambo physician; Philippine Star, Nov. 22, 1998, kidnappers seek P8 M for 3 Hong Kong men; Sandard, Nov. 25, 1998, jeepney operator, aide kidnapped; Philippine Star, Dec. 20, 1998, 2 children killed; today, Dec. 29, 1998, kidnap cases in ’98 up by 6.7%; Philippine Star, Dec. 21, 1998, kidnapping cases remain high; Inquirer, Dec. 29, 1998, kidnapping rose in ’98, says solon.

So, even if the first six months of the previous administration, however, seem to be no better then our record after all if you recall. We are determined to stamp out violent crimes because we are not interested in just being better than the previous administration. We are determined to stamp out violent crimes particularly kidnappings. And we have scored some successes in this battle, in fact 70 percent of all cases have already been solved. And just recently, speaking of Cebu, you remember in Cebu there was this Japanese from a project that was shut up, well, the perpetrators has been caught but it’s not in the headlines. That’s the trouble: the kidnapping is in the headlines, the solution is not in the headlines. Seventy percent of the crimes have been solved. And oh I don’t know if I should announce this, sasabihin na naman raw information. Well discount it as my information pero in fact I have raw information that Itto Carlos’ kidnappers have already been arrested too — but that’s raw information.

With the arrest of several criminal gangs in the last couple of weeks, we certainly have made a lot of in-roads. And with the new council giving top-level attention to the crime problem, we expect to apprehend more kidnappers and substantially diminish their nefarious activities.

In fighting crime, in fighting poverty, and in meeting the challenges of this new century, we must pursue an aggressive renewal of Christian values. Let us have faith in ourselves. The international creditor community, IMF, world bank, they still have faith in us; and, — well I will be getting ahead of him but he will give perhaps details to make more headlines — secretary Lito Camacho has takers for his million bond flotation and they are takers for ten years period. Usually Philippines only gets three years but he has takers for ten years. Others still have faith in us because of our good governance.

Businessmen of the Philippines, have faith. Let us all move forward together, united in god’s will and armed with his mercy and compassion. Let us proceed to build a renewed and reinvigorated and god-loving Philippines both in the church and in the business world.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference for Human Development. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409213421/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8662&Itemid=38