Microfinance for state workers

Many of you are an inspiration because the microfinance funds come from you, or the training for creating simple project studies comes from you. But you should also be among those who benefit because you are also citizens of the Philippines.

And here is Myrna Yao, she hosted me, us. Perhaps some of you are female employees who were there. When we celebrated Women's Day in March, I said that our government personnel would be given the opportunity to benefit from our expanding microfinance programs. And now, we proudly launch business capital for government employees or ‘Go Negosyo, Go Gobyerno’. As Cerge Remonde said, “A promise fulfilled”.

In this program, you can borrow without collateral. Because microfinance really doesn't have collateral. Small and medium loans do, those who borrow from banks, but microfinance doesn't. And the loan can be paid, this is the difference between you and other microentrepreneurs, you are… Others do it in the style of Indians, every week or every month someone comes to collect the loan installments because, right, to ensure that you are really using it for the business you borrowed it for. But it's different with the government because you have a salary, especially if you are a civil servant, it's difficult to remove you from your position unless you have a case. So the difference between you and the ordinary microentrepreneur is that you can pay your loan through salary deduction. So that is an advantage for government employees. If you want, it depends on you. Or you can have your cooperative pay it and they will just collect from you. Or you can also create like ordinary microfinance, microentrepreneurs, create your own associations. That's what ordinary microentrepreneurs do who borrow from microfinance. For example, five women or twenty women, they come together, the debt of one is the debt of all. That is the essence of microfinance that came from Pakistan, Dr. Yunos who won the Nobel prize for it.

So I want to instruct the Philippine Government Employees Association, Espie Ocampo, to organize these microfinance associations of five women or 20 women so that the debt of one is the debt of all. You are therefore… You are guaranteeing one another, that is the essence of microfinance. So you have a choice: get it from your salary, have the cooperative pay for you first, or create an association, a self-employment association.

And microfinance is usually small. You can borrow five thousand pesos without collateral to be paid within three to six months. That is the usual microfinance.

However, you, because you have a salary, that's like the guarantee that the microfinance will be paid, the government can give you more. Your cooperatives and organizations may borrow up to one hundred and fifty thousand pesos. Isn't that right? Because the difference, the distinction, is that you have a salary that can be used to pay. And that is recorded with the government. Other microfinance usually have no other livelihood than that. So that's… And not only that, it's not paid in three to six months, you can pay it up to two years. Because as I said, most of you are civil servants. So we expect that unless you have a case, and there are only a few civil servants who are being prosecuted, you will still be there for two years and we can be sure you will pay. So you have blessings that cannot be given to ordinary microentrepreneurs.

So as part of this program, our government workers will have the opportunity to learn from successful entrepreneurs who are willing to share their experiences in launching and growing a business. But it's not just big businessmen who will teach you now. There are also recent entrepreneurs, maybe five years ago or two years ago, who borrowed five thousand pesos. What did they do with their five thousand pesos? They can also tell you their story.

And through the power of microfinance, the ability of families throughout the Philippines to lift themselves up and rise from poverty is increasing. It adds to the savings, puts food on the table, and allows one or two more children to be educated in addition to the others.

The reason why the interest in microfinance is higher is because the lender has expenses going to your area. Because this is almost home service. Isn't that so, as I said, the 'bombay' style, the 5-6 style, but lower than that and without collateral. Those are the reasons why the interest in microfinance is higher. Even so, we say that while the interest in microfinance needs to be market-oriented, we say to benchmark more or less the interest charged by Quedancor, that is also the interest charged by the DSWD. Because we want you to choose a business where your income can pay the interest. Therefore, this is not a handout in that sense. It is subsidized in the sense that there is no collateral and a large amount can be loaned and the loan repayment period is long. But it is not a handout, it is meant for you to pay back with market interest so that there is dignity in your second livelihood.

So all of you, “ Yes, the government worker can be a successful entrepreneur.” So all of you, government workers, you can really do this. When we say the Filipino can, the Filipino can!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library