Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Favila for your kind introduction.

Thank you also to the leaders of the garment and textile industry for inviting me to be with you today although we all know that I wanted to be invited by you. So thank you for accommodating my desire. Our other members of the Philippine government, ladies and gentlemen.

Well, why did I want to have the chance to be with you? Because I think you all know that the welfare of the garments industry is very special to me. I remember being appointed by Secretary Concepcion without much notice that I was going to be the new head of GTEB. And I was quaking in my shoes because there was this great woman named Siony Kalalo who had been the head of GTEB and who brought it to great heights and so I attempted to replicate her feats and I’m glad that during my term we were able to reach that benchmark of one billion dollars and the industry became the largest net dollar earner for the country.

But today, I’m seeing Mr. Tan of Luen Thai, and I was thinking that the industry has gone to so many changes. Because in the past if I would meet the leaders of the garments and textile industry I would see… when we see CONGEP, we will talk about novelty and all those other companies that were doing simple baby things because of our quota and because they were simple to do and the Philippines had plenty of labor.

But things changed very much after my term. For one thing, China received the Most-favored-nation status from the United States. And I heard about that news when I was a senator and I said, “Oh! there goes our market for baby wear.” And sure enough soon we started to see them go away because we lost much of the low-skills, low-end garments market to China.

We had some reprieved from a total collapse because we still had, we could still rely heavily on quotas from our trading partners, even as our garments companies were losing their upstream support from a declining textile industry. Then the quota system ended. So we had to look for ways to enable the industry to survive. And why have you survived? We found those ways in the innate artistry of the Filipino, the natural ingenuity and craftsmanship, the sense of style and color that appeals to the upper end of the market.

These advantages allowed us to move upmarket, create new niches, and compete based on better quality rather than cheaper price. While we may have lost ground in the mass market, Filipino designers and Filipino manufacturers and even Philippine manufacturing of foreign names are making a name for themselves on the world stage with the good designs and the finely-worked garments. And that is your niche today — no longer the low-skilled, low-priced garments but rather the higher-skilled, better-priced and better quality garments.

Of course, when you go shopping abroad you see Josie Natori with her “underwear as outerwear” designs embroidered by Filipino artisans. But that’s the name and there are many others with foreign names but with great designs all made in the Philippines.

So, by late last year, the garments and textile industry had recovered again to become this time the country’s second largest net dollar earner. And I’m hearing about your targets of 3 to 4 billion dollars — what a way to move forward from those dark days of China’s MFN status, entering to MFN and the end of the quota system.

I wanted this meeting since my last trip to the U.S. because I wanted to report to you what we have done in the last two trips. The trip that I could not attend was supposed to be the third trip working for our garments industry. Our trips and our meetings with the textile industry and the leaders gave us a new ray of hope for our garments industry. And I was very happy that I was meeting with leaders of the industry and the lobbyists of their industry who used to be dealing with us also when I was in GTEB.

So, as I see old friends when I’m here, I saw old friends again working for the same cause in the United States. And that is as you know the filing in the U.S. Congress of House Bill 3039 otherwise known as the “Save Our Industries Act of 2009” or the “SAVE Act.” And in our last two trips to the U.S. we devoted much time and effort to push for this bill and what should have been my last trip we were going to continue with that as described by our gentleman here, by Lawrence. It was a very difficult decision for me to have to forego the trip to New York because it was a very important choice I had to make between making the trip and going to Saudi Arabia to see the King of Saudi Arabia about something that is also of great importance and that is our peace process.

Actually, I tried to negotiate to be able to make both events but the date with the King of Saudi Arabia was non-negotiable. And I felt that we would be very well-represented with your friends in the U.S. Textile Industry and your own leadership of the garments industry, and I think we did not lose any ground by my not being there.

You know what we’re talking about, but you know the media joins me all the time, so for those who are wondering what we’re talking about, this is a bill that was supposed to save the U.S. textile industry but it’s a win-win solution. And in the two trips I made before the last one that I wasn’t able to make, I was able to bring this up to the various congressmen, to the various senators, to the Speaker Nancy Pelosi, to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton because they’re all concerned about the recession in the U.S. However, they’re also concerned that in the longer run if they become very protectionist, it will become a “beggar thy neighbor” situation in the world. So I would point out this bill as an example of a win-win solution. And as I said for those who are not really familiar, the idea here is that the United States manufacturers will have a program to import garments sewn in countries like the Philippines but with fabrics coming from the United States and yarn coming from the United States.

As I said our textile industry is really no longer around even during my time it was already in it’s death rows, and so a lot of our products were using textiles from Japan, Taiwan, other parts of Asia and then being shipped to the U.S. with Philippine labors. But in this particular case now, we are encouraging through this bill there will be an encouragement of the Philippines using U.S. textiles to expand its industries. So what will happen here is that if a garment is made from U.S. made fisheries fabrics and yarns and cut and assembled in the Philippines it can enter the United States duty free. When I explained this to the leaders of Congress and the Executive they found that to be a very good combination. Of course, if it is made of U.S. fan or yarn formed in the Philippines, it can still enter the United States at a discounted duty.

And this covers cotton and manmade fiber knit shirts, trousers, underwear, swimwear, they are garments that our people can easily and readily design and make. So if this new bill is passed into law it will not only help the U.S. textile industry, because after all that’s what congressmen and senators in the U.S. are there for to protect their industry, but it will also be a boon to Philippine garment producers and exporters, and it will create new jobs, it will showcase Filipino talent to a wider public, it will differentiate further our exports from the cheap, mass-produced clothes being turned out by other countries in the region.

I remember that I met in one of the two previous trips that I went to — oh, yes the last one — because in the second to the last trip I made that was the day that Senator Inouye sponsored the Veterans Bill Provision in the Fiscal Stimulus Package. And in my next trip, I went back to Congress to thank the senators and the congressmen who sponsored and worked very hard to pass at last a veterans provision in the Fiscal Stimulus Package.

And I told them, thank you for that and now we have something else to ask you. And what I asked them was for the passage of this bill. So we are lobbying for the early passage of this bill with the same fervor with which we lobbied for the Filipino World War II veterans’ benefits. And just as the U.S. was finally receptive to the plight of Filipino veterans of World War II, we also hope it will be sympathetic to the needs of Philippine garment makers who have supplied the U.S. market for so many years because it is a formula that will also help the U.S. textile manufacturers.

So my message for you today is: we are here and I’m happy we are altogether working for this. And I hope that we will continue to work hard together for the speedy reproval of the Save Act by Congress, by the U.S. Congress. Just as the Filipino-American community and the Filipino veterans at that time worked very hard with the Philippine government for the veterans’ benefits. Now let your industry and our government and our friends in the U.S. textile industry pour all of our dedication and talent into that common and noble effort.

So, I thank you all for helping many legislators see the light. Let’s continue to work until that bill is passed into law.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Joint Membership Meeting of the Philippine Garments and Textile Industry Associations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134128/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26494&Itemid=38