Thank you very much Secretary Perez.

Mr. Aw Peng Lam, president of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club; Mr. Dante Go, Honorary president; His Excellency Ambassador Wang; Mayor Atienza; congressman Angpin; Congressman Nieva; Secretary Golez; Mr. Liu and the other members of the Beijing delegation; members of the Chinese-Filipino business club; officers of the Chinatown Barangay association; ladies and gentlemen:

I congratulate the officers and members of the Chinese-Filipino business club led by current president emeritus Peter Yu and president Aw Peng Lam for spearheading this significant occasion. I also acknowledge last year’s club president, Mr. Dante Go, for his hard work in pushing forward the initiatives of the CFBCI in this past years.

Today’s gathering is special because we are celebrating three occasions. This is the first time we are celebrating Filipino-Chinese friendship day, and this in accordance with Proclamation no. 148, which, as Ambassador Wang said, I issued last January. Second, we celebrate today the first year of the signing of Republic Act 9139, otherwise known as the administrative naturalization act — and I hope that the members of the Chinese-Filipino Business Club will propagate this law and invite many of the Chinese who have been living in the Philippines for a long time to apply for Filipino citizenship. And third, we mark these twin occasions by, as mentioned earlier, officially naming two unnamed bridges here in Binondo as the “Filipino-Chinese Friendship” bridge and the “Manila-Beijing Friendship” bridge.

May these two bridges serve as monuments to the enduring friendship and historical ties between the Chinese and the Filipinos.

Long before Ferdinand Magellan landed on our shores, the Chinese were already here — trading ceramics and silk for the pearls of Sulu, the indigo of Manila, and the cotton of Cebu. When the spaniards established the galleon trade between the Philippines and Mexico, the bulk of their cargo consisted of luxury goods from China which had, by then, become popular items in the west. During the spanish times, the stores and shops in the parian or Chinese quarter, along the banks of the Pasig river outside Intramuros, supplied most of the essential commodities for local residents.

As the Chinese expanded their commercial presence in the country through the centuries, cultural and social assimilation set in. Intermarriages became so common that the late social scientist Otley Beyer said that Filipinos are generally 10 percent of Chinese descent.

Personally, I feel a deep sense of affinity with the Chinese community. My husband, Mike Tuason Arroyo and his family, the Tuasons, are of Chinese ancestry. I have mentioned many times that they are from the lineage of son Tua, a Chinese businessman granted a Spanish nobility title. That name was eventually, the name son Tua was eventually hispanicized to Tuason. And so therefore I am glad to be here in my husband’s ancestral community.

There is so much from our common past to cement the bonds between our people. And I am glad that here in the Philippines, the Chinese have effortlessly assimilated the Filipino culture. This has enriched our language, traditions and even our values as a people. By stroke of good fortune, this process has also prepared us way in advance for the coming era of regional economic integration and the coming of china into the world trade organization.

The strong presence of the Chinese in the Philippines paved the way for our strong ties with china. Since the 9th of June 1975 when diplomatic relations were established between our two countries — our relationship has become closer and deeper with each passing year. And I personally am proud that in my pre-government days I played a role in the establishment of diplomatic relations between our two countries, because I was a founding member and co-chairman of the association for Philippines-china understanding which worked for diplomatic relations between our two countries.

During my visit to china last year, several agreements were forged, one of which was the signing of the MOU between CFBCI and the all-china federation of industry and commerce.

A cooperation agreement was also signed between the Philippine chamber of commerce and industry and the china council for the promotion of international trade, geared towards the intensification of bilateral trade between the two countries.

I am also very grateful that as a result of my visit to china last year, specifically my talks with Premier Zhu Ronggi, we adopted a flagship project in our drive towards agricultural modernization founded on social equity, and this is the famous Chinese hybrid rice which is now being planted all over the Philippines.

As a result of the m-o-u signed in china last year to set up demonstration farms in the country, Chinese experts are scheduled to arrive this month to start the project. The benefits of this project will surely redound to the upliftment of our farming communities in the rural areas.

In response to an educational agreement between the Philippines and china, the commission on higher education has already lined up educational programs and activities to promote bilateral economic-academic relations in higher education. These include lectureship programs and training of Filipino teachers in the Chinese language, as well as the exchange of education professionals between the CHED and the Ministry of Education of China.

The future of Philippine-China relations rests on the ability of both our peoples to continue working for our common goals under the international globalized regime. These goals were articulated in the APEC Summit in Shanghai, in my visit to Beijing where many of you were with me and in the asean+3 summit in Brunei last year. In these three meetings, I had the opportunity to meet again with President Jiang Zemin and exchange ideas and proposals spanning the wide range of issues in regional security and development.

Today we also celebrate the contributions of the CFBCI to the good and welfare of the Filipino people.

I commend your initiatives to help the government address the shortage in school buildings and facilities, your plan to donate school buildings in various Barangays and your book donation program for the poor in the countryside deserve our appreciation and acknowledgement.

I also commend your efforts to help my administration provide better services for indigent families through “operation brotherhood,” to which you generously donated money and medical missions for the benefit of indigents in metro manila.

I am also glad to know about the initiative of Dante go to gather together the heads of over 100 different organizations involved in business brotherhood and fire fighting. I am confident this will result in the further unification and solidarity of the various groups in the Chinese community.

I also want to thank Dante Go because he just announced today that your group will be donating a million pesos to any charity of my choice. And I would like to announce that this million pesos I will use to be seed funding for low-cost housing loans at 200,000 pesos each for five working-class applicants.

We must be united in our fight against poverty. The greatest challenge of our country is to win the battle against poverty within the decade. To succeed, I need your help and assistance.

I realize that poverty alleviation programs will not succeed if crime threatens the well-being of our citizens. I am aware that criminality remains a concern to the members of the CFBCI; and I appreciate that you are doing your best to help in crime prevention and control.

The CFBCI is working continuously and closely with the national anti-crime commission headed by secretary Perez in addressing the problem of kidnapping. Your club has donated 30 patrol cars to the PNP in previous years. This is on top of your determined efforts to establish tighter links between the government and the filipino-chinese businessmen.

The CFBCI’s efforts to rally metro manila against drugs also merits acknowledgement. Recently, Mr. Go got together NGO’s, students and youth organizations in various chinese-filipino schools to participate in one of the biggest anti-drug rallies ever held.

And today I am happy to let you know that I signed into law the new anti-drugs law which reduces the amount of drugs that one person has been caught holding in order for him to be considered a pusher, and which also created the new Philippine drug enforcement agency.

I assure you that my administration with your help is meeting the problem of kidnapping with more focus and counter force.

I am motivating both the incumbent and the incoming leadership in the PNP to eliminate kidnapping in metro manila.

We will improve the on-the-ground capability of the PNP. We will have a more disciplined processing of intelligence. After all with coup threats subsided, ad hoc sources are now less necessary.

In my visit to London last January, we had an agreement with prime minister Tony Blair for Scotland yard to help the Philippine national police in building up its skills and capacity to fight kidnapping and other organized crimes. We now have such a training program in place, and we are working on a similar arrangement with the Hong Kong police.

I am also thankful for CFBCI’s support of our anti-terrorism program and for donating one million pesos to the soldiers killed in Mindanao. You know, more soldiers have been killed than the hostages that were either rescued or that died on the wayside in this battle. Such commitments and actions of your organization are needed — they are what we need to gain the momentum to move forward.

I am deeply saddened over the death of Ediborah yap and Martin Burnham, who were slain in an encounter between our troops and the Abu Sayyaf this afternoon after more than a year of captivity.

I commiserate with the Yap and Burnham families. This has been a long and painful trial for them, for our government, for our country. Our soldiers tried their best to hold their fire for the safety of the hostages. We had hoped and prayed for their safe return. Gracia is safe. This is our blessing. I pray for her early recovery.

I salute our troops for their forbearance and courage. I thank our

American military allies for their assistance. The fight against terrorism is our fight. It is the fight of all mankind against evil. Even as we speak, even while the bodies of Ediborah and Martin and while Gracia have all been flown already to Zamboanga so that Gracia can have her treatment in the hospital, the fierce battle is still continuing in the jungles of Siraway in Zamboanga del Norte.

The terrorists shall not be allowed to get away with this. We shall not stop until the Abu Sayyaf is finished. I ask our people to be vigilant always.

Despite the problem of terrorism in southern Philippines, with god’s grace and the help of private organizations like CFBCI, our economy has pulled through in just one-and-a-half years.

While the economies of many of our neighbors and trading partners suffered declines last year, ours posted a 3.7 percent growth in GNP, one of the highest output growth rates in east and Southeast Asia.

And in the first quarter of this year, our GNP grew not by 3.7 percent but by 4.9 percent.

I thank your organization for helping me to accelerate and sustain this growth. You have done many things to help me including making a call against political bickering, in line with our shared aspirations.

I call upon you, and all other sectors that share our desire to improve the quality of life of every chinese-filipino and of every Filipino: let us set aside our political differences and instead concentrate on our common aspirations for peace, for public order, for good governance and for national development.

The Philippines will be bright and secure for us and for our children, if we remain united.

Thank you very much and long live you all.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the First Filipino-Chinese Friendship Day Celebration sponsored by the Chinese – Filipino Business Club, Inc. (CFBCI) and Inauguration Ceremonies of the “Filipino-Chinese Friendship Bridge” (North Bridge) and the “Manila-Beijing Frien. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225213/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8333&Itemid=38