Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a call by the delegates of the 5th Ambassadors/Consuls General and Tourism Directors Tour (ACGTDT)

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, July 11, 2009]

Thank you, Thank you.

Thank you, Ambassador Brillantes for your introduction.

Secretary Romulo; Secretary Favila, our Secretary of Trade and Industry; Undersecretary Palabyab of the Department of Tourism; our Consuls General; our tourism officers, attaches, representatives; and of course, our visiting friends from the United States whether Filipinos or friends of the Filipinos.

Welcome back to the Philippines! Welcome to Malacanang!

As Secretary Romulo said, today is the fifth year of this Ambassadors/Consuls General, and Tourism Directors Tour. And I’m happy to see that the tourist, bigger than ever, that interest has not waned one bit among our kababayans and friends in North America about visiting the Philippines.

And as always, as in every year, I understand that once again, the biggest contingent of participants come from Hawaii. Aloha! Naimbag nga bigat yo amin.

For some of you, this may be your first time to visit and discover the motherland. For others, it may be a homecoming of sorts and a reconnection to old but unbroken ties. For all of you, whether you’re a first timer or a repeater, a real balikbayan in that sense, I hope that this journey becomes a journey of appreciation for the country, the people, and the unique spirit of the Philippines.

And as our officials here in the platform said, “this trip defies all global economic odds.” And we all know, especially North America, that the past twelve months have been a year for the history books. The global financial turmoil has spread and jeopardized the well-being of billions of people across the globe.

And the stark reality is that even Philippine economic growth has slowed. We have been affected. But we are comparatively better off than most other nations.

Last year, we managed to grow our GDP by 3.8 percent and our GNP by 6.2 percent. In the first quarter of this year our GNP continued to post positive growth of 4.4 percent, GDP at 0.4 percent. Standard & Poor’s reports of nine countries seem to post positive growth in 2001. And one of those nine countries is the Philippines.

This is a reality from which we can and should take heart and hope. Our work is never done. But the Philippines we see today is different from the Philippines eight years ago. Back then was a perilous time for our economy with our country teetering near bankruptcy.

Since 2001, our economy has posted uninterrupted growth for 33 quarters. It has doubled its size from 76 billion dollars to a 168 billion dollars. We have brought down the rate of poverty. It has increased per capita GNP from 967 dollars to a middle-class of 2,051 dollars. The economy supported 7 million entrepreneurs; reversed our balance of payment deficit to a record surplus of 8.6 billion dollars in 2007; grew the business process outsourcing industry from almost nothing to a six billion-dollar industry; and enhanced tax revenues by P291 billion more between November 2005 and December 2008.

And I’m very glad that we’ve been able to do all these because we hope that you, our Overseas Filipinos will be very proud of us for that.

We took the bitter medicine years ago — that’s why we had this 291 billion pesos extra money now — we took the bitter medicine in the past years to strengthen our revenues and invest in the people and the nation. Now, we have an economy that is stronger and able to withstand shocks such as what the global financial crisis is throwing at us.

We have also invested in new and modern infrastructure. For those of you who will travel to the north by car, there’s the first-world Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway as one example. But on the other side of the spectrum, there’s also the 13,000 kilometers of farm-to-market roads. Indeed, among administrations we have built the most roads, the most international airports, and the most seaports.

The Roll-on/Roll-off or RORO system has three nautical highways composed of roads and vehicle ferry routes that go from Mindanao to Luzon.

Our job today is to protect the Philippines and our people from the full brunt of the global economic recession. We would have balanced our budget this year were it not for the global recession and the need to provide stimulus for our economy and welfare support for our people who have been impacted. But through all these efforts I’m talking about and how we’ve been able to withstand the global recession, let me say that one key to keeping our economy strong at home has been our vigorous engagement with other countries abroad.

We have championed our OFWs and brought in new foreign investment. Net foreign direct investments multiplied from a 195 million dollars in 2001 to a peak of almost three billion dollars in 2007. But now more than ever, it is you, our Overseas Filipinos who are helping very much, keeping our nation resilient in times of global challenges. Your remittances reached a record 16.4 billion dollars in 2008; you contributed 10 percent of our GDP. Thank you for that.

And so far this year, your remittances will overall, the whole world are already higher by 2.58 percent than last year’s. And for that I thank your unswerving dedication. You are really our far-flung heroes. When I said 2.5 percent overall, I had to point out overall because Filipinos in the U.S. and Canada remain the top two remitters of funds to the Philippines. Thank you again for that. And I especially note that those of you based in Canada have already remitted 65 percent more than last year. So thank you so much for that.

So, it should not be surprising that I spare no effort to visit our Overseas Filipinos across the globe — from Asia to Brazil, from the Middle East to the Midwest in the U.S. One of the benefits of our travels is the protection of our OFWs in difficult situations. For instance on my request, King Juan Carlos of Spain and Prince Khalifa, the Prime Minister of Bahrain, even though there are very few problems in their countries of our OFWs, they’ve been interceding with their peers in other countries in behalf of our OFWs.

In 2005, on the occasion of my visit, the state visit to Saudi Arabia, King Abdullah triggered a process of amnesty to more than 700 detained OFWs. And I brought a planeload of them home as part of my entourage. Among those pardoned was the death convict Sarah Dematera, who has since returned home. Likewise through my personal intervention, the Emir of Kuwait commuted the death sentences of OFWs Marilou Ranario and May Vecina.

Another benefit of our international engagement has been the chance to work with you, our Fil-Ams to promote our veterans’ rights. The day I visited Washington early this year was the day Senator Daniel Inouye successfully sponsored the inclusion of the lump-sum benefits for Filipino veterans in the Fiscal Stimulus Package of the U.S. So, we’re able to work together on that. And you, the Filipinos in the U.S., know only too well how long you have struggled in order to get recognition for our veterans.

The whole nation is grateful to our Overseas Filipinos for your dedication. So I hope that when you return home — well, first you return home to your provinces here and enjoy yourselves and then you return home to your new land, your new home — I hope you can bring to our kababayans in your communities the message that your countrymen and women at home fully appreciate the many ways you, our Overseas Filipinos, share your skills, time and resources with the Philippines here, and what a contribution you have made to the resilience of your homeland.

On our part, to the best of our ability, let us assure you that we will continue to work to keep the global recession from overwhelming our country — your country here. It won’t be easy, but with the support of our people, and with the continuing support of you, our Overseas Filipinos, I’m sure we can rise to the challenge.

So more than ever, I thank you all. And I wish all of you an enjoyable stay in the Philippines.

Mabuhay! Welcome! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a call by the delegates of the 5th Ambassadors/Consuls General and Tourism Directors Tour (ACGTDT). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100858/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25629&Itemid=38