Thank you very much Secretary Angie Reyes for your kind introduction.

And I’d like to greet all of you today. Let me just mention Governor Sorry about that, Miguel Domiguez of Sarangani, our host governor. And I’d like to thank and congratulate Miguel, he showed me his program for the province of Sarangani and almost point for point he has his counterpart of the ten point program. Thank you very much for aligning your program to the national government, Miguel.

I also like to thank Vice Governor Bridgette Chiongbian for her welcome. And Bridgette, belated happy birthday. Yesterday was her birthday. I’d like to thank her father, my compadre, Congressman Erwin Chiongbian for your kind welcome for being with us in our trips earlier today. I’d like to greet the president of the League of Vice Governors of the Philippines, Julius Herrera of Bohol. And as mentioned earlier by Congressman Chiongbian, I have a number of Cabinet members here with us today. On the head table with me is Angie Reyes and Romy Nery who were your guest speakers earlier. and I brought together with me — Arty Yap, Dinky Soliman, Paul Dominguez.

I’d like to greet our… the other… well, I will… since I greeted the father of Bridgette, I will greet the father of Miguel – Paul Dominguez who was with my Cabinet but his now with the private sector as the president of the Tampacan Mining Corporation, six hundred million dollars. Congratulations, Paul!

Our other officers of the League of Vice Governors, we have James Calingin from Albay, we have Oscar Lambino from Pangasinan, and all the other vice governor who are here, about 50 of you. May I also greet the other guest speakers John Dalton, growth with equity in Mindanao. And his name is not here but he was my professor in demographic economics Ernie Pernia, I’d like to greet him.

And to all of you, good afternoon. Maayong hapon, maayo nga hapon, marhay nga hapon, maupay nga kulop. And I’d like to thank all of you for being here in this as big as the southernmost province of the country.

Your 27th National Assembly today is a good opportunity for us to get together in what I call the year of urgent change and fervent hope.

Earlier, when I was preparing, I asked my aide, “where’s my speech?” So she called up Secretary Afable. Afable said, “nobody told me to make a speech.” So I called up Dodie Limcauco who by the way is sick in the hospital. Let’s hope that he gets well. I called up Dodie, he said, “no speech because you’re suppose to have a roundtable. You gonna sit down on a u-shaped after lunch thing and you’ll talk. Ok, no speech. Nonetheless, I still need notes. So he had some notes prepared for me.

And then when I was in Malungon, they said, “oh, it’s not roundtable anymore, it’s theatre type.” I said, “but there’s no speech.” And I haven’t seen my speech if there… even if it has a speech, so put it back to a u-shape.” They said, “no more, they can’t change it because Secretary Reyes and Secretary Nery already spoke in a speech style, theatre style. Ok, so theatre style, so speech style. So my aide comes and tells me, “Ma’am, it’s not really interactive either.” “But how will we interact in a theatre style, it’s just a speech now.” And then Bridgette says, interaction.

Anyway, what we’ll gonna do is… I can’t have an interaction this style. So, when I finish my speech, my opening remark, I’ll go and get my merienda. Can we fix the, you know the arrangement again to make it u-shape style like before.

Anyway, why it is so important for us to have this interaction because our vice governors are the presiding officers of the provincial boards. Therefore, you are at the helm of aligning local programs to national priorities and I can assure you that you have a lot of action ahead.

Yesterday, we had twin celebrations. The Roman Catholic community observed Ash Wednesday, the Filipino-Chinese community celebrated Chinese New Year.

Both these occasions signify that we have a collective faith, a collective solidarity, cultural diversity. We are a multi-ethnic society. But the joint celebration was a good way of showing solidarity to push forward in nation building. Here in Mindanao, that multi-ethnicity of our society is even more obvious. Christians, Muslims … multi-ethnic society indeed. And we must all be united. We must all recognized at the same time the multi-ethnicity of our society and have social justice for all and institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions.

We need unity, we need a strong action from Congress. And I thanked Erwin Chiongbian for his support there. And we need a clear direction from the leadership. These are the three things we need so that our economy can truly awaken from the skepticism of the past. I believed the signs are clear of the awakening from the skepticism. The people are rejecting the politics of division, doomsday prediction and hate. They are embarking on the new politics of unity, performance and integrity.

Investors have been coming over to take a serious look at the rebirth of our mining industry. That’s why I was mentioning Paul because that’s when we had our mining seminar, we must have closed about three billion dollars in mining investments. One of the biggest is the Tampacan with a six hundred million dollars. But maybe the biggest single one of all so far is the Chinese investment of one billion dollars in the Nonoc Nickle Mining Corporation in Surigao Del Norte. The fight against corruption is being fought at all levels. And our partnership with congress to put our fiscal house in order is reaping steady gains. Congressman Chiongbian, please convey again my thanks to the congressmen.

The spirit of unity must flow down to every community. And you the vice governors are our agents of transformation.

I’m glad we’re here in Mindanao so that you can all see that permanent peace in Mindanao is within reach, even as we have to push the fight against terror to the limit.

The situation in Sulu has brought together the forces of law against the force of lawlessness. As we deal with pockets of criminals and terrorist holdouts, we are keeping the line of the law firm with the full cooperation of the local governments, the peace constituencies and community leaders.

We will win the peace for the people but we will not give the terrorist a moment of peace.

Our operations are not targetted against the MNLF. Afterall, the MNLF is in control of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao in the person of Parouk Hussin who is pure MNLF and he’s governor of the autonomous region. The MNLF is leader in Basilan in the person of the deputy speaker of the House of Representatives Jerry Salapudin who is MNLF. The MNLF is there in the local government of Cotabato City because the Manour of Cotabato City is Muslimin Sema, Secretary General of the MNLF. It is the leadership in Marawi City because the mayor of Marawi City Omar Ali who is also MNLF. Then, we talked about magic 8. Most of them are holding elective positions in the different municipalities and provinces of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. So our operations are not aimed at them. They are our allies. They are our co-leaders. In governance, we have an on-going peace agreement with them that is being carried out. What are we doing? We are fighting against terrorists and criminals in Panamao and in Indanan in Sulu. Therefore, we are insuring that MNLF communities and civilians are kept out of harms way even as we wage war against criminals and terrorists. Evacuees are being sheltered, fed and cared for until they return to their homes.

Our government has briefed the OIC ambassadors on the situation. We have assured them that the overall peace process firmly holds even amidst isolated hostilities.

The ceasefire with the MILF is holding tight, far and wide. And we will soon set out joint teams to go after lawless elements as we prepare for the resumption of peace talks.

Enduring peace, like economic growth, is a work in constant progress

I salute the members of Congress, Erwin for their non-stop deliberation on the national budget and tax legislation like the vat bill, to raise the coffers of the national government so that we can, among others, add to the resources of our local government.

The budget for 2005 has been earmarked to finance the 10 point agenda which Bridgette talked about, which Miguel Dominguez replicating here in Sarangani. And some asked me, how can we remember what your ten-points are. And for those of you who haven’t heard, well it’s…to remember it, we make it bear the acronym of “BEAT THE ODDS”.

B – is for a balanced budget because we must reduced our budget deficit. We have a budget deficit of 180 billion pesos that must go down to zero by 2010.

E – is education for all. And that’s why I am very happy that in the remote barangay’s Malungon we were able to build five school buildings, five classrooms and two school buildings under the KALAHI-CIDDS program. But Miguel has his own building program.

A – is for automated elections;

T – is for transport and digital infrastructure.

That’s BEAT. For the:

T – terminate the MILF and NPA conflicts hopefully through peaceful negotiation

H- is heal the wounds of EDSA.

E – is electricity and water for all barangays. And I am very happy that as Bridgette said, we just came back today from barangay Cauayan which is among many barangays that we are providing water and power for under the KALAHI-CIDDS program.

O – is opportunities for 10 million jobs over the next six years starting last year. And how do we do this? By promoting, by supporting three million entrepreneurs and developing two million hectares of agri-business many of which are in Mindanao. In fact, flying from Malungon to Alabel, we flew over about two thousand hectares, Miguel of mango plantation which is the type of product that’s here in Southern Mindanao high value crops.

D – is for decongesting metro manila. And that’s the reason why we want to transfer some of the agencies to different parts of the country. And then finally,

Ds – is to develop Clark and Subic because we must have a hub somewhere in Asia for goods that come from America or go to America. And we want to… Clark and Subic are competing not which GENSAN, not with Davao. They are competing with other hubs in the region of Asia.

These are our goals for today and the very near future. All agencies and departments are geared towards the implementation of these agenda. And you, the vice governors who draw-up the budgets of your own provinces will be an unindispensible cog in the wheel of stability and prosperity.

For our ten-point agenda to be achieved, we must learn to work together and live each day with optimism and a zest for constructive engagement.

The specter of division and strife must be banished for the seeds of permanent change to take root.

We continue to make history as each day passes. And now I ask the League of Vce-Governors of the Philippines to stay the course with me as we embark on the path to real economic freedom which is freedom from poverty for our people.

Many of you are already familiar with my ten-point agenda as Miguel is, I am sure that my ten-point agenda can also easily reflect your priorities.

And so I ask for your help now in explaining our tax reform measures to our people because that’s the way to finance the ten-point agenda, one of which is a balance budget. We all gain from broad enlightenment on the burning issues that impinge on the lives of average Filipinos.

Our economy is growing, corruption is being addressed. A clearly-defined road map for Philippine progress is in place. Even tourism is up for this two weeks of Chinese new year. Last night I had dinner with publishers and columnists of the Chinese-Filipino media, and they said, all the five-star hotels are fully booked. They were so fully booked in Manila that many book in Cebu. Now they’re all fully book in Cebu but they’re not familiar yet with the tourists areas in the rest of the country, the tourists facilities. But it really shows that with the volume of tourists coming in there is a lot of room for developing tourism in other parts of the country. Investors are coming in. I mentioned already … Australian partners. I mentioned already China in nickle in Surigao del Norte and many more. With a collective heave of great political will, the future can be ours.

This is the moment when we must all decide our place in history. So I asked you vice governors, take up the challenge with me, and we shall win the future.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 27th National Assembly of the League of Vice-Governors of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412082151/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3072&Itemid=38