Almost every year since I became President, I am here at your festival.

During my visits, I have seen how you have used the opportunities given to you to improve your lives.

Previously, it was among the ten poorest provinces in the country. But through the diligence of the Camiguingnons and the vision of former Governor, now Congressman Pedro Romualdo, Camiguin is no longer in what is called the Club 10.

Even though Camiguin is one of our smallest provinces, here you find the sweetest lanzones in the Philippines and your tourist spots are not only beautiful but also unique compared to what can be found in other parts of the country. What you needed before was a chance to be known throughout the world for what you can offer; and now, you have this opportunity.

You also have Lanzones Festivals and fairs that bring in many tourists.

Camiguin offers excellent opportunities in a range of sectors, particularly various forms of tourism including eco-tourism.

We have a unique opportunity to get it right from day one: to introduce industries that are clean and profitable. This includes eco-tourism.

We believe in the power of the global trading system, together with tourism, to alleviate poverty and modernize nations through market forces.

Tourism is the best strategy for the development of your province.

The development of your province encouraged me to include you immediately in the Central Nautical Highway.

This nautical highway will bring people here from Bohol and Cebu, via Guinsiliban, and will be able to bring your lanzones to other provinces through Bohol.

For Camiguin, these initial benefits are the repair of the RORO port here in Mambajao and the repair of the Guinsiliban-Mambajao road.

We now want to look for an investor in a RORO ferry boat who can get a concessional loan from the Development Bank of the Philippines.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget deficit to almost zero, pre-pay our debts and raise employment, thank you to Congressmen like Governor JayJay Romualdo now.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in, the peso is strong, our stock market has reached historic heights and we have created 6 million jobs in six years. And the world is taking notice.

We take great pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health. I am proud of the fact that we are pre-paying our external debt. We will balance the budget in 2008, two years ahead of schedule. We are making sure to use the gains to invest in vital social and economic needs.

The following projects are P10 million for your cross-country road and P10 million for your market. I welcome the Camiguingnon! Happy Lanzones Festival to all of you and thank you very much for your continued support!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech at the 28th Lanzones Festival in Camiguin. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140213/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2219&Itemid=38