Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Towards a Culture of Responsible Information

[Delivered at Ballrooms 1 & 2, Dusit Hotel Manila, Makati City, October 24, 2003]

TOWARDS A CULTURE OF RESPONSIBLE INFORMATION

Last night, the Philippines was elected to the U.N. Security Council. Our seat in the U.N. Security Council combined with our earlier designation as a major non-NATO ally by the United States, puts our country in a vantage position to contribute to world peace and to achieve enduring peace in our own shores. It is a source of national pride that 179 out of 182 countries voted for the Philippines. We only needed 122 votes to be elected. We got 179 votes. This shows the support, respect and prestige we have gained in the international community. This is because of the Filipinos’ courage and sacrifice in the fight against terrorism, in the fight against poverty and in our willingness to work with other nations in promulgating international consensus, multilateral peacekeeping and the Rule of Law.

We shall continue to stand by these principles as we strive to keep every Filipino home and family safe from harm and closer to economic prosperity.

Yesterday, too, the number two man of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) in the Philippines was presented to the public after being arrested a short while ago. We are elevating the JI into our national official threat spectrum. We used to have the MILF, the NPA and the Abu Sayyaf up there. But I have decided to update our priorities. The Jl’s sinister plans are both deadly and far-ranging. Both intended to threaten our country and to sow fear in the region.

At any rate, we’re about to enter into formal talks with the MILF, and the Abu Sayyaf is a spent force. We’re going therefore into a more focused campaign against the JI with a complete order of battle, a new order of targets for domestic and transnational intelligence in concert with our allies.

We’re moving effectively to check terror in concert with our neighbors. Our ongoing constriction measures are cutting up their room for maneuver. The peace process with the MILF will continue to isolate them. Our determined moves against poverty will drain their recruitment bases.

Meanwhile, preparations for the peace talks with the MILF are pushing forward. Philippine officials and MILF representatives are to meet in Malaysia very soon to set a timetable for the formal negotiations. As Prime Minister Mahathir steps down on October 31st — I’m glad his ambassador is here — I take this opportunity to express once again my gratitude to him for his abiding support for the peace process,

I would also like to take this opportunity to extend my best wishes and greetings for greater unity and peace to the Muslim world on the start of the Ramadan tomorrow.

Our peace panel has just finished setting the detailed guidelines for closer coordination with the MILF in going after lawless elements. The authorities are readying a list of wanted persons to be delivered to the MILF, and, I expect them to cooperate in assisting find these wanted elements.

I want the MILF specifically to stand clear of the JI because we have special teams on the trail of the JI fugitives and we don’t want this manhunt to get in the way of the peace talks.

President Bush’s recent visit was a boost to political and economic security in the region. In the run-up to the visit, “Convergys”, the last customer service company in the world, committed to make us a center of operations. Ford put in an additional 50 million dollars to launch the Philippines as an export hub to the world. Mirant Cal opened a power plant in the Visayas and staked more of its resources to contribute to our barangay electrification program. Intel applied for a 300-million peso expansion. And just a few days ago, Texas instruments announced a 70 million dollars expansion.

The state visit marked another step forward in the development of a modern, mature relationship between friends and equals. President Bush acknowledged the gains we have made in all fronts, including poverty alleviation and combating corruption. And we appreciate his generous words for our country and our government.

In keeping with our agreement that we made during my state visit to the U.S. to conduct a comprehensive security assessment, President Bush and I reviewed and endorsed the findings of the 2003 Joint Defense Assessment (JDA) of our armed forces’ capabilities and requirements.

The purpose of the JDA is to assist our government in developing a defense program that will improve the ability of the Philippine military to respond to threats to our security. President Bush in his statement to the Philippine Congress committed to assist us in our program of military reform, including increased allocation of resources to our national defense.

I also welcomed the new U.S. initiative to strengthen education in the poorest and most conflicted areas of the Philippines, particularly Mindanao. This new program complements our government’s efforts to uplift the communities in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao and expand their access to education and training.

The visit of President Bush was a prelude to the APEC Summit. The APEC leaders committed to revive negotiations at the WTO and pledged anew to eliminate terrorism. APEC economies are collectively determined to put more reasonable consensus into the multilateral trading system, make a dent on global poverty and mop up the recruitment grounds of extremism.

All these eventually will translate to a better life for our people. The Philippines was cited by APEC as one of the fastest growing economies in the Asia Pacific region. Of the 21 member-economies, the Philippines ranks number six in probable GDP growth for this year. And I’m talking GDP because our GNP growth is usually higher but even by the more conservative GDP growth, we will be outpaced this year only by China, Vietnam and Russia, Thailand and Malaysia.

Whatever boons we are facing will be a cumulative effect of what we’ve done over the past two and a half years.

We insulated our country quite effectively from the impact of SARS. We gained market share in electronics even when it was weak worldwide. That’s why Intel and Texas instruments are making these major expansions. We prevented the El Niño phenomenon from depressing our rice production, right Cito? Where’s Cito L? Right?

We are pushing the frontiers of social reform in tandem with the peace process.

Through my trials and little triumphs in the difficult past two years and a half — difficult for our country and difficult for the world — I gained the experience and the insight to shape effective political, economic and social policies to fight corruption through positive and negative measures, to control terrorism wielding domestic programs and international cooperation, to combine good governance with fiscal discipline and macroeconomic stability.

We need even bigger things to do. We need to keep the deficit in check but more than that, we need to reduce our debt to GDP ratio. We need to do lifestyle checks and prosecute erring officials but more than that, we need to build up the institutions to rev up the fight against corruption, and of course, against poverty -the fundamental problem of our society.

We need fundamental reforms to bring about long-term solutions to finally strengthen a republic. Yes, we need reforms and we need reconciliation.

I’m sorry to learn of the impeachment raps against Chief Justice Davide. The Executive is obligated to stand down from this controversy involving co-equal branches of government. However, I would like to douse wild speculations that we are in the midst of a constitutional crisis. So far it appears that the Rule of Law is being followed and there is a Constitutional process being applied. I only wish that the process will be speedy and insulated from heavy partisan or personal undertones. Let us demonstrate institutional strength and stability and the will to uphold democracy, justice and fair play.

As Mr. Nathan said, we have had many trials this past year. We have had many trials these past three years for that matter. And I thank you once again for inviting me here today as you said, to reflect on some of these important happenings in our country and in the world.

Thank you, once again, for inviting me and I hope we have a good exchange. Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].