Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Inauguration of Busuanga Airport.

Thank you very much Secretary Mendoza and congratulations to you and all the officials of the DOTC here at our very beautiful new airport. Congratulations! (Applause)

Governor Joel Reyes, thank you very much for your kind remarks, and thank you for the recollections of the time when I came here to your fiesta and this was just a dirt airport and it was nice to see it now as a real holiday airport. Congratulations! (Applause)

Our Congressmen Tony Alvarez and Baham Mitra, Congratulations also! (Applause) And congratulations to Tony for your new airport also in San Vicente which was finished last October 31st and to Baham, congratulations on your forthcoming terminal which will be finished in May in 2009. (Applause)

Ambassador Choi Choong Kyung, thank you for this airport which was funded by a grant from KOICA. (Applause) Thank you for the friendship between the people of the Philippines and the people of Korea. I’m glad that you talked about your early struggles when the Philippines sent a contingent to Korea to help you in your fight against communism, and I’m very honored that at that time, the one who signed… who authored that resolution to send troops to Korea was Congressman Diosdado Macapagal, my father. (Applause)

Mayor Mario Reyes and all the officials of Coron in Busuanga, I say that because people get confused. They said, you know, we wanted to go to Busuanga Airport but they send us to Coron instead, so we have to tell everybody that it’s one and the same airport, it’s Coron, “comma” Busuanga. So, congratulations to you! (Applause) And may you be therefore now the hub of tourism in the Calamianes Islands.

Just right is the opening of this airport for the Christmas holidays. As Secretary Larry Mendoza said, the traffic here in Coron, Busuanga is now three times bigger since the improvement of this airport began. And by the end of the year, Larry said, it might reach the full capacity of the airport, we might need to expand again for the GAA starting next year. (Applause)

And just right, we’re opening this airport as we open the start of the holiday season. As Christmas approaches, we should count our blessings and with greater hope and confidence, face the future. According to experts, “in a very stormy sea of global economic uncertainty, the Philippine economy is a relative island of calm.”

This Christmas season, our people should come together to celebrate faith and family. Our communities should unite and set aside personal conflicts and political disputes. That's why I was pleased to hear Joel (applause) and all his colleagues here working together, united for the development of Palawan. (Applause)

We should really focus our attention on the positive things we can do together to improve our lives. We believe that our future will be bright, especially the future of the Calamianes Islands. (Applause)

I believe in the hope, faith, and resilience of the Filipino people. We will ensure that the government is vigilant in delivering services to the people. It is important that the government serves you and provides you with the proper services.

Your government is doing everything in its power to put food on every table and protect your income from high prices of goods and high inflation. We continue to invest in the country's health, education, and social services systems.

We are working to lower the price of gasoline, rice, and food, and to continue to create jobs and investments that will continue to create job opportunities for more of our countrymen. As Joel said earlier, those who started Boracay Boat Station 1 will now be establishing here in the Calamianes. (Applause) And Banyan Tree, which started in Phuket, will also begin construction on an island here in Busuanga. (Applause) So tourism is among the important investments that create many jobs.

In our first State of the Nation Address in 2001, we said that we would further promote fast-growing industries where there are the most high-paying jobs. One of these is “Information and Communication Technology,” and in addition to that, we still have a significant advantage in tourism.

We have a significant advantage in the beautiful natural scenery in our country, and in the natural kindness of our people. They say – listen, this didn't come from me – they say that the most beautiful province in the entire Philippines is Palawan. (Applause) Well, let me say that it didn't come from me, I heard it from other people. We said we would build roads and facilities to allow tourists to reach those beautiful sights, and that is what we are celebrating now. Tourism should be a national priority because of its impact on social development. In terms of employment, we can call tourism a “big tent” industry. What does “big tent” mean? It means it creates many jobs, both skilled and unskilled. It will create jobs wherever tourism has potential, not necessarily in the city. And every foreign visitor, according to Secretary Ace Durano, creates one job. And because of the personal attention here, the personal service, people cannot be replaced by machines, so it provides job security, that is the goodness of tourism.

In our State of the Nation Address in 2006, we introduced the superregion called “Central Philippines.” This large region covers Palawan and Romblon, the Visayas and Bohol, up to the northern islands of Mindanao, Camiguin and Siargao. And one reason why I invited Governor Carrion of Marinduque is to see what we can do to include Marinduque in the Central Philippines as well.

Leading the way are Boracay, Cebu, Bohol and Palawan. These four provinces attract more than half of the tourists who visit the Philippines, so congratulations to you! Therefore, the priority here is investment in tourism.

The tourism of Palawan, as I said earlier, needs to fix the airports of Puerto Princesa, Busuanga and San Vicente, that’s what I said in 2006. And we need to build a new airport in Balabac, and we need to complete the El Nido-Bataraza road which serves as the backbone of the entire Palawan.

As I said, the upgrade of San Vicente was completed during Halloween, which was also a holiday. And Puerto Princesa is fixing the terminal, which will be completed in May, and according to Baham, to allow for full development, although it can currently accommodate planes from nearby countries, Baham also wants—this might be too big, we might not get a grant from KOICA—but Ambassador, according to Congressman Baham Mitra we will try to have a loan from the Korean Exim Bank for the airport development of Puerto Princesa. (Applause)

For Balabac, we expect the private sector to do it, but the feasibility study is almost complete so they won’t have to spend on the feasibility study. And many parts of the El Nido-Bataraza Highway are already finished. And to speed it up, I told Secretary Ebdane to take the funds from the Malampaya funds. (Applause) And here we are now fulfilling the promise regarding the airport in the town of Coron on the island of Busuanga. I repeat, as I said, many are confused, they think there are two airports in Coron and Busuanga. That’s not true, there is only one, but it is very beautiful. (Applause)

And Governor Reyes said that this airport will be named Francisco B. Reyes Coron, Busuanga Airport in honor of the Mayor of Coron from 1936 to 1939 who donated the land on which this airport now stands. (Applause)

Aside from tourism, Palawan is also one of the main provinces that plants rice, and the government prioritizes providing the needs for planting, harvesting and selling, because there is great potential to increase yields here. And our farmers are getting the investments they need. The government continues to support agriculture, the largest in history. If last year less than 100,000 metric tons of rice were bought from Filipino farmers, now we are making this…we are making this one million tons, to encourage increased rice production. And as a result, we expect the inflation rate to continue to fall and the price of rice should also continue to fall. We expect your paycheck or earnings to increase. So to the farmers of Palawan and other provinces who have harvested a surplus, thank you very much. (Applause)

Every day, we must dedicate ourselves to helping our poor and unfortunate countrymen, but especially during the Christmas season. During this time of hope, love and faith, we must work to provide every Filipino with opportunity, livelihood and human dignity.

And this airport, which will boost tourism, that is what it will do here in Northern Palawan.

The efforts of the farmers in Palawan and this new airport strengthen our confidence in our future and in the hope and resilience of the Palaweños and the Filipino people.

So to all of you from Coron, congratulations! From Busuanga, congratulations! From Northern Palawan and the entire province of Palawan, congratulations to all of you!

Thank you very much! (Applause)

May you have many more tourists to come.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the inauguration of the Busuanga Airport. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134654/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8829&Itemid=38