Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the closing program of the Peace and Development Summit “Partners in Peace and Development, the Bulacan Brand”

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Governor Josie de la Cruz.

Josie’s story about me is very fitting for a student talking about their teacher.

I am grateful that we are all here. Thank you for your very warm welcome to me and my colleagues today.

With me today are some of my Cabinet members. Our Cabinet officer for regional development in Region III, Richard Gordon, our Secretary of Tourism. Josie mentioned earlier Secretary Michael Defensor, he is the partner of this one who will be transferring from our railroad. He is also here, he is with the media, taking care of them, entertaining them, our Press Secretary, Secretary Milt Alingod. And here is one of my three Cabinet members from Bulacan, Secretary Lito Sarmiento. Also here is our Presidential Assistant for North Luzon, Rene Diaz.

As Josie said, I have appointed so many people from Bulacan. Three Cabinet members, many undersecretaries, many important directors, and lately I appointed three Sandiganbayan Justices, all at once, all from Bulacan. Judge Baldos, Judge Jurado, and Fiscal de la Cruz. All Bulacan.

So I congratulate all the officials of Bulacan who are here today. Our congressmen, your congressman here is Congressman Willy Alvarado. He… withdrew his signature from the impeachment. Also here is my friend, former Chief of Staff when I was Vice President, — half Capampangan — Congressman Willy Villarama. Here are our two very beautiful congresswomen — Lorna Silverio and Nining Nicolas. And our Congressman from the party list, representing the grain farmers, Congressman Ben Cruz.

I would like to greet our host mayor, Danny Domingo. Josie is right, when you're near Pampanga, Bulacan, I can see everything I give to Pampanga. You saw the San Fernando overpass. From San Fernando, I went here to Bulacan, in Baliuag. Then, I was asked for an overpass for Malolos. And as Josie said, the engineering team arrived immediately, three days after. And Danny Domingo told me that mobilization is already starting.

I greet all the mayors of Bulacan, there are so many of you here. I thank you all for being here. And I also want to greet our peacekeepers, General Dominguez, General Braganza, and General Querol. Romy, aren't you also from Bulacan? Ah, but Vidal Querol, he is from Bulacan.

And I would like to greet the private sector. If only the names were here, I would greet everyone, but the name of Rey Simbulan, the Regional Director of Luzon PCCI, is here. And our host at this school. Thank you for receiving me for the second time, Sister Carmeli Catan, the president of the University of Regina Carmeli. When I entered, I was looking for the students. They were there. How are you all? And there are so many DepEd officials here, I greet you all as well. Various officials – oh, good afternoon to all of you.

And this meeting of ours for peace and development is truly a mark of the Bulakenyo. Your love for peace and development is a characteristic you have proven in many historical events in our country where Bulakenyos played an important role.

One of these, we cannot forget because it is celebrated by the whole country, is the Malolos Congress which created the first Constitution in all of Asia – the Malolos Constitution. Here in Malolos, here in Bulacan, Filipinos showed appreciation and respect for the Constitution. Just right, we remembered that because this appreciation for our constitution was once again proven in the Davide impeachment case, where the Supreme Court's decision based on the Constitution was upheld and respected by the Filipino people.

We really need reconciliation and renewed unity if we want our country to move forward. We need peace if we want development for the country. For the peace of mind of the people, we should silence the controversy of the impeachment crisis after it is resolved in a constitutional manner. All parties to the conflict should act in a nationalistic manner and we should unite and strengthen our democratic institutions rather than weaken them.

I reopen sincere and quiet dialogue with all concerned groups, and I hope they will listen to the call for principled reconciliation. This principled reconciliation is truly a call of our times. Not only principled reconciliation between the different sides of the conflict in the past impeachment crisis, but also complete reconciliation that we seek through the NPA and the government, MILF in Mindanao, the government, reconciliation is also important through the forces of Edsa Dos and Edsa Tres. That is a very important reconciliation that we must pursue now.

Because the people need to see a force that unites, otherwise the people themselves will be divided and weakened in facing the daunting challenges. Our challenges, our basic challenges are two – promote peace, fight poverty. The country needs to heal through united patriotism and a sense of duty from leaders and the people alike.

In past crises, past crises of impeachment, while helping to find a solution in a way that upholds the dignity of our government's great institutions, our focus remains on trade and livelihood services. Because our country cannot stop running just because there is conflict or discord.

We are striving to have a strong republic. Thankfully, with our long-standing problems, we have achieved some successes. Revitalizing our economy has long been our problem because revitalizing the economy is the solution to poverty. That's why development is what we're discussing at this summit. It's good that even during the impeachment crisis, our stock market rose to its highest level in the past twenty months. That means the confidence of businesses in our country is still there. And in a short period, we have accomplished a lot. Those who will have a new life and a new home, they are part of the largest housing program and land tenure program for the urban poor in history that we have established. Many poor people, not just these ladies in green to my right, have been given the right to have a new home and the right to buy the land on which it stands. And this is… There were so many because for fifty years, thirty years they have been waiting. I've seen so many people cry because they didn't think it would happen, but it happened under our administration.

Rice, fish, the things the poor always buy, we are still able to maintain the price of food bought by the poor. And our tax collection is getting stronger, because we fixed the collection system, including lifestyle checks and other anti-corruption measures. And also because of the good laws made by Congress regarding the order of our tax collection system. So, congratulations to our five congressmen who are here today.

Even if critics say whatever they want to say, our GNP growth rate this year is the highest we have achieved since the 1997 Asian financial crisis. And even if critics say—whatever they say about us—out of twenty-one economies in Asia-Pacific or APEC, our growth this year is sixth overall out of twenty-one. That means compared to fifteen of our neighboring economies in Asia and the Pacific, our performance is better.

But even if our performance is better compared to our neighboring countries, and this is true in the past two and a half years of my administration, these countries in my visits and talks are starting to recover. So on this occasion, they should not leave us behind when they recover.

So these are the things we need to do. Even in fighting crime, especially in fighting illegal drugs, we have important successes. I thank Josie for letting me know earlier that in Doña Remedios Trinidad, there will be a rehabilitation center for our drug addiction victims. This is NGO-initiated, so congratulations to the Bulacan NGOs and private sector. The problem of drugs is serious, so that is one of the bases for the performance of our police, chief and police director.

Yesterday, the police arrested smuggled drugs worth one billion pesos after intensive intelligence operations in your neighboring city, in Valenzuela. This is very important. Because in the first three months of our renewed fight against drugs after our State of the Nation Address, we have already had many drug busts on drug lords who were untouchable in the past. We have closed many shabu factories, making shabu expensive on the streets. But even so, even though it became expensive, it increased five times, there is still some. Well, if the factories are closed, where does it come from? It comes from importation, it comes from smuggling. So that's where we put our detective work. And yesterday, in one factory, they found it hidden under the sofa, disguised as furniture imports. And there, they found drugs worth one billion pesos. The most effective, most fruitful drug bust in the history of our country.

And here in Bulacan, I know you are busy with the problem of drugs. I know that the barangays here in Bulacan will not be left behind in this campaign. I learned that even the Homeowners Associations here in Bulacan want to help. I really need your help. It's good that a religious NGO is building a drug rehab center. Homeowners Association, private sector joining in the search for drug pushers. That's good and should be emulated by similar associations and NGOs in other places. Bulacan is truly a model.

Throughout the Philippines, we truly have many successes regarding peace. We have also weakened Abu Sayyaf. I read in the newspaper that one of the main leaders of the kidnapping during the Sipadan period in the year 2000 was neutralized by our soldiers. And we are actively campaigning to arrest members of Jemaah Islamiyah, so that they can be suppressed before they spread here to Luzon and Bulacan.

The government is striving to do all of this for all Filipinos, because as your summit theme says, peace is needed for development. And we are doing this especially for our youth, like the youth here in this school, those to my left, because you are the future of our country.

Here in Bulacan, you had a summit, there were some… Josie is the one who needs to answer. But there were also some that I saw that involved the national government. Some are being studied – everything is being studied – but I saw three that should probably be announced now. Oh, why are there only two of these? There. No. Ah, there, there. Okay. What should I start with here?

Ah, I want to congratulate Bulacan because your products are beautiful, and will become even more beautiful with the packaging that Raul Hernandez is helping with here in Bulacan. And because we discussed the trade of Bulacan, the North Food Exchange, Josie said she has been working on it for six years, so experience and time are really needed to fulfill it. And with six years, I am ordering TESDA, NEDA, Foreign Affairs – the son of Ka Blas Ople is here. Oh, hi! Felix Ople – and the DOST to help the province of Bulacan to speed up, speed up the information component of the North Food Exchange.

Now, you know Bulacan is close not only to my father, but to me, and also to my father. And during my father's time, Mayor De Leon always told me when I went there – during my first times going there – “your father was the one who provided irrigation here in Bulacan, in Angat.” Now it seems that new work is needed in Angat. So I learned that there was an MOU as early as 1992 through the MWSS and the Provincial Government of Bulacan on how to allocate the water of Angat. Well, the MWSS should, it’s been 1992 – that’s the problem with changing presidents – luckily, we researched this through this summit. So I am ordering the MWSS to revisit this 1992 MOU with the province of Bulacan and see how this allocation can be fulfilled.

Then the third one. There is a Bayabas Dam Project, in DRT again. What is this DRT? And there is… Because you have a problem with irrigation and there is a recommendation that I create an Executive Committee that will oversee the build-operate-and-transfer implementation of the Bayabas Dam. They said I should create an Inter-Agency Committee. I don’t believe in committees. I believe that only one person should oversee or one department. So this Memorandum Order stating “create an inter-agency committee to oversee the build-operate-and-transfer implementation of the Bayabas dam.” I will replace this Memorandum Order. I will say “Authorizing the Governor of Bulacan to oversee the B-O-T transfer.”

It is really important that we come together to address these needs. It’s easy to talk about principles and theory. It’s easy to criticize what is being done badly or poorly or wrong. But it’s difficult to implement – execution. And that execution comes from experience, from knowing where to look for papers, that’s what is called the learning curve. And we can say that what we did in this summit will be a big help to success so that we can understand what needs to be done for the main province of Bulacan, which, if you are prosperous, the entire Philippines will be prosperous.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Closing Program of the Peace and Development Summit “Towards Peace and Development. The Bulacan Mark”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140920/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7506&Itemid=38