Thank you so much, Secretary Tiglao.

Secretary Ermita; Secretary Panganiban; Governor Tetangco; various appointees of the government, especially those of us here on stage, those leading the various government agencies that help with microfinance; Congresswoman Nelly Chavez and other elected officials here; I saw Monching Guico, president of the Mayors League; I think I also saw Mayor Gerry Calderon, the secretary general of the Mayors’ League; also here are other big businessmen who help with microfinance like Mr. Washington Sycip and Ambassador Tsuching Tambunting. To all of you, leaders of microfinance, stakeholders, congratulations to all of you today!

This occasion is very fitting as I return from the United Nations. Because we are celebrating the U.N. International Year of Micro Credit so it is included in our celebration of the 60th anniversary of the United Nations. And as Secretary Bobi Tiglao said, this is also the Philippine Year of Microfinance. This is your year, congratulations to all of you!

Yesterday upon my return from New York I said in my… arrival statement, we should immediately address some of the problems facing the country, especially the creation of jobs.

And we need this even more because of the danger of a sudden and sharp increase in oil prices around the world making the fight against poverty even harder. The fight is difficult because the situation with the oil crisis is difficult but we must not give up.

Last year at my inauguration as president, I mentioned my ten-point program. Number one on that was the creation of six to ten million jobs within the next six years. And I said there, by developing three million entrepreneurs and developing two million hectares of land for agri-business. These three million entrepreneurs, this is through helping micro, small and medium enterprises. And Bobi Tiglao also mentioned our accomplishment report since 2001, two million very small businesses were helped with 20 billion pesos.

Many here are from Land Bank, DBP, the National Livelihood Support Fund, the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, and there are also from SB Corporation although SB Corporation really handles small enterprises, not micro. But the help coming from the government, these banks I mentioned or agencies, is not directly to micro enterprises so sometimes micro entrepreneurs don’t realize that a large part of the help — not all of it because NGOs provide a lot of help too — but they don’t realize that a large part of it comes from the government. So it’s important for us to know in this stakeholders’ forum to state that this is a partnership of the government and NGOs, as well as the banks, microfinance banks that have been accredited by the Central Bank of the Philippines.

The Land Bank, for example, doesn’t lend directly to micro enterprises, they go through conduits. Most of the conduits are NGOs, those on stage, those are NGOs used as conduits. Those who came up earlier and received certificates or large checks, those are the conduits. And the government also has conduits, Quedancor is a conduit that lends retail but most are NGOs because the Classic Grameen Bank which came from Bangladesh started as an NGO, not the government doing it but we want to fast track that’s why the government enters as a source of funding that contributes to equity. When there is equity, other NGOs, or if there is a lack of conduits, they also act as conduits like Quedancor. But the management here, according to the law — which I also was the principal author of, our anti-poverty law — the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation is the one in between our microfinance.

So I am instructing again the PCFC to have a directory of microfinance conduits in every town. Because we say PCFC, Credit, DBP, maybe later the small entrepreneurs, the micro, will go to DBP, will go to PCFC, it’s not like that. They will go to the conduits but it’s the job of the PCFC to have a directory of conduits in every town. And we should advertise this, scroll it, Mr. Heneroso, scroll it on our government channels. For example, San Pablo, Laguna card, that’s it, the conduit of microfinance. Or in Aklan, taytay sa kauswagan, there should be knowledge in every town of where the conduit is.

So that our incomeless assetless women also know that they should be the main priority of microfinance where to go to borrow capital for their micro enterprises. There are places that have no conduits. There are towns that have no conduits. I said it and I repeat the order — because they aren’t here, meaning they haven’t been entered into the loop of microfinance — if there is no conduit in a town the DSWD SEA-K should be the conduit. Because not all 1,600 towns of the Philippines have a microfinance conduit. But all towns have a DSWD, and the DSWD is related to… It also has its own microfinance office self-employment assistance. So, this is what we need to do to reach many people.

Our goal, as Bobi said, as I said, from 2004 to 2010 is to develop three million entrepreneurs through microfinance and small and medium enterprise loans. Microfinance is different, small and medium enterprise is different so it’s important what we say about conduits. Small and medium enterprises borrow from regular banks like Ambassador Tambunting’s very successful bank, they are number one in lending to small and medium enterprises.

We have a loan program for SMEs, it’s called ‘Sulong.’ What does ‘Sulong’ mean, Zoraida? Small and Medium Unified Lending Opportunities for National Growth, that’s for small and medium enterprises. And it has already lent 27 billion pesos last year alone.

Microfinance, however, the borrower doesn’t go to a regular bank, they go to NGO conduits or Quedancor, or if there isn’t one, we arrange the system to reach the DSWD SEA-K. This is our answer to five-six. Like five-six, the loan amounts are small so it goes through conduits, because Land Bank doesn’t have the machinery to lend 2,000 pesos, 15,000 pesos although Quedancor forcibly became a machinery. Small amounts are loaned in microfinance, while in SMEs the loan can reach millions. And the system is almost door-to-door lending and door-to-door collection almost, going to the community center. And the collection is often not at the end of one year, right, Zoraida? So that the debt doesn’t accumulate and grow too large.

Therefore, microfinance has higher administrative costs than a regular bank. So you can understand why microfinance charges higher interest because the costs are higher. At least, it’s much smaller than five-six.

Usually microfinance has no collateral, while banks have collateral. But what is the substitute for collateral? Social preparation. So in the DSWD for example, beneficiaries are taught for several months about the ethics of paying debts, including values formation. That’s why I see many Christian groups are very active because of the strong values formation component and co-makers joint obligation. Microfinance doesn’t lend to individuals only, there are co-makers, there are microfinance groups, five people, ten people, 15 people. The debt of one becomes the debt of the members of the group. And because of this good system, almost home service, values formation, frequent collection then the co-makers almost 100 percent of the debt of microfinance borrowers is paid, better than the repayment rate of those who borrow large amounts from large banks. So congratulations to all of you! Heroes of microfinance.

Earlier, during the celebration of our microfinance event, we distributed 73 million pesos as microfinance loans: 34 million from DBP, right, Rey?; 25 million from PCFC; 11 million from Land Bank; and 3 million from SB Corporation. We saw them give checks to the conduits, and then the conduits gave checks to those borrowing from them. So, congratulations to the conduits! Congratulations to those who received the funds, to the borrowers!

Because the role of microfinance in job creation is very important, there should be a lead agency monitoring the entire microfinance system of our country, whether this microfinance is government or NGO. And this is the job of the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation. Because what the small business corporation of Mel Alonzo is doing for SMEs should be done by the PCFC as well. What I’m trying to say is that the PCFC doesn't need to be the one lending to everyone because we have an entire system. Like the SB Corporation, they don’t lend to all SMEs. And Mr. Tambunting lends many, many times over what SB Corporation is lending. The SB Corporation lends only a small amount compared to what the entire SME system is lending. Because many loans for small and medium enterprises come from various banks.

So, microfinance should be the same, with most of the loans coming from large NGO conduits like opportunity and microfinance bank, or card, or transformation… What? Center for transformation, Taytay sa kauswagan, Negros Women for Tomorrow. There are about half a dozen major sources. Then there’s DBP, Land Bank, but the PCFC should be the one monitoring. There should be a program director and that is the job of the PCFC, just like the SB does for the entire Small and Medium Enterprise Development. So the PCFC should always coordinate with Land Bank, DBP, NLSF, the conduits, including the DSWD SEA-K, which, every time I have a meeting, I tell them to use the DSWD as a conduit when there is no NGO conduit in an area.

The PCFC, I am placing under the DTI, under the management of the DTI, because the PCFC and SB should be a tandem in monitoring the development of three million entrepreneurs. So I want to make sure that Secretary Ermita gets the papers following my instructions done so that this can be institutionalized because this is the role of this stakeholders’ meeting, isn’t it, Bobi, how to improve the delivery of microfinance. And I think bringing DSWD SEA-K, where there is no microfinance in a particular town, improves that. Putting PCFC and SB Corporation together under one administration of DTI improves that.

And in our celebration today, we congratulate the PCFC because it should be the lead agency in microfinance and all the partners in microfinance. And this day is important so that the flow of microfinance is faster and more effective, reaching all those who need jobs.

So to all of you, I congratulate you, thank you for your service to the people. Let's not get carried away with too much politics. Let's use our energy not for gossiping about politics but to nurture three million small businesses, create three million jobs. That’s what we should do in the coming years and hopefully after this day the microfinance community of the Philippines will be even more successful.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Stakeholders’ Forum in Microfinance with the theme: “Harnessing Microfinance for Jobs Generation and Entrepreneural Growth”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092806/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5135&Itemid=38