Introduction and expressing your support and the support of the province of Cavite under your leadership.

We greet Vice-President and HUDCC Chairman Noli De Castro, (Applause) who manages housing in our administration; we also greet Mrs. Maliksi and all the women of the province of Cavite; (Applause) we greet your Congressman, Congressman Pidi Barzaga and his wife, Mayor Barzaga of Dasmariñas; (Applause) We greet Congressman Jun Abaya (Applause) And he has an aunt who is one of the most prominent women of Cavite, Justice Amorfina Herrera; (Applause) We greet our women in the Cabinet, Secretary Espie Cabral and all those who care for women in Cavite and throughout the Philippines.

And we thank the mayor of General Trias, Mayor Ferrer for his warm welcome earlier; (Applause) And here are also the mayors of the three towns covered by this project, Mayor De Sagun of Trece Martires (Applause) And Mayor Arayata of Tanza; (Applause) And here are the various mayors, on stage is the mayor of Tagaytay City, Bambol Tolentino; (Applause) Here is Mayor Loyola representing the various mayors who are also here now, as well as the Vice-Governor and our board members who are here in full force; (Applause) Vice-Mayor Campaña, we greet you; And we also want to greet of course all those who received blessings today, especially the housewives whose families will live here in this very beautiful housing project of the province of Cavite. (Applause)

I thank all the people of Cavite and thank you for your continued support of our administration. (Applause)

Because it is Women's Day, I had Governor and the wife of Congressman brought up. Let's also greet the Mutya ng Kalayaan who is here. (Applause) And we greeted Mayor Cantimbuhan who is now in Palawan and my other female ambassador, Vicky Bataclan from Cavite. (Applause) We especially greet the Caviteñas who are known outside, known inside, I mentioned Justice Amorfina Herrera who is the granddaughter of President Emilio Aguinaldo. We are also proud of Senator Helena Benitez, so there are many well-known Caviteñas.

We have a double celebration today, the celebration of Women's Month here in Cavite and the inauguration of this housing for the masses spearheaded by Governor Ayong Maliksi. It's so beautiful, “Pamayanang Maliksi”. In other words, energetic community, that's what “Pamayanang Maliksi” means. (Applause)

Let's go to the women first. We celebrate the theme of Women's Month — “CEDAW of the people: the wealth of women.” CEDAW, not a shout. CEDAW is the U.N. Convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women. This defends the rights of women all over the world. But we are proud of our country, because we are recognized as being good at implementing CEDAW which is the source of many livelihoods and the defense of women's rights, so we are in the whole world the sixth country in the excellence of following the proposals of CEDAW. (Applause) Only the four Scandinavian countries and New Zealand are ahead of us, then us, sixth in the whole world.

Why are we sixth in the whole world? In the evidence looked at by the judges, we are the only country in Asia that has closed the gender gap in education and health, (Applause) And one of only six in the whole world that has closed this gender gap.

For example, in education, the Philippines is leading in equality in literacy rate and school enrollment rate — according to Mayor Strike Revilla, it's there. Strike, I already told you about your problem with Vice-President Noli De Castro, right? (Applause) So you two should talk. These are the fishermen who are having problems with the construction of the new Coastal Road, Strike. Or tomorrow, Strike.

In fact, women outnumber men in simple literacy rate. Sorry, Governor, so the Caviteños here are obedient. Women also outnumber men in school enrollment and have a lower dropout rate. In honor students, women also outnumber men. In health and longevity, the Philippines is leading in equality between women and men. In fact, Filipinas live longer than Filipino men. (Applause)

We have already praised Justice Herrera, Senator Helena Benitez, Vicky Bataclan, the women in the leadership of Governor and the Mayor of Dasmariñas, the youth and women in the leadership of our Mutya ng Kalayaan, but if you will allow me, let me also praise a Caviteña, her name is Escolastica Romero. She is from Cavite City but married a Kapampangan and became Mrs. Macapagal. She is the grandmother of my father. She was a midwife and a catechism teacher in a Catholic school. She delivered her grandson who was… Because she was a midwife, she gave the name “Diosdado,” a gift from God, because she was very religious. And when my father, after high school, before becoming… He studied law and before topping the bar exams, he first took the civil service exam and also ranked number one in the civil service exam. But even though he was number one, he couldn't find a job. It was the same way back then. But my grandmother, Escolastica Romero, because she had many patients as a midwife, she had a patient named Mr. Mills. A German mestizo who worked in the Bureau of Lands. He was the one who gave my father his first job as a civil servant. That's why I remember the difficulty of finding a job even though he was number one in the civil service, and our economic problems now, I really think that from then until now we are striving to create a strong and growing economy to help ensure the peace, order and stability of our country. This is the reason why we are becoming agile in our recovery every day to strive and focus like a laser beam to fix our economy. We made difficult and unpopular decisions to raise government collections and pursue tax evaders so that we can invest in our infrastructure and our people.

So, when Governor Maliksi asks for a road to be fixed, for the entrance and exit to be neat and spacious here in this beautiful housing project, we can immediately order Undersecretary Aquino, (Applause) Fix what Governor Maliksi is asking for.

When we bring in investments, and many are investing in Cavite and creating jobs, our people will have a more stable and predictable life. And with more investments comes more tax collection that can be invested in schools, roads like those requested by Governor Maliksi and bridges like those requested by Mayor Ferrer, don't forget that, right? We should already break ground on one of the three bridges they are waiting for, Undersecretary Aquino. (Applause) And also in care and health, and education and the environment. In that way, everyone will benefit.

But we know that no matter how much there is improvement in the economic ladder, many of our people are still working hard. We are very aware that many hardworking women and men work every day just to put food on the table and provide shelter for their families.

Because of the growth of our economy, our goal is to spend forty-four billion to be invested in housing. Eight billion of this will come from the national budget, and according to Vice-President De Castro, there are thirty billion coming from PAG-IBIG which has very low interest. And there is also coming from the private sector and banks, Vice-President De Castro also reported that the Asian Development Bank lent Official Development Assistance to the Development Bank of the Philippines which can be used for take-out so those who will buy a house here can borrow from PAG-IBIG, can borrow from DBP for take out here in this house. Because that's the system when the private sector builds housing.

But here, although the private sector will build the house, the Cavite government bought the land so the land is cheap to buy here, 500 pesos only then around P1,300 for the house, so P1,800 is the cost of housing here. And many can live here, eight thousand, including former squatters or soldiers. We congratulate General Obañana and our other officers here. (Applause) So General, your soldiers can also live here, P1,800 a month. Police, so we also congratulate General Padilla, your police here can also because eight thousand can be housed here, three thousand, right, Governor, is what we have? And although according to Governor Maliksi, fifteen thousand he thinks will look for a house here, (Applause) and half of those in need will be accommodated.

Therefore, we thank Governor Maliksi for his continued support of the national objective to address the needs of our countrymen.

This new housing in Cavite for more than eight thousand families from various sectors, as I said, former squatters, will be provided housing by Gawad Kalinga. So that is not included in the P1,800, right? That is separate. The P1,800, more or less, are for teachers, factory workers, police and soldiers, all will benefit from the houses being built because it is fifty-three hectares, which is lucky, you know, in a very densely populated area in the Luzon Urban Beltway, Governor was still able to find more than fifty hectares that can be purchased for the people.

So congratulations, Governor Maliksi! (Applause) It’s a wonderful way to celebrate Women’s Month in Cavite because the housewives are getting new homes.

To all of you, congratulations Caviteños, women or men, and long live the Caviteños and Caviteñas!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the groundbreaking ceremony of the Pamayanang Maliksi-Cavite Mass Housing Project and the Women’s Month provincial kick-off ceremony “CEDAW ng Bayan: Kayamanan ng Kababaihan”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123147/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1071&Itemid=38