Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference

[Delivered at the NBC Tent, Fort Bonifacio Global City, Taguig, July 8, 2003]

THE CHURCH AND BUSINESS IN HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Thank you once again for inviting me to be with you. We have been together for many, many years now. The Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference has been here for many years now and whenever I have a chance to attend, even before I became president, I always joined you because I believe this Conference is a representative of the conscience of our people.

During Martial Law, you were the voice of temperance and peaceful resistance.  Since then, you have come a long way. You have become staunch advocates of many causes, including and especially the cause of Mindanao and also in many other ways, the promotion of social justice and the promotion of the equitable distribution of the nation’s wealth.

I like to join your annual assembly because for me it is a time like an annual retreat, or an annual day of recollection for reflecting on the main components of our battle against poverty, and of the main components of our quest for good governance, that is the improvement of moral standards in government and society.

To improve moral standards, there are many things that we must do. One of them is to help honest people get elected through electoral reform. I say this because the leaders of the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference has also been the staunchest advocate for electoral reform. I want to go back to that compass. I want to go back to what we were saying together “ high-tech na boto, ito ang susing pagbabago ” and that came from many of the leaders of the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference.

This year, in the midst of deficit problems last year, in the midst of threats to peace and order, in the midst of the terrorist threat and the SARS threat, I took the giant leap of making available the financing needed, to fully computerize the quick and accurate counting and tabulation of votes in the 2004 and subsequent elections.

I say this because hardly anybody seems to be talking about it anymore. There’s a lot that needs to be done to make sure that this money so difficultly put together, will really result in the modernization of our electoral system.

I want to take this opportunity, speaking before you, bishops and the businessmen, who are leaders also in the religious community, to ask for your support in making the system work. After all you work long and hard for it, and I was only your instrument as a faithful daughter of the church to make sure the facilities are made available. The money is there but many milestones must be met, many advocacies must be advanced, much education must be made on the many elements of electoral modernization, if we want to see the elections of May 2004 as a time when we cross a bold new threshold in democracy by cleaning up the voting process.

Just to give you an update, we have seen in the newspapers that the COMELEC was able to bid out the Computerization Systems on time, just in the nick of time. I don’t think we should do the rest of the steps just in the nick of time. I have assigned our Secretary of Science and Technology, Nina Alabastro, to work closely with the COMELEC to make sure that the specific system for counting votes is technically above board, responsive to our needs and adherent to the high standards of integrity, we want to preserve. But beyond assigning Nina Alabastro to help the COMELEC technically, I cannot do much beyond that because COMELEC is constitutionally independent of the executive. That is also why monitoring the milestones, doing the advocacies and the alertness, providing the education and information are more properly done by civil society, including the church, rather than by the administration. I propose that in the middle of the great work that you are doing for our society and for Mindanao. Please do not forget that these activities related to the modernization of elections should be a major task of the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference this year and next year.

Again, to give you a report, the first batch of automated counting machines will arrive on August 5th this year. The Commission on Elections is setting up a testing site for the machines and will put these through a gruelling set of tests, to make sure that they are hardy and worthy. And I believe it would be proper for the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference to do the advocacies rather than the administration to make sure that all parties, including NAMFREL, are represented in these tests, to do the advocacies and exercise the alertness to make sure that we obviate any misunderstanding or misperceptions about how the counting machines work.

I look forward to that historic day in May next year when these automated counting machines will be first touched by Filipino hands. This will be one of our great legacies to suffrage. And I want to acknowledge once again that it was the leaders of the Bishops-Businessmen’s Conference from a long time ago that began the journey.

You will work for these electoral reforms in the same way that you have been working for other reforms, to improve governance and to improve moral standards in government and society. In all these, you also imposed upon yourselves; because you’re working to improve not only moral standards in government but moral standards in society and in the business community. As your consensus statement says, the new business of business is to build an enterprise on the total development of man. The total development of man — that is what we must all look for, and that is what we must reflect on, as we go about meeting the many challenges of today.

The encyclical on the development of people states that peace cannot be limited to a mere absence of war. Peace is something that is built up day after day in pursuit of an order intended by God, which implies a more perfect form of justice among men. And it is on reflecting on the meaning of peace, in the context of the total development of man, that I reflect on the policies that we must follow regarding the different threats to peace.

On the NPA, the Government will move on two priority areas:

First, we will conduct a political, social and economic audit on the 500 or so ‘influenced’ barangays identified by the intelligence community and determine a specific set of military or developmental countermeasures, to extricate these poverty-stricken barangays from the grip of dissidents;

Second, we will identify and expose the growing number of front organizations of the CPP-NPA-NDF and cut their links from domestic and foreign funding sources. We will mount a full court press on the security and developmental components of these threats, even as we leave the door open to peace talks based on constitutional, democratic participation.

We condemn the series of assassination attempts on municipal executives, especially, as they have happened already for the fourth time in the last several weeks. The DILG Secretary is instructed to conduct a full investigation of these incidents.

On the MILF, we are open to the suspension of the court warrants, if this is necessary to move the peace talks forward. But the MILF must not tarry on the procedural issues involved, especially so, that it has several lawyers and legal advisers among its ranks. We will continue to build confidence in the peace process and we’re preparing for the opening of talks, and we must avoid being bogged down by these matters.

On the drug war, the intelligence community maintains a list of the most notorious drug lords and their coddlers. That list will be disclosed in due time as information is gathered on these personalities. I want the people to know the face of the enemy, who should not be allowed to move around freely under a cloak of legitimacy. Drug lords must be exposed for what they are — destroyers of our future. Our crusade must be relentless and encompassing.

These are the challenges to our peace and the order of our society that we must face, even as we try to move forward to bring about fundamental reforms in the electoral process and in the affirmative action for Mindanao. As we try to achieve these positive reforms in the midst of many threats to our society, we must work harder now amidst the complexity of challenges and the ever changing face of crisis. But I am grateful that there are bishops and there are businessmen who look to God for guidance, in the way they run their businesses and lead their communities.

May God guide you and may God guide us through the fields of change and give us a good harvest of opportunities, to make the people of God closer to the heaven that He wants us to enjoy.

Thank you and congratulations!

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].