Thank you very much Secretary Lina, Secretary of DILG.

And regarding those bridges you mentioned that are needed, I said you can apply to the DPWH or you can also apply to the DILG through the President’s Bridge Program as long as there is a local counterpart.

Let me greet, first of all, the Secretary of Agrarian Reform, because he is the one who invited me here — ah, co-host of this — here at our Farmers’ Congress, Agrarian Reform beneficiaries, how are you all — Obet Pagdanganan. Obet, as you know, his wife is from Sariaya. I remember when I was a senator and I was invited to the Tayabas Association, Obet Pagdanganan was always dancing the rigodon, in a black tie, in a tuxedo, right Obet? Very handsome, he can definitely do the rigodon.

I also greet the co-host because this is a double affair — Farmers’ Congress and also the Congress of beneficiaries of the Urban Land Reform in A-T-O. Thank you Mayor Mon for your invitation here, that's why we have farmers, we have the urban poor, we have Agrarian Land Reform, we have urban land reform because those are the two important programs of our government — land reform whether in the city or in the countryside.

I am also with the Secretary of Agriculture now, because Quezon is still largely agricultural and he is listening to the results of your Congress so he can see where the Department of Agriculture can help, Secretary Lorenzo.

Thank you to the officials of Quezon who always warmly receive your servant, I already mentioned Mayor Mon who invited me to celebrate the 436 proclamation that I signed in 2003 and to show this land development project that is on the billboard. I also greet the congresswoman of your district, the second district, Congresswoman Lynnette Punzalan. Because as Mayor Mon said, you have been working on this A-T-O proclamation for a long time. Even during the time of Congressman Jun Punzalan and Mayor Mon, and finally this year it was fulfilled because we focused on it.

I also want to greet the congressman of the first district — where are the farmers of the first district? Are they here? Where? There! — and thank him for always supporting me even before he was a congressman, he already supported me, Congressman Raffy Nantes of the first district.

And from the Bondoc peninsula, the mayors of the Bondoc peninsula and they are here, are the farmers of the Bondoc peninsula here, no? Anyway, I want to greet our congresswoman of the third district and thank her husband for the wonderful project “Kalsada Natin, Alagaan Natin” by vice chairman of the Road Board, Danny Suarez, thank you through Congresswoman Aleta Suarez. I greet the representative of the entire province, Vice Governor Talabong, thank you very much for your warm welcome. Our peacekeepers, Commander of Southern Luzon General Dagudag; Region IV director of the police, General Caringal; taking care of our Land Reform beneficiaries, Director Andres; the one who also takes care and listens carefully to your needs for roads and bridges, Director Segit.

And thank you also to the barangay captains, here is ABC president Aurora Garcia and our barangay captain here in Isabang, Barangay Captain Emerito Robles. Thank you Monsignor Melecia for your prayer, and I greet Bishop Marquez for his transfer here to Lucena.

I also want to give attention and greet Mr. Philip Castillo, the barangay Agrarian Reform Committee chairman of Quezon province. And Mr. Gregorio Hernandez, the Provincial Agrarian Reform Coordinating Committee chairman.

I am truly happy to be with you again today, people of Lucena, other people of Quezon especially those of you who are no longer squatters in your own town in A-T-O, and those who are no longer enslaved in your own farms here in all of Quezon, especially the first and second districts because you are receiving beneficiaries of land reform.

Quezon, as I said, is a very large province and has many farms. From Infanta or General Nakar even — because our report earlier was about General Nakar — that from General Nakar and Infanta in the north to the length of the Bondoc peninsula in the south we can see vast farmlands, coconut groves, seas that provide livelihood for the great people of Quezon.

And we know that in the vast province of Quezon, many places, for generations the people have been poor — the people of General Nakar, the people of Bondoc, even the people of Lamon Bay — there are many poor people. That is a picture of our entire Philippines in our entire history. In our history, the big problem of our country is poverty. But in my two and a half years as president, in my experience that I have seen — in experience itself not just in books or in ideas — that if we want to achieve progress and end poverty, we need, first of all, to implement deep changes in our politics and economy; and secondly, we also need unity so that together we can promote the welfare of our country.

What are the reforms we are talking about that are essential? We see here two examples, land reform. My father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal, made land reform into law a long time ago. Now we are really vigorously implementing it. And not only that, because distributing land is useless if you don't have irrigation, if you don't have loans, if you don't have farm-to-market roads, then you will blame the government and you want to return your land to the lord of the land. So modernization of agriculture is needed, that is part of land reform.

In the cities, we also need land reform. We have so many lands where squatters live. So when I became president, I said, we will find those lands owned by the

A government that we don't even use. We will look for land for an airport that isn't even being made into an airport, and that will be sold to squatters. That is also land reform.

Let's return to agriculture, because the majority of those from Quezon are in the countryside. Agriculture is one of the important aspects of our national life that will affect our desired change and unity. I said, we need land reform, but it needs to be accompanied by reform in agriculture itself, modernization of agriculture. And if you feel there are more farm-to-market roads, irrigation, seeds now, it's because my administration is the only one spending no less than twenty billion pesos annually for the modernization of agriculture. My administration also spent on the most extensive project for irrigation because irrigation is important for the fields.

And I'm not just talking about big dams. Here in Quezon, we don't have big dams as our projects. Here in Quezon, our irrigation projects are small irrigation projects in various parts of our archipelago so they can be built quickly, aren't too expensive, and provide water. And because of this, production is expanding. Cito Lorenzo's pet project that seemed to work was the planting of hybrid rice. A new type of seed came from China when I made a state visit in 2001, it was adopted here in the Philippines, distributed, and our rice production this third quarter was very high. And this is one reason why this morning, as chairman of the National Economic and Development Authority, I announced that the production of our entire country, our entire economy, in the past three months rose by 4.4 percent.

That's what they call GDP growth rate, the increase in our production. This number is higher than what we expected and we have surpassed Taiwan, Indonesia, Singapore and Korea in economic growth. And where did this increase in agriculture come from in the last three months—actually, from the country—it came from agriculture and from investments, spending on investments. So to all of you farmers, thank you very much for your contribution to the production of our country.

And one source of this was hybrid rice, because the farmers who use hybrid rice have doubled the yield of our farmers who planted it.

So if we have farmers here who have irrigated land, if you want to enter the hybrid rice program, contact the Department of Agriculture. This doubling of the rice yield of those using hybrid rice is a response to my closest desire for our country. Even before I became president, I said that my ambition is to have food on every table. And I expect this hybrid rice—how much now, Cito? 85,000 hectares?—100,000 hectares have already used this hybrid rice, 100,000 hectares of farmers have doubled their yield. We expect this to be a basic reform in agriculture. I want within two years from 100,000 hectares, hopefully 600,000 hectares will be planted with hybrid rice and hopefully include the farmers of Quezon province.

Because thirty percent of the farmers of Quezon are still rice farmers, right? Sixty percent are coconut farmers, coconut planters. For our coconut farmers, what we did, as Obet Pagdanganan said, is the coco levy funds that are expected. I want to tell you that we are already using some dividends from the coco levy funds for the benefit of our coconut farmers. Because the government is continuously using the seven hundred million pesos in dividends from the coco levy funds that I obtained in 2001 for the benefit of our coconut industry. We are doing this while the case of the coconut levy is still in court because I value the welfare of our farmers and

coconut planters.

So earlier you had some expected projects. I thank you for voluntarily saving to build your capital. And for others who still need loans, I want to let you know that this 700 million pesos coconut levy dividend is now being managed by a committee. I don't know, that committee has a long name, but to me, my short name for it is the CIIF committee. They accept proposals from coconut farmers and if the proposal is good, they fund it. So the resolutions you declared earlier, I hope you make them into proposals and submit them to the CIIF committee. It shouldn't be difficult for you to find that committee even though its real name is very long, I can't even remember. Because on the board of that committee there are two from Quezon. Just look for them. One is Mely Jabola, many of you know her. The other is Marivic Gutierrez, the former vice mayor… No, councilor of Lopez, Quezon. You remember her police husband. When the NPA raided Lopez, two died, the chief of police and a policeman, Marivic is his wife. So it's like help for her and help for you, I also put her on the board of the CIIF committee.

And Mely is from Tayabas, so the first and second districts can go to Mely. There's also Mayor Ubana of Quezon, Marivic's fellow townmate. The third and fourth districts can go to Marivic or you can go to Mely because maybe the Bondoc peninsula is closer to Tayabas. That's what I want to give you as a tip, you have two members of the board there on the committee that holds 700 million pesos. So if your project is good, you should be able to share in the dividend of the coconut levy fund.

I, what am I asking from you, I hope you help me and support me so that the programs of our government will succeed. Because the success of these programs is also your success. If we can eradicate poverty, the future of our children will be beautiful.

Farmers and city dwellers, to all of you, thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Farmers’ Congress in Quezon. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140541/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7408&Itemid=38