Thank you very much to Secretary Joey Lina. Our very diligent and very good at expressing the government's very important ideas, Secretary Joey Lina, Secretary of Local Government.

I also greet Undersecretary Wencelito Andanar who is in charge of peace and order, and also his help in running the Bureau of Fire Protection; and I thank him and you all, because on the 1st you were there guarding the perimeter of Malacañang. I also greet, of course, your leader, the one who welcomed me earlier, the leader of the Bureau of Fire Protection, Chief Superintendent or General Francisco Senot; various officials of the DILG, various leaders in various agencies under the DILG. And I want to thank our volunteer friends, the Chinese community is very diligent; and of course you women and men, our very diligent members of the bureau of fire protection; guests; friends:

I want to greet you here on the opening of fire prevention month. This day, as Joey Lina and General Senot said, it is the first time that the President himself attended the start of fire prevention month. For me, it is important that we have a fire prevention month so that we all remember that it is very important to prevent fires.

I, for a long time, even before I was President, even before I was a politician, even before I was a public servant, when I was just a housewife, every fire prevention month, that's what I used during fire prevention month as a reminder to call an electrician to check the electrical connections of my home. So even then, for me, fire prevention month was important as a reminder. And now, as president, that's why I'm here, I appeal to all those who run homes, who run buildings, that you do that during fire prevention month, use it as a routine to call a certified electrician to check the electrical connection of your buildings because many fires come from faulty wiring. That's a good thing to do during fire prevention month.

We hold this throughout the month to instill in our minds that we must do everything to avoid fires.

It's very sad to experience a fire. For example, even the rich people I've seen who have been burned, it's very sad because all the sentimental aspects of their property are lost. Although they, usually have insurance if we talk about money, the money is returned to them, but they have memories that cannot be returned, that cannot be bought again.

But it's even worse for the poor when they lose their homes due to fire. I've been to many squatter areas because of fires, many markets that I had to fund or contribute to when I was still a senator to rebuild. And in those markets, I usually see, when I ask, 'why? How did it start? Why does the market often burn?' it usually starts in the eateries, in the gas, the gas, those oxygen tanks, those gas tanks that explode, so that's also something we need to do during fire prevention month: those gas cylinders need to be corrected. And perhaps it's also an opportunity for the Department of Trade and Industry to conduct spot inspections of all gas cylinders sold in various places.

And those poor people in remote areas or even not really remote but here in the city center where the roads are narrow so that even though we have brave fire volunteers, the fire trucks cannot reach, that should also be addressed on how to resolve fires that easily overflow, easily spread in those areas.

One of the most difficult things that can happen to anyone is to be a victim of a fire. Many people die in fires. I also know some examples of people who died in fires – those with closed bars on their windows. So when a fire happens, they can't open them. It's very sad, we see them, the firemen see them, television sees them screaming, asking for help but they can't get out because the bars are covering [the windows]. It's not wrong to put bars on windows, but those bars should be able to open. If you are afraid of thieves, well, you can put a key from the inside so that when there is a fire, you can open them too. That's also something that should be done during fire prevention month: in homes, in buildings with bars on the windows. We are not saying to remove the bars, but change the design, add a small door with bars, but put a key inside, but one that can be opened, so that we have an escape route when a fire comes.

We have a saying that it's better to be robbed than burned. Fire doesn't choose who it will strike and takes everything in its path, including the lives it encounters.

So, during this fire prevention month, we have a lot to do and many things to prevent. But one thing we must do is, if a fire does happen and we can't avoid it, one thing we must do is use this opportunity to thank those who risk their lives to put out the fire and save those affected – none other than our fire fighters and fire volunteers.

I salute our gallant fire fighters who risk life and limb to save persons and properties from fire. You have shown the true meaning of courage and commitment to public safety and welfare.

The whole world on September 11 saw what the whole world saw about how great our fire fighters around the world are. The New York Fire Department, they are now the heroes of the whole world. But whatever the New York Fire Department with all of their modern equipment is respected as a hero, I, you, our fire fighters of the Philippines, are not lacking in heroism because your equipment is not good, but you are still that brave.

Apparently, there are still 900 of our towns that don't have a fire truck. And if we talk about it, how much is a fire truck, the cheapest is two-and-a-half million, the appropriate one, five million. So, for the 900 towns that don't have a fire truck, we need billions of pesos which are not in the budget. That's why Undersecretary Wency Andanar said they are trying to create a project proposal for the Obuchi Fund of Japan so that we can find help.

But we are looking at the budget for fire protection. Do you know how much its capital outlay budget is? 37 million pesos. How many fire trucks can be bought with 37 million pesos? We thank the congressmen and senators because they added about 55 million pesos for their favorite districts and constituencies. So, wherever that is, for us, as long as we can complete the 900, we are grateful. But 37 million pesos for the Bureau of Fire Protection is really very small. For me, rather than having a few good fire trucks, I think we should strive for all towns, all communities to have at least a fire pump so that especially the small towns have a way to prevent fires and how your job, Bureau of Fire Protection, will be easier.

So, I will match the 37 million capital outlay of our bureau of fire protection from the president’s social fund of 37 million so that we can buy, not for fire trucks – 37 million can only help a few fire trucks – but for fire pumps so that we can help many small towns and densely populated barangays and so that you, our gallant fire fighters, can continue your heroism with your lives also safe.

Congratulations! Happy Fire Prevention Month. Let us all do what needs to be done, citizens and government alike, to avoid fires.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Fire Prevention Month. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230402/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7635&Itemid=38