Thank you very much, General Narciso Abaya.

Troop Commander, give the troops “Tikas Pahinga.”

First of all, I want to greet our officers who received us today in their celebration. Here is the new commander of the Philippine Army who also came from the Scout Ranger, Major General Efren Abu. Here is our Commander of the Northern Luzon command, General Romy Dominguez, and of course the leader of the scout rangers, Colonel Danny Lim.

I would also like to greet our companions who came here. First of all, I greet the wife of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mrs. Gina De Venecia. And through her, let us thank Congress because they quickly passed the law that I requested from them to increase the salary of our soldiers like our teachers. We are also with us here today, various officials of the national and local government. The town mayor of San Miguel, Bulacan, Mayor Santi Sevilla; the Congresswoman of this district, Congresswoman Lorna Silverio; the vice-governor of the province of Bulacan, Vice Governor Rely Plamenco. Governor Rosie De La Cruz also sends her greetings although she left this morning for the Visayas. Here is also board member Tony Ligon, thank you for coming here. And also the barangay captain of barangay Tartaro, Chairman Manuel Apoderado.

I am with some Cabinet members. Some of them are related to Bulacan. First of all, we know that he was a former governor of Bulacan, Secretary Obet Pagdanganan. And thank you for the road he will build from the housing project to the main highway. Here also, a grandson of Bulacan, a grandson of San Miguel, Bulacan because his grandmother is none other than Doña Trinidad De Leon Roxas, Mr. Palengke, Secretary Mar Roxas. Secretary Roxas is here not only to attend to his fellow San Miguel residents but because I brought the national media here and Secretary Roxas has something he wants to announce and he is ready to answer their questions after our program, our latest statistics, latest record, update of investments as of October 2003 for the last ten months, investments increased by 22 percent. So despite the criticisms and conflicts, we see that the trust of investors is still there. Some can talk but in the end, they vote with their money, and there’s a 22 percent increase of those who voted with their money for confidence in the Philippines.

Many of these are even foreign investments. Most of this investment is foreign investment. So we are not surprised because despite what whoever says that there is no trust, the survey of Japanese investments still ranks the Philippines as number three favorite, next to Thailand and Malaysia. What more if we are united.

I would also like to greet, another son of Bulacan, our chairman of the National Food Authority who has Cabinet rank, Secretary Lito Sarmiento. And earlier signed a memorandum of agreement because they will build a housing project for our soldiers here behind Camp Tecson, Secretary of Housing, Mike Defensor. Secretary Mar Roxas wants to say that in the rising increases in our production in our country, the fastest rise is the housing sector. So congratulations, Mike Defensor.

I would also like to greet our representative of the National Defense today—oh, never mind. He is still with me in Malacañang—Undersecretary Abby Puruganan because I greet him because he was also a scout ranger before. And I greet our various people who participated in our program today, Presidential Assistant for North Luzon, Secretary Renato Diaz. And thank you for his good expression about our KALAHI program here in Camp Tecson. Because this is the first camp to have a KALAHI program or integrated community development programs.

So to all of you, I also want to greet not only the officials but also the private sector who will play a very big role in the coming times. I want to greet the chairman of Manila Bank, Luis Puyat and their president, Benjamin Yambao. The landowner who is donating, 50 hectares, Attorney Dave Puyat, Attorney Raymond Puyat. And I will greet the one who told Dave Puyat that the soldiers need housing, the daughter of Executive Secretary Bert Romulo, Mrs. Berna Romulo-Puyat. Berna, come up here on stage and sit here, somewhere here. You should be here too. Berna is always in the background. But today, she is a donor of land so she should also be on stage. I greet all the different officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines who are here and of course to all of you scout rangers, happy greetings to one of the most excellent warrior groups in the armed forces on your anniversary.

Along with my greetings to the entire scout rangers, I also greet the scout rangers and the civilians who received awards as proof of your unique service to our country. With your continued excellent service to the country, if some of you still remember, I chose you to be the first I visited in all the regiments of the Armed Forces when I became president. You remember, a long, long time ago, early 2001. On that day, February seven 2001, I visited you. And there too, right after I became president, I also first announced my plan to further improve the service of the entire military. And we continue those reforms I talked about them up to today.

Continuing reforms, better morale and discipline, and the even handed pursuit of justice and compassion have steadily immunized the Armed Forces from the coup fever. The intelligence community sees no reemergence of underground groups in the command. And I call upon the politicians who are inclined to inveigle or support these groups to train their sights on the forthcoming polls rather than futile destabilization. Let’s resolve all political issues by the ballot rather than the gun and give our people the peace of mind they deserve.

When I first visited here, what did I mention, during my first visit here to you? I said, I will increase assistance for the families of soldiers who are wounded or die in war. I said, I will increase the pension of those who received the Medal of Valor, most of whom also come from the scout ranger regiment. I said, I will give more tax exemptions to the members of the AFP. I said, we will strengthen housing programs and other benefits for the military. I said, I will ensure promotions based on merit and not on connections. I said, I will listen to your grievances.

If you look at it, one by one those things I said before – February 2001 — today, November 2003, you can say I fulfilled my promises as early as two years ago. For example, I said in February, two months later in April, I announced the increase in financial assistance for those wounded and those left behind by the deceased. And I didn't say it then but I saw later because of my learning curve experience that you also need to have equal salaries with teachers and police. Congress quickly passed — thank you Speaker De Venecia, thank you Congresswoman Lorna Silverio – they quickly passed the law to make the pension of those with the Medal of Valor 20,000. Back then, it was only a few hundred, now it's 20,000. They also gave the exemptions on allowances, non-salary benefits, and more importantly, they also increased your salaries. First, we could only get your salaries from savings, because in 2003 the law passed — no, it was 2002 — but the 2002 budget passed for 2003 did not include a salary increase because the law was not yet there. Now, thank you, the House of Representatives passed your supplemental budget, which includes 50 percent of the pay increase. So thank you to Congress.

We continue other programs to improve your lives such as housing, such as KALAHI, our comprehensive and integrated delivery of social services. In fact, our continuing project is livelihood and housing for the fifty hectares that will be allocated for your housing.

It is sad, it is saddening what happened in Oakwood in July. Even though it opened up the remaining grievances of the soldiers because the government continues to work to make your lives easier. However, I continue to strengthen the Armed Forces through basic reforms.

Strengthening policies, sound management of resources and people, and the swift implementation of orders without obstruction or as it is called in English reinforced policy control, sound management of resources and untrammeled command efficiency. These are the strategies we are following in our basic reform. And I am eliminating the practice of conversion which is the source of much corruption. And the AFP Chief of Staff now he alone will hold the cash reserves. I am saddened that there are still others in this regiment who lacked trust in the sincerity of the leadership of the statements I made two years ago. But you have seen in my accounting now, I have not forgotten what I said then. I have not forgotten in two and a half years of my presidency. And although I do not visit every day, announcements are needed because the president has to work at his desk to get everything done. We are doing it even before Oakwood. Harboring resentment does no good.

All those who went to Oakwood and were proven to have been merely misled by their officials have been exonerated, there are 133 of them. The leaders of the disturbance, however, will be punished according to law because they not only conspired with ambitious individuals to overthrow the government, they also misled their troops. There is no reason to give even a moment of your time to those instigated by politicians who only want to use the strength of the military to seize power by any means.

Our efforts should focus on fundamental change in the system and then reconciliation. Reconciliation is also the reason for our efforts to achieve lasting peace in Mindanao where many of you serve even though your headquarters is here at Camp Tecson. Peace is also what we all desire, including the soldiers. Fundamental reform and unity, this is what the entire nation needs.

Therefore, Scout Rangers, I ask for your support as I ask for the support of the entire nation for our change and unity throughout the country.

Again, thank you very much for your service to the nation. And long live our Elite Scout Rangers of the Philippines!

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 53rd Founding Anniversary of the First Scout Ranger Regiment (FSRR). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615140617/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7418&Itemid=38