Thank you Secretary Teves for your introduction.

Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps, leaders of our domestic and international business communities, goverment officials, ladies and gentlemen.

The last two years have been remarkable for the economy of the world.  History is not always a straight upward projectory of progress as we have seen.  This was certainly true of the economic and social setbacks the world felt during this tumultuous time.

Yet the world will recover and become stronger and more resilient.  So, too, the Philippines.  We have been able to withstand the global devastation better than most for a simple reason: we were prepared.  We made the tough choices on raising revenue, instilling budget discipline and most importantly, using our savings and new revenue to invest in the people.

At the end of the day, it is still all about investment and growth.  No nation can move forward without expanding growth and opportunity.  The global recession put the poor all over the world in deep jeopardy.

In the Philippines, the global setback force as to delay our long desired objective of balancing our budget but it was a worthy delay.  We invested in our poor and middle-class to keep their heads above water during this very difficult time.

Our stimulus package and targeted subsidies for the poor answered the pressing need to protect our people from harm.

Today, we stand before you feeling more confident about the future and proud of what we have done not just these last two years but over the entire nine years of our administration.

Our record of accomplishments is a solid one: 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth; low inflation; higher job creation; expansion of human and physical infrastructure.

The story of our administration started with some daunting statistics.  In the first quarter of 2001, inflation was 7.5%; our overall balance of payments position was a deficit of $202 million; external debt was 72.9% of GDP; but worst, our total public sector debt was larger than our whole GDP; unemployment was double digit at 11%.

We inherited an economy that was not even on the radar screen of international investors or the international financial community.  Net foreign direct investment inflows were less than $200 million in 2001.

During the previous government investor confidence was so low that one credit rating agency Moody’s, said in 2000, and I quote: “Recent weak economic management overshadows the decade-long improvement in the country’s economic foundations that resulted from reform and liberalization.”  Moody’s also said that, “prolonged political uncertainty or economic mismanagement would depress domestic and foreign investment, potentially reversing the recent gains in external flexibility and hurting the country’s creditworthiness.”

Today we are seeing the Philippines in a different light.  Even in a depth of the global financial crisis in February 2009, the same Moody’s said, and I quote again: “The Philippines has so far demonstrated a remarkable degree of resiliency to the global financial and economic crises, and has largely preserved gains achieved in recent years in improving the country’s economic, external payments and fiscal fundamentals.”

Yes, we have come a long way.  Nine years ago, we were our own poison. But today, the Philippines’ internal strength and resilience, which we built up through investment in our country and sound economic policy, are helping to keep our economy afloat even as some of the world’s strongest economies have fallen.

The future for the Philippine economy is, indeed, much brighter now that it was in 2001.  However, capitalizing on our potential will only be possible if we continue to have leadership willing to make the tough and often unpopular decisions that are required to break the hold of entrenched special interests and keep our economy moving.

We call on all those who aspire to this, the highest office of our land to always put the right thing for the country ahead of political expediency.  It doesn’t matter how popular you are if our economy is not providing the broad-based opportunity that our people deserve.

When we took office in 2001, we had very clear development objectives and an equally clear action plan to meet those objectives.  Our plan to promote growth and equity centered around a focus on the following components I pointed out in my first State of the Nation Address in 2001:

First, an economic philosophy of private enterprise appropriate to the 21st century.  Under this philosophy, the way to fight poverty is to create jobs.  To create jobs, we attract investments. To attract investments, we attend to macro measures and concerns like instituting fiscal discipline and strengthening the banking sector. Government revenues had to be raised and government expenditures had to move from profligate to prudent without compromising such core priorities as education, health, agricultural modernization and our nation’s technological progress. The government has also continued to work with the Bangko Sentral to pursue legislative reforms aimed at ensuring that international standards were maintained to eliminate such illegal practices as money laundering.

Our efforts to invest in the sectors that have the potential to make significant contributions to our nation’s drive for job creation and investment attraction have resulted in a stronger ICT sector and the modernization of our tourism and agriculture sectors.

Our BPO sector was employing 4,000 people when we took office in 2001. Today that number has increased to more than 400,000 and still counting.  This did not happen by accident.  It has required a joint public-private sector investment in the future of that important sector of our economy.

International cooperation was also central to our efforts to promote economic development.  Opening new markets, increasing trade and providing leadership in regional and international organizations has benefited our national economy.  Bilateral economic, political and security cooperation with such countries as Japan, China and the United States and others have been vital to the growth of the Philippine economy.  They have also been vital to our efforts to promote and protect our expatriate workers, our OFWs, in countries throughout the world.

Second component of the focus that I pointed out in my first State of the Nation Address was a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity.  I said then that we should try to create a million jobs in agriculture.  Almost two million jobs were created in that sector.

To achieve this, we invested no less than P20 billion pesos a year in agricultural and fisheries modernization including promoting organic fertilizer; irrigating over a  million hectares; agricultural education; Land Bank loans to farmers and fishermen of a P161 billion in our one administration compared to P97 billion for all previous administrations combined since the bank was established; dryers and other post-harvest facilities including more than 10,000 kilometers of farm-to-market roads, double that of two previous administrations combined; and seed support that increased average yield per hectare.

To fight poverty, agricultural modernization must be socially equitable.  That is why we redeemed in earnest the promise of land reform by distributing millions of hectares to almost a million indigenous people and more than a million Agrarian Reform beneficiaries.

Third component of the plan we announced in 2001 was a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan.  We recognized that our development must provide essential safety nets for the poorest members of our community, those who would otherwise be marginalized by expanded national development. It is for that reason that we expanded healthcare, adding 50 million beneficiaries to Philhealth, upgrading primary health centers and clinics into secondary and tertiary care hospitals, and selling medicines commonly used by the poor at half price even before the Cheaper Medicines Act was passed.

We built more schools, brought water to remote towns, electricity to remote barangays, and provided conditional cash allowances to the poorest one million families in the country.

We also recognized that education must be at the center of any government’s economic development platform.  In that regard, we have invested an education budget that is more than P200 billion pesos this year compared to less than P100 billion in year 2000.

As a result, national achievements test scores went up from 44% to 65% in grade school and 36% to 47% in high school still a long way to go but much better than before.

We have also provided college and post-graduate education for over 600,000 scholars, including masters and doctors in science and engineering.

We have also ensured that more and more families are able to own a home. During our tenure, 300,000 low cost housing units have been built, thus, giving 300,000 families in locations across the nation a chance to meet their goal of home ownership.  Part of this 300,000 families are 90,000 families that we relocated from the riles; 90,000 families, and did you hear of any big controversy? It was done with the best of social preparation.

We also recognized that if development was going to be equitable and sustainable, it must not be restricted to the Metro-Manila region. We must ensure that all regions, in every corner of our nation, realize the benefits of economic development.  The record shows that our investments in farm-to-market roads and other infrastructure, rural electrification, education and health services have made a difference in lifting up the competitiveness and quality of life of millions of our people throughout the Philippines.

Fourth agenda item, effective governance.  The fight against corruption has been ongoing for years.  It must continue.  But we have achieved significant success.  It has resulted in higher levels of tax revenue for the Bureau of Internal Revenue as well as enhancements in governance in many government departments. And I would like to congratulate Secretary Teves and the BIR because for the month of February, for the third straight month, the BIR has come back to meeting or even surpassing its targets.  Congratulations!

I would also like to acknowledge our outgoing Secretary of the Budget, Secretary Nonoy Andaya for the reforms that he made in procurement. Maraming salamat. And while we’re at it, a big thanks to outgoing Secretary Arthur Yap for the 1.8 million jobs that we created in agriculture through your leadership.

A critical component of our economic growth has been our efforts to establish security and stability throughout all corners of our nation. This has included increased allocation of resources to the military and police, expanded cooperation with the international law enforcement agencies, and economic development targets for areas such as Mindanao.  Our streets are safer to walk today than they were when we took office.  The people of Mindanao are already reaping the benefits of a peace dividend that will expand once agreement is reached on lasting peace for that important part of our country.  As we have said on many occasions, we will fight for that peace until our last day in office.

The growth that has resulted from our economic development programs is very evident when we travel throughout our nation, as we have done regularly for the past nine years.  During those visits, we see firsthand the tangible benefits of our policies and programs. This was certainly the case again during the visits we recently made to each of the five Super Regions that have been a key focus of our development efforts to spread development: Agribusiness Mindanao, the Cyber Corridor, Tourism Central Philippines, the Urban Luzon Beltway and the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle.

We started my remarks with a review of economic indicators we inherited when we took office in 2001.  We now close with indicators based on recent numbers:

Inflation today is stable, 2.9% for the fourth quarter of 2009.  And we have the lowest average inflation rates among administrations after my late father.

Our balance of payments position is now at over $5 billion dollars.

External debt as a percentage of GDP has been cut by half to 34%, but to me what is more gratifying, the total public sector debt which used to be larger than our GDP has been cut to about 72%.

Unemployment is now single digit compared to 2001, at 7.5 percent.

Our GDP, our economy has doubled over the last nine years.

And we are back on the radar screen of international investors. Claro Cristobal already told us that net foreign direct investments have grown more than six times during our administration.

Those are real numbers.  They are making a positive impact on the lives of real people.

We have created almost eight million jobs in nine years.

We built 100,000 classrooms, many of them in over a thousand barangays where there were no schools at all before.

I remember one time I went to what was already a very remote barangay in the Zambales mountains in order to look at some development there electricity for the barangay etcetera.  And one young Aeta girl came to see me, teenager, she was in grade 1 or 2 in that barangay which was not her own barangay.  Because if she were… she had no school in her own barangay and if she were to study and she would have to travel like 2 or 3 hours walking through mountain trails, crossing rivers to go to school every day. So she had to go to that barangay where we were Monday to Friday, live with some people there, and pay them vegetables or something for her rent.  So she said, I wish… then she told me her story. She said, I wish that we could have a school in our own barangay.

I said, it will come. Because our project is to have a school in every barangay where there was none.  At least for grade 1 and 2, so that like in her case she was a teenager in grade something because when she was 5 or 6 years old her parents certainly would not send her to another barangay to study.

So later on, months later, I went to celebrate the 100,000th classroom, and when I was there, here comes the same teenager, this was her barangay.  Now she had the school. She was crying, she was thanking me, and she was giving me the best bunch of bananas that she could harvest from what her family had planted.

More than 11.5 million people received technical education and skills training scholarship.

Barangay electrification has reached 99%.

Philhealth beneficiaries, I said we added 50 million, because that is an increase from less than 30 million before our administration to more than 80 million today.

We have constructed and rehabilitated almost 50,000 kilometers of roads, more than three previous Administrations combined, plus 10,000 kilometers of farm-to-market roads, as I mentioned earlier.  We also built and upgraded airports, and built the RORO Ferry Nautical Highway System.  These are all contributing to better connectivity, lower cost and higher efficiency of transport and travel.

Yesterday, or was it the day before yesterday, we re-inaugurated the Halsema Highway which my father had built from a mountain trail from Baguio to Bontoc.  And a farmer leader told me that that used to be a mountain trail, my father made it a highway but subsequent neglect turned it back into a mountain trail.  And now I have turned it back into a highway.

When it was still a mountain trail again, he said, the “ahente” would buy their vegetables for a very low price.  Because by the time it reached Baguio with that horrible travel the vegetables were no longer fresh.  And worst when it went to Manila.

He said, now, that we have this highway — in fact, it is from Baguio to Bontoc and then expanded to Ifugao Rice Terraces — now that we have this highway which they have benefited from for sometime now, at least the Baguio to Mt. Data portion, he said, the travel to Baguio is very fast.  And he heard that travel to Manila is also just as good because he heard of the SCTEX and the NLEX, so now the “ahente” buys their produce at a much better price. A difference in the lives of ordinary people.

So all these investment in transportation gives a boost to visit activity across the nation and across different scales of business.

Also, my friends tell me, we should point out ours is the only administration with a stronger peso at the end of our administration than at the beginning. And of course, the incidence of poverty went down.

These are just some of the many important achievements we have made over the last nine years to improve the quality of life for our people and to put our economy on a sustainable path of growth. But what is important is not so much what we have done, rather where the nation is going.

I have been committed to turning over to a new leader a nation that is in better shape than we found it. But long after we have left office, I want this nation to succeed, to win.

I want the people to prosper, the poor to be lifted out of despair, a middle-class to expand and lead this nation to the verge of first world in twenty years.

And you, the movers and shakers of business, hopefully, will be there to lead us.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Year-End Philippine Economic Briefing with the theme – “The Philippines: Opportunity in the Global Recovery”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080456/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27668&Itemid=38