THE OMNIBUS POWER BILL: RATE REDUCTION THROUGH GREAT COMPETITION

First, I would like to thank the senators and congressmen who crossed party lines and worked together to pass the Power Reform Bill. The passage of this bill demonstrates that healing is more productive than hatred. So, “To God be the glory”.

Because of this law, we can finally stop the huge amount of money the government gives to NAPOCOR each year as a subsidy. That is a large amount. This law unburdens government from having to maintain and operate generating plants. At Php38 billion annually, government subsidies to the power sector could be used to fund other services. This amount can build more than a hundred fifteen thousand classrooms. This, almost a hundred twenty seven thousand hectares, can put up 76,000 low-cost houses or construct 6,300 kilometers of road. This aspect to me is most significant, for it enables government to stretch its finances to meet other basic needs that our people should have immediately.

Because of this law, hopefully the government will no longer have trouble finding additional capital for the energy sector. At the core of this law is the framework for greater competition and the provision of a level playing field for power generator.

Because of this law, the debt of NAPOCOR will be resolved. If the Power Reform Bill had not passed, this debt would have continued to grow. That is one of the reasons why the price of our electricity is too high and one of the highest in all of Asia. This is the reason why the price of goods is so expensive. With the passage of the power reform bill, there will be competition. We expect the price of electricity to go down.

Our reputation as having one the most expensive electricity rates in Asia will hopefully change, with the law’s mandates of rate reduction of around 30 centavos per kilowatt-hour for residential consumers. The law also provides for a reduction in industrial power rates.

If the price of electricity goes down, the price of goods should follow or at least prevent a severe increase in prices. We will become competitive with other countries. Many people favor this law and many oppose it. I listened carefully to both sides. The congressmen and senators also listened to them. And in a historic vote, our intelligent legislators decided to pass the Power Reform Bill.

Many of our countrymen and even some legislators who voted for this new law believed, that this new law can still stand some improvement. In particular, they want the law to level the playing field more in the power industry, and to institute additional safeguards to protect consumers.

I believe these are valid concerns. And I am directing the incoming Secretary of Energy, Vicente Perez, who is right here, to conduct public hearings to determine if further amendments are needed, and what amendments are needed to further protect the public interest. And with the indulgence of our senators and congressmen who have worked so hard, if the hearings come about with conscientious amendments, then I hope they will indulge me, when I certify in the 12th Congress as urgent, the enactment of this needed conscientious, amendment to the law.

This law has both relief and pain. There is relief, and that relief will begin immediately, the lowering of our electric bills. The pains, however, we expect to gradually disappear. But if we do not remove or cure the illness, the pains will only worsen. We will use the money we save, as I said earlier, for our priorities. Such as affordable housing, free medicine, infrastructure, and mass education. We will revitalize the economy and the quality of our lives.

Thank you again to the senators and congressmen. Ladies and gentlemen of the 11th Congress, aside from thanking you for passing this bill, I also offer you the deep appreciation of the Filipino people for all your accomplishments during this Congress.

This Congress has set many “firsts”. This is the first but hopefully, the only Congress of our country that has worked with two administrations.

And, it is this Congress that will finally see the passage into law of what is perhaps, the longest running bill in our history, because it spanned three administrations and two Congresses, indeed, the longest running bill in Philippine contemporary legislation, the Electric Power Industry Reform Bill, which will soon become Republic Act 9136.

I am glad, that the soon to be Republic Act 9136 is the product of the joint efforts of this immediate, past and the present administration. It was in the past administration that this bill reached the Bicameral Conference Committee level. This administration has ensured that the work done to push the bill would not come to naught. As the child of two administrations, this law should prove that when the interest of the Filipino people is at stake, Congress and the Executive Branch will readily set aside politics and join hands to benefit our people.

Let it also be said here that this administration will continue to implement sound policies started by previous administrations.

Thank you also to the NGOs that supported us. The passage of the Power Reform Bill, which was debated for the past nine years, is a demonstration of the new spirit of cooperation among Filipinos. Let us continue this spirit of unity for our country, for our youth, for our future.

Today, we also witness the signing into law of Republic Act 9137, or the Supplemental Appropriations for Fiscal Year 2001. I am happy to sign this bill, which, among other things, will provide a five percent increase in the salaries of government workers. This supplemental budget is vital to the operations of the bureaucracy; a total of Php10.9 billion in the supplemental budget, Php1.45 billion will cover the second installation of the salary increases for the Philippine National Police, as mandated by Republic Act 8551; five hundred million pesos covers the increase in the monthly old-aged pensions of veterans and surviving spouses under Republic Act No. 7696; and, one billion pesos will go to the deficiencies in the appropriation of foreign-assisted projects, as well as a counterpart requirement of projects that will be implemented starting this year.

The bulk of the supplemental budget amounting to 7.95 billion pesos will cover salary deficiencies and adjustments. Of these amounts, 4.15 billion pesos will be used to pay 5,000 teachers hired in fiscal year 2000, the increase in government share of health and insurance premiums of government employees, retirement benefits for PNP personnel, and the deficiency in the regular retirement benefits of our government personnel. The remaining amount of Php3.8 billion, will be used to cover the five percent across the board increase of all national government employees.

I am the first to say that the increase is still not enough to fully meet the increase in the prices of goods. I am also the first to admit that this increase should have been given to government workers a long time ago, because the private sector salary scale has long surpassed the public sector salary scale.

A very important part of the government service is our program for reform. We cannot finish our plans if we do not have a stable, hardworking, and educated workforce of government workers. Every year, we lose good government workers because they move to the private sector, or they leave to go to other countries. As an economist, I do not blame their decision because their family's interests are their priority. Their decision is reasonable. But in the long run, the lack of education and discipline of government workers will affect the delivery of public service to the citizens. Nevertheless, we need to further improve the quality of government service through training, improved recruitment and better pay. We are striving for adequate salaries for government workers because of their great service to the country. Of course, public service is not always paid in money. Helping to build the country is a kind of what we call psychic income, an inner satisfaction that is more than money. But there is still a need for money in the pocket or in the bank.

In addition to the Php3.8 billion salary increase that I mentioned for government workers, I repeat, this law will also increase the salaries of police officers, teachers, pensions for veterans, and will also fund retirement benefits for government employees.

Therefore, I would like to thank Congress again for passing the supplemental budget worth Php10.9 billion. I thank the courageous senators and congressmen who worked overtime to ensure that hardworking government employees receive an increase. Thank you all, senators and congressmen.

You, the members of the 11th Congress have made your work as legislators and statesmen, with more than 400 new laws to your credits. These last two laws to be signed soon, are testaments to the sincerity and the political will of both the Legislative and Executive Branches in searching for enduring processes, systems and plans that has positive impact on our people’s lives.

I am particularly happy that after I became President, Congress passed a hundred three bills including the last two bills, and 20 of them are of national application.

Since I have been President for only a hundred forty days, this means that during the time you worked together, congressmen and senators, you passed almost one law per day. And I hope that the 12th Congress wherein many of you will still sit, will be as productive.

Take a bow, ladies and gentlemen of the 11th Congress and a cheery applause of the Filipino nation. It has been my great honor to have worked with you. And to all our fellow Filipinos, let the nation unite.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library