Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Swiss Asian Chamber, “A Path to Permanent Economic Growth and Stability: Creating a New Philippines”

[ Delivered at the Savoy Hotel, Baur au Lac, Zurich, Switzerland, January 23, 2008 ]

Thank you Mr. Zuellig. I’m glad you’re the one who introduced me because your family’s investments in the Philippines is one of the proofs that the Philippines is worth investing and staying in. Thank you.

I thank the Swiss Asian Chamber for your warm reception and hospitality on this winter day and I thank each and every one of you for taking time out to join us today. I also want to thank those of you who visited the Philippines last year.

This meeting is timely because it’s taking place during a period of great uncertainty for the global economy. This is especially crucial time for world leaders in business and government to band together to turn the challenges we face today into opportunities, challenges from the issue of climate change to volatility in the world markets, and the rise of Asia against these uncertainties. So I’m glad that there is a Swiss Asian Chamber.

And within Asia, the Philippines offers a strategic location in this, our very fast-growing region of Southeast Asia. Our workforce is well educated, productive and English speaking, and we are cutting red tape to simplify the requirements for investments. In the midst of world uncertainties, we remain a competitive location for a wide range of manufacturing and high-end services.

The Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. We have created seven million new jobs in seven years. We have achieved 28 consecutive quarters of economic growth even when many of our neighbors experienced negative growth or even recession at some time or another of the last seven years. In fact, our economy, which rose 7.1 percent in the first three quarters of 2007, is experiencing its fastest growth in more than a decade.

The Philippine economy grew faster than the rest of Southeast Asia, despite oil price volatility and a global economic slowdown. Our international reserves are also at record levels. We have a balance of payments surplus, a low inflation rate and low interest rates.

Business and investor confidence is on the rise, the peso is one of the world’s best performing currencies, and our stock market has reached historic heights. Our budget is under control and we are raising unprecedented amounts of revenue.

The Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for investment. Over the last seven years, our administration and our people have aimed high. We have met the challenge of economic and fiscal reform. Seven years ago, expanding the taxpayer base, strengthening the peso and attracting foreign investment were our biggest challenges. To some, our goals of balancing the budget, lowering debt levels and raising employment seemed ambitious at best. Seven years down the road, our unwavering commitment to installing the necessary reforms to move our nation forward has allowed us to make important progress on all these fronts.

In the midst of world uncertainties, it helps that we have one of the best and most awarded central banks in the world, which has helped the Philippines achieve a stable macroeconomic environment, that is, making us much more resilient to external volatility. We are vigilant that our efforts should not be derailed by the sub-prime crisis and the subsequent credit crunch. We count on the Central Bank governor and his team, who operate independently, to continue to ensure stable macroeconomic fundamentals to support our robust economic growth during a time or continued global economic volatility.

Foreign investment in the Philippines has grown more than five-fold from 2003 to 2007. This surge of investments has been anchored by billion dollar plus investments by several major international companies, including Texas Instruments, which chose the Philippines over other locations including China for its $1.6 billon wafer fabrication plant, Korea’s Hanjin which is putting up two shipyards for $3.7 billion, making us the fourth largest shipbuilder in the world; Marubeni, Tokyo Electric and America’s AES which have put in billions in our electric power industry, and Mittal Global which has conveyed to me their plans for putting up a $1.6 billion integrated steel mill in Mindanao. Significant new investments are being made across the board in a number of industries, especially mining, technology, energy, tourism, business process outsourcing and infrastructure, are also creating significant investment opportunities for both domestic and international investors alike.

The Philippines is ranked among the most attractive off-shoring destinations in the world because of cost competitiveness and more importantly our country’s highly trainable, English-proficient, IT-enabled quality manpower. Our outsourcing sector has the potential to grow 40 percent per year from 2007 until 2010, which would put in on track to double its global market share in three years This rate of growth also means revenues from the outsourcing sector would grow four-fold from the current level of $1.3 billion, and employment would triple to 900 000 jobs.

The government and private sector work together to develop talent to support the rising demand for quality workers in outsourcing, and expand outsourcing capabilities to new locations across the country beyond the centers of Manila and Cebu to tap larger talent pools.

Some of the joint initiatives include training, funding for education, and creating awareness of career opportunities to attract more graduates to pursue jobs in the outsourcing sector. The government and the private sector also work together to reassess current tertiary and secondary education curricula, to respond to the emerging needs of the market. To develop next wave cities, the government is developing IT hubs in Clark, Dumaguete and Iloilo to encourage greater levels of outsourcing investment in these locations.

In recent years, the outsourcing sector has expanded beyond call centers and IT to include a range of professional and business processes including accounting, human resources, financial analysis, design engineering, animation, medical services, legal services, insurance processes, banking processes, map making, publishing, content creation, and research.

We are certainly a leader in the outsourcing space, but we cannot underestimate the contribution of other high growth sectors to our economy: manufacturing, technology, mining, energy, tourism, and infrastructure.

Our strongest competitive advantage, our people, is also opening doors for us in medical tourism. The Philippines is recognized internationally for the uniquely Filipino brand of hospitality, care and compassion that makes us a competitive player in this sector. In fact, recently, the European Chamber of Commerce and Industry together with the American, Japanese and Korean Chambers of Commerce have endorsed our strengths in this area by forming a coalition to promote the Philippines as a healthcare destination for foreigners.

Mining is a key driver of our economy and an important sector that is bringing in significant levels of investment, creating jobs for the people and spurring exports.

The world’s biggest players from Australia, America, China and Japan have already been flocking to our country to invest and to conduct exploration.

Last year, investments grew more than the last three years combined. Mining will grow into a US$10 billion industry by 2010.

Our economy is booming, but like so many places in rich and poor nations alike, we must fight to close the gap in income inequality. There is no justification in this time and place in history that government policies should be tilted to maintaining the status quo that ensures the domination of the many by the few. And while I am fighting for social justice, I am fighting even harder for economic justice, for a strong economy is the best weapon for the liberation of the poor and oppressed.

We are now focused on further raising our competitiveness to sustain our momentum. For the first time in decades, less of our revenue is being used to service debt and more resources are being directed towards investment in human and physical infrastructure including education, healthcare and training as well as new bridges, roads and ports. Hopefully this will attract more investment, including Swiss investment.

We take pride in the discipline of our administration to focus on the economy and our overall economic health.

Our economy is performing at an all-time high in every aspect. We are in a stronger position than ever to instill permanent economic change in our country and to work together to ensure we achieve long-term prosperity for many generations to come. There is no better time for investors to take advantage of the many opportunities crated by our strengthening economy.

Thank you.

Source: Adamson University Library