Thank you, Secretary Puno.

General Verzosa; other officials and men and women of the Philippine National Police; members of the Diplomatic Corps; other government officials; ladies and gentlemen. Please sit down.

Happy greetings to all members of the PNP on your anniversary.

As we have seen from the report of General Verzosa, the PNP has come a long way since January 2001 when you played a central role in a highlycharged political crisis at the start of the decade. You tilted the balance in favor of good governance and you proceeded to transform the PNP.

You inherited a society with a culture of lawlessness and kidnapping that was directed, if you remember at that time, at certain domestic ethnic groups and foreign investors. But through sheer energy and focus, you led the way in working to end kidnapping as a major problem, virtually erasing this plague from the Philipines. Congratulations!

As a woman, I want to especially point out that during these years with your vigor and determination the incidence of domestic violence and crimes against women and children has gone down. Congratulations as well!

But let me be more general, through all of your work, the people are safer than ever today. And that deserves a big congratulations.

Going to international relations, you have played a large role in the fight against global terrorism, boosting our intelligence gathering and sharing with key allies while lifting up your professionalism and training. And I don’t need to talk about how you have lifted up your professionalism and training because General Verzosa has given a comprehensive report about how you have done that.

But let me point out also my gratitude that in quelling the attempts of delusional individuals and conspiracies to subvert Constitutional authority, always, you stood by the Constitution. And you did it without having to resort to force, while allowing dissenting voices to express their grievances. You the members of the PNP have conducted yourselves professionally in handling the various coup attempts, mass actions and other politically-motivated activities. That is why mass actions are now less violent than many other administrations in the past. I admire you and the people admire you, our police forces for demonstrating more temperance compared to the past even in the face of provocation.

I also congratulate you on your campaign against loose firearms, which netted over a hundred thousand firearms from July to September last year. And in response to what General Verzosa has said, I confirm that I have certified necessity of immediately enacting the bill imposing stiffer penalties on illegal firearms and light weapons. (applause) This is particularly important because of our continuing fight against terrorists and armed criminals, and also because we want to reduce election violence.

It is unfortunate that the Maguindanao tragedy happened, and I’m glad that you had an introspection and is part of the process of addressing that. But in the ensuing declaration of Martial Law, I am proud to say that the combined PNP and Armed Forces assigned to implement it were models of good comportment and that you really have to be congratulated for.

In the face of various challenges: typhoons and floods, disasters and tragedies caused by lawless elements, the Philippine National Police always rose to the occasion, preventing crime, providing quick response, saving lives, assisting in rescue and rehabilitation.

There were those we gave awards to, you truly deserved the awards that you got. General Verzosa mentioned the cop hero of MV Baleno, PO2 Mark Valiant Rey, who disregarded his own safety just to save the fifteen passengers of the sunken ship in Batangas during the Christmas season. There was also the care shown by the police who helped rescue those affected by typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng, even though many of them also suffered damage from the typhoons.

Indeed, whether in your core activity of fighting crime and violence, or your very important additional civic activity of saving lives and helping people, our policemen and women, you have given so much of yourselves to remain faithful to your sworn duty to serve and protect our nation and our people. Some of your heroics have become plots of movies, but even more stories about your valiant deeds will probably remain unknown.

But whether they are celebrated or whether there everyday occurrences or hidden achievements, for your valor and sacrifice, our nation is grateful. As General Verzosa pointed out, the PNP has received a high approval rating of 67 percent from our countrymen. That is indeed a thank you from the people of the Philippines.

And not only here in our country has the police demonstrated your courage and bravery. You are among the largest number of peacemakers or peacekeepers of the U.N. in the world, and lately our peacekeepers in Haiti are in the middle of the scene, our police, and we are grateful that they are still safe from danger and are currently helping in search and rescue operations. They really deserve a medal too. And I also ordered the sending of additional peacekeepers to Haiti.

I, along with the entire nation, admire the heroism you have shown, a heroism that has not been easy in the face of trials and challenges that have confronted you.

Like the PNP, the Philippines itself has come a long way since January 2001. Time has gratefully erased many memories of that tumultuous time less than ten years ago, when the nation teetered on political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made, few jobs were being created. The public sector debt of P3.6 trillion pesos was bigger than the GDP of P3.3 trillion pesos. The foreign debt was 73 percent of GDP. Foreign reserves were razor thin.

It was a time of lower salaries, including for the police force. You had a bill, you had a law increasing your salaries but it couldn’t be implemented by the time I had come in. And there was high inflation to further disturb you low salaries. Due to the large debt to GDP ratios, insufficient investments had been made to expand healthcare, improve education, provide clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Internationally, the Philippines had fallen far, far off the radar screen. It had taken itself out of consideration by investors as a place to invest and create jobs.

Into this dismal picture we stepped.

In 2001, I did not seek the Office of the President. It was thrust upon me, with as I said earlier, the PNP playing a central role in EDSA II. Rather than shirk from the onerous task, together with you, I rolled up my sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around. Together with you, I was focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, not just discipline of the citizenry to the police. We had to grow the economy and we had to invest in human and physical infrastructure, including investment in the police.

And I’m glad that General Verzosa already talked about the supplemental P10 billion pesos Capability Building Enhancement Fund as an offshoot of the PNP Modernization Program, including the two billion pesos release to acquire firepower and mobility and communication equipment for our police stations from 2008 to 2012. And I’m also glad that every police station now has at least one patrol vehicle. How could we afford this?

From day one, our actions to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy, and invest in human and physical infrastructure would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver 36 consecutive quarters of growth, create 9 million new jobs, including more than 20,000 in the police. And our turnaround also delivered the addition of 52 million people to healthcare and a stable fiscal situation that allowed us to afford your transformation.

You have never shied away from taking on tough challenges, as I have never shied away from taking on tough issues. Most notably, my popularity dipped when I went against the grain and championed the passage of the Expanded Value Added Tax. I knew it would be unpopular. But someone had to get the nation’s fiscal house in order and bring in revenues to invest in the people, including in the police. It was the right thing to do. It has served the people and the PNP well, and I have no regrets about it.

We have also ensured that more and more families are able to own a home. During our tenure, more than 300,000 low-cost housing for the Filipino people have been built, including housing programs for the police as showed by General Verzosa such as those in Camp Bagong Diwa, Bicutan, Camp Macabulos in Tarlac, Camp Castañeda in Silang, Camp Capistrano in Cagayan de Oro. This is in keeping with what I said in 2001 that I would be studying “how to make the lives of policemen and their families better.” Since that time, as I said before I came in, there had been a law giving you higher salaries but they couldn’t be implemented. Since that time, the men and women of the PNP have been granted five increases in salaries and allowances, so that today you’re earning more than double what you did in 2001. This is on top of scholarships for your children, and cheaper medicines and food sold in outlets within the camps. And the other many benefits that General Verzosa inventoried which I don’t need to add after that.

In conclusion, in summary, we will leave a legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investments in healthcare, education and law enforcement, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure. Yes, much work remains to be done, but through your support, we are determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines, one that is ready for the challenges of bringing our nation to the verge of first world in 20 years which would include a modern and thoroughly professional police force.

The nation recognizes the enormous contribution you have made to national peace and order — two of the important ingredients for long-term development.

So my request to you is to continue to honor this organization through your faithful service.

Thank you again for your support. And Happy Anniversary to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 19th anniversary of the Philippine National Police (PNP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235159/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27400&Itemid=38