Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Switch-On Ceremony of the First 82-Megawatt Power Generation Unit of the 3×82 MW Clean Coal-Fired Power Plant and launching of the environment-related project

[Delivered at the Cebu Energy Development Corp. (CEDC) Multi-purpose Hall, March 5, 2010]

Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Reyes. Thank you for your introduction.

Chairman Ty; President Sebastian and your other partners in this very important investment; Governor Garcia; Congressman Pablo John Garcia; Mayor Zambo and the other officials of this jurisdiction. I would also like to recognize Congressman Benhur Salimbangon from the northern part of Cebu.

Members of the Cabinet: we have already had Secretary Favila acknowledged and Secretary Reyes. Also, we’ve had Secretary Horacio Ramos who signed the Memorandum of Agreement today on Reforestation. Secretary Durano who is our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development here in Region VII and Secretary Jun Icban, Office of the Press Secretary. Other government officials who helped make this possible. To all of us, to all of you, Mrs. Ty and the other ladies who provide inspiration here.

Congratulations to Cebu Energy! Congratulations to Metrobank and its partners for being part first of all of our Billion Dollar Club! The Billion Dollar Club is that exclusive club of investors putting in one billion dollars in our economy during my administration. I have welcomed several other members of the Billion Dollar Club to our country but I’m very happy that this is the first that I am welcoming which is majority-owned Filipino. Congratulations! Your one billion dollars in power plants in Cebu and Iloilo are the solution to the power shortage in the Visayas.

By the way, let me also acknowledged our Ambassador from the People’s Republic of China, Ambassador Liu. Thank you for joining us here.

Early in my administration, one of the very first bills that we passed into law was the Electric Power Industry Reform Act. That law privatized the electric power sector. It prohibited the government from being the one to put up new power plants. Henceforth, it had to be the private sector to produce the energy infrastructure to match the demands of our growing economy. And so, we have had to campaign hard for the private sector to invest in power generation, and we are happy to have positive responses from development-oriented companies like Metrobank and its partners. Maraming salamat sa inyo.

I am happy that Metrobank or Global Business Power through its Cebu Energy Development Corporation and on the other side of the Visayas, the Panay Energy Development Corporation has responded to the challenge.

Today, the Visayas grid has a generation deficiency of 45 megawatts that is why we have been experiencing some brownouts. But with the inauguration today of the first 82-MW generating units of this 246-MW plant, the whole of the Visayas can now meet its present needs and a little more for its reserves.

This additional power signals the end of rotating brownouts in the Visayas and it also marks the end of importing power from Luzon which is also burdened by huge power requirements.

We now look forward to other significant power start-up dates calendared by the Metrobank related power companies: the synchronization of the 2nd and 3rd 82-MW units of this Toledo plant in May and then in December of this year; and the synchronization of the generating units of Panay Energy Development Corporation, an additional 82 megawatts in October and another 82 in December, all of this year. And we hope that the power plant of KEPCO, which we passed by on the way here in Naga, under construction will also provide additional supply by October of this year.

So, from being an importer of power, now that Cebu will be producing more power than it needs, it can even become an exporter of power to Luzon and to Mindanao.

We also congratulate this Toledo plant and the Panay power plant for using clean technology so that even if they are coal-fired, our air would have less carbon emissions than the old style coal-fired plants. Our Administration has forged a new energy and environmental policy that has created more jobs, decreased reliance on foreign sources of energy, and provided a blueprint for a green, sustainable economy. Choosing between a good job and a clean economy is a false choice. We can have a growing economy and a green, healthy economy. And we thanked the Metrobank group for complying with my request — that was the signing ceremony was all about — to augment their clean coal investment with a reforestation project in Central Cebu to make this plant even more carbon neutral.

To Dr. George Ty, Chairman of the Metrobank Group of Companies and all the others mentioned by Francis Sebastian earlier, who have made possible the operation of this Toledo plant, I would say what the Cebuanos have been already saying when and Arlene said it already, but I say it once again: To you, daghang salamat and congratulations to all of us.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Switch-On Ceremony of the First 82-Megawatt Power Generation Unit of the 3×82 MW Clean Coal-Fired Power Plant and launching of the environment-related project. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080436/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27674&Itemid=38