Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Dinner Reception for Delegates to the Cities Alliance-Public Policy Forum

[Delivered at the Malacañang’s Rizal Hall, November 5, 2007]

This meeting comes at a time when the nation is moving and the people are more concerned about taking advantage of our economic progress, than the backsliding of political protest. People deserve peace, order and stability. We have been through many upheavals and the people deserve a stable government and economic progress. With the help of our officials here tonight, that is what they are getting now.

We like to think that even the opposition are committed to the public good and like us, that they want to find common ground to move the nation forward. We have made huge strides with our economy, including 27 quarters of growth, a surge in investments, 6 million new jobs, a strong peso and the best stock market in a generation. We are confident that politicians, especially the city officials who are here with us tonight and want to continue with the gains and not stop the progress.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. Six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on tax cheats, strengthen the peso and move the stock market. And no one thought we could bring our budget deficit down, prepay lower our debts and raise employment, but we have.

The national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single Filipino. It is a pro-poor, pro-growth, pro-modernization agenda. We have moved the nation forward on the strength of our partnership with city mayors and other local government executives who form the backbone of our government.

The cities of the world are a force to reckon with in our respective countries’ march to a better future.

Cities are also at the forefront of international diplomacy representing the hubs of excellence that reach out across the seas to other lands.

We are among the most rapidly urbanizing countries in East Asia. This is a double edged challenge. While rapid urbanization drives high economic growth, it can also aggravate poverty and social inequalities.

Rapid urbanization provides an opportunity to use economic of scale to fuel economic growth and thereby create the conditions for the provision of improved infrastructure, service delivery and jobs.

On the other hand, it creates the challenge of how to provide decent and secure housing, food and livelihood for the mounting numbers of poor families.

Our economic reforms are the frontline in our campaign to reduce poverty. Economic reforms have created the environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people. More jobs means less poverty. These reforms have also generated the additional revenues needed to invest in services that help poor people such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food for school programs. Education is also very important in our efforts to reduce poverty, which is why we are investing additional value added tax revenues in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators. It was encouraging to see the recent report released by the United Nations on our Millennium Development Goals, which recognized the progress the Philippines has made in reaching key targets on infant mortality, gender parity in education, reduction of the prevalence of tuberculosis and HIV, reducing poverty and improving urban sanitation.

In a world of rapid urbanization, cities play an indispensable role in laying the foundations of laws, ordinances and regulations; working with and coordinating stakeholders and sectors; and leveraging investments to provide jobs.

We have several local government units worth visiting who have demonstrated that a pro-active stance in improving the conditions of the urban poor can yield significant results.

The local governments and the national government, represented in the Philippines by the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council or HUDCC headed by our very devoted Vice President de Castro, team up to accelerate affordable and sustainable financing for local slum-upgrading programs, adopt an effective regulatory and institutional framework, and provide incentives for private sector and NGO participation.

We believe in the “Hernando de Soto” formula for property reform. We have carried out our socialized housing program, which has been commended by the United Nations, based on his principles. We aim to continue to harness the principles to expand his ideas whether it is through private market forces alone, or in combination with government initiatives. Either way, we must continue to liberate our poor to take possession of assets that they can use to gain a foothold and create genuine wealth for themselves.

Over the last six years, almost 200,000 families on more than 25,000 hectares have benefited from our more than 100 urban land reform proclamations where we proclaim a piece of land as available for security of tenure for those who are living there. The Vice President de Castro’s HUDCC and National Housing Authority have awarded certificates of lot allotment “de Soto” –style to more than 10,000 families in the first half of this year, bringing the total since the start of our administration six years ago to almost 30,000 families. During our administration, we have loaned out more than P4 billion for a community mortgage program whereby 85,000 family-beneficiaries 700 housing sites are able to buy the land from the owner of the land that they are squatting on. So, they are no longer squatters and the owner gets paid for the land that wouldn’t be used; otherwise it’s hard to eject thousands of people living on your land.

The idea of “cities without slums” is an ideal framework to address urbanization.

The success of the C% Development Strategies Program, funded by the Cities Alliances and implemented by the League of Cities strengthens our belief in the power of the global system to alleviate poverty and modernize nations. That does not mean we believe that countries like the Philippines are ready to compete head-to-head today in every sector, but it does mean that we need not be afraid of globalization.

I understand that the program has already been implemented in the majority of our cities, with measurable success, and that it is among the most successful in the world. Congratulations!

We hope that you will continue to work with us.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].