Thank you very much, Secretary Lotilla of Energy.

I’d like to greet, of course, the Lao family and the Chemrez family. Congratulations to all of you! We have some VIPs with us today from the government, we have two congressmen: Congressman Louie Villafuerte whose coconuts in Camarines Sur will feed CHEMREZ; we have Congressman Firmalo of Romblon. If this is the first coco bio-diesel plant, Romblon has its little second bio-diesel plant as well; and of course we have Mayor Sonny Belmonte. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank him for his very successful mega jobs fair last May 1st; other officials of the government and of CHEMREZ; guests; ladies and gentlemen.

This bio-diesel plant of CHEMREZ started about two years ago. And during that time, the Lao family invested in it as a response to our request to have clean air. Now, after two years, they are addressing two needs — clean air and alternative, more efficient and therefore cheaper fuel. So today is an important day, we are opening this factory in the middle of our energy-independence agenda. One of the five most important parts of our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan.

Last year, our economy grew by five percent. But we did not increase the importation of oil products by five percent. In fact, our consumption of imported oil products decreased by eight percent, and why? Why, while our economy is growing, are we reducing our consumption of imported oil products? Because of our alternative fuel programs, especially now that the CHEMREZ bio-diesel plant is open.

These strategies are in the middle of our energy-independence agenda. What we want, according to our economic planners, like Popo Lotilla, is that by 2010, we should be 60 percent self-sufficient in energy. This coco bio-diesel is one of the big potentials in lowering the price of transportation per kilometer. That’s why Len Bautista, the chairman of LTFRB who is also here now, is happy.

How does this reduce the cost of transport? By adding one liter of coco bio-diesel — your brand name is bio-active — by adding one liter of bio-active to every one hundred liters of diesel, we reduce the cost per kilometer of transportation. And the other day, during the soft opening, they already had this supply, they already supplied it. In fact, it was pre-blended in some independent fuel stations. And the customers of those independent stations kept coming back because the customers really felt that their expenses per kilometer were reduced.

The big oil majors, while they haven’t yet built their plants to pre-blend, are open to having their consumer shelves loaded with bio-active so that if you are a motorist and you fill up your diesel at a major station that doesn’t yet have pre-blended fuel, you can buy bottles of bio-active there on their shelves to add to your fuel tank. Because I know this as CHEMREZ, but I suppose their product, bio-active, is better than CHEMREZ. But CHEMREZ is the first continuous bio-diesel plant in Asia. I asked Mr. Lao what continuous means, the technical term for it. But to a layman, it means consistent quality, consistent quality. So very scientific, very high-end. And I am happy that this product is not only for the Philippines. We really need it for the Philippines, but we need the dollars and they are helping with that. Other countries including first-world markets have expressed confidence in our local bio-diesel and have been importing this fuel from the Philippines.

I want to congratulate CHEMREZ, because we are now exporting bio-diesel to Japan and Germany. These countries have very high standards. I remember when I was in… running the garments industry, even if the clothes were beautiful, if the stitches didn’t match the color of the hemline, they would be rejected. That’s how high their quality standards are and they are buying coco bio-diesel here at CHEMREZ. Congratulations!

And I’m very glad that aside from Japan and Germany, the Americans, the Australians and the Chinese have also expressed confidence in our bio-diesel. The advent of bio-diesel from coconut is a very big boost to our coconut industry. That’s why Louie Villafuerte who comes from a very big coconut province is here. This industry provides jobs and livelihood to some 20 million Filipinos including countless poor families. And if we are talking about coconut, when I started my presidency, how much was our coconut? Two pesos was our copra then, now it’s 20 pesos.

Because we have been able to develop the market, coconut is now a seller’s market, not a buyer’s market in the Philippines. Virgin coconut oil, the market is practically infinite compared to our supply. Coco wire, which they now use for flood control, slope protection in China, they almost buy coco wire from the Philippines. So this coco bio-diesel is another ready market for our coconut. So in our coconut industry, the problem is no longer the market, our problem is supply and of course the livelihood of our coconut farmers.

So yesterday, Popo Lotilla was at our Cabinet meeting. And a decision was made that from the agri-agra funds — isn’t this what is required that our agri-agra funds should be used for agriculture and land reform by the banks — one billion should be used to develop one million hectares of land under our coconut trees for agri-business. For example, Louie, we can add more coconut trees here or, for example, it can be used to build a coco wire factory or used for a laboratory to ensure the consistent supply… the quality of our virgin coconut oil. And it can be used perhaps for logistics so that the sending of coconuts to CHEMREZ or the support needed by the small bio-diesel industry in Romblon can be helped to improve and those are what the one billion pesos of agri-agra funds will be spent on to develop one million hectares of land under the coconut trees for agri-business.

So thank you very much, CHEMREZ. First of all, for entering to make our air cleaner. Secondly, for helping to make our transportation more efficient — more mileage per peso, therefore, more economical. And thirdly, for helping our poor communities in the coconut-producing communities.

So, for these three services that you are giving, a fourth is the export of coco bio-diesel, thank you very much to CHEMREZ and long live bio-active!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of the CHEMREZ bio-diesel plant. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213849/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2792&Itemid=38