Thank you very much to all of you.

You may now take your seats.

Thank you very much Governor Enverga for introducing me. And thank you very much for the many times you have invited me here at Enverga University.

I have been coming here for a long time, even when I was still a Senator. But of course, the students change so we always meet new faces.

I also greet President Laurel of the University Foundation. And as proof that I am not a stranger, here is a picture of us during one of my visits here when I was still a Senator.

I greet all the teachers who are here. And with us here from Malacañang is Presidential Adviser for Southern Tagalog, PA Cesar Sarino, who is here, and Presidential Assistant for Education, Mona Valisno, who is also here.

Earlier, I saw Vice Governor Talabong running here with Governor Enverga, so I also greet him. Actually, they weren't late, we started early because I saw in the program that the graduation was supposed to be at two o'clock, but we started at one o'clock.

So it's good that we are always prepared and always ahead of time because that is a challenge of the coming century: how to be there ahead of the others.

You know, Governor Enverga, the reason I have been invited to their school many times is because my father, he reminds me now, was with him in Congress. I know that they were together in Congress, but Willy also said that they were almost seatmates because the seating arrangement in Congress back then was in alphabetical order — the P and the Q were next to each other, the Congressman from Pampanga and the Congressman from Quezon were seated together. So, even though I come from Pampanga, I am close to Quezon.

And so today, my dear students, I congratulate our graduates as I commend the administrators and staff of the Enverga University for your continued zeal and commitment in the pursuit of academic excellence and social relevance. In this region, academic excellence and social relevance, you are all partners, our partners for national progress.

On this day, you, the graduates, leave your university lectures behind. You will now be the speakers and authors of our nation’s future. The key lesson of any commencement is that the world is now in your hands. The future becomes your responsibility. You can no longer lean upon your teachers for hints or answers. You have to step forth on your own.

As you line up your sights on the professional horizon, there are several things you must keep in mind.

Whether we like it or not, almost all our national concerns have become globalized. In today’s marketplace, ideas, discoveries, technology, money, and human resources move quickly from one country to another. Competition is keen, we must constantly keep up with others.

Also, we must all realize, you must realize, that the key to progress is information and communications technology which is the primary vehicle of the world today. Everyday, we must be able to cope with new ways of organizing and utilizing information so that we can keep up with the demands of growth, stability, and survival. Those who cannot keep up will fall along the wayside.

We live in a rapid stream of perpetual change. This means we must keep on training ourselves, chasing knowledge, learning multiple jobs and dealing with complex problems. It is an awesome challenge and responsibility and it never relents. In line with these imperatives, we need to provide all filipinos with quality and relevant education. We need an empowered and literate citizenry. We need to create more opportunities for employment and wealth, which translate to higher sustained economic growth.

Our victory against poverty depends on productivity enabled by education. We must stop the vicious system of one generation inheriting the poverty of a previous one and passing it on to succeeding generations. The task begins in our schools. Our goal is for every Filipino to find gainful employment.

When I became president, the unemployment rate I inherited was 11.3 percent. After one year of my presidency, this unemployment rate went down to 10.3 percent because jobs were added for one and a half million Filipinos.

But 10.3 percent unemployment rate is still high. And the very high unemployment rate is in Metro Manila — almost 20 percent, so many are dissatisfied now in Metro Manila. We still need to find jobs for another two and a half million Filipinos by 2004, or going into 2004. And to do this, we will vigorously pursue employment generation, employment preservation, employment enhancement and employment facilitation.

Employment generation, this means creating new opportunities in the labor market through four components of our medium-term Philippine development plan to fight poverty.

The first component of our medium-term Philippine development plan to fight poverty is a philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Under this philosophy, the way to fight poverty is to create jobs.

To create jobs, we must attract investments.

To attract investments, we must attend to macro-measures and concerns. We are attending, we must attend to basics like infrastructure. Our priorities include telecommunications facilities, roads, infrastructure for the modernization of agriculture and mass transport infrastructure. This will create engineering and other jobs in construction, telecommunications and transport.

So I saw there are engineers here, right, in this line? So I hope you will find those jobs because we are promoting infrastructure.

We will further explore labor-intensive activities in infrastructure development. Because there is infrastructure that is capital-intensive, there is infrastructure that is labor-intensive in construction. So I told Secretary Datumanong, our methods should be labor-intensive.

Also, in pursuing the philosophy of free enterprise to create jobs, we are designing policies to develop our capital market. We will set up a secondary housing mortgage market, an asset management company, and a provident fund for overseas Filipinos. This will create jobs in the financial sector.

And, indeed, in Metro Manila — because I bring a jobs fair whenever I have a graduation ceremony — in Metro Manila, our jobs fair for graduating students are producing many jobs in the financial sector.

Preparing our growth sectors for the future enables us to tap the opportunities of the 21st century to create jobs. We are promoting fast growing industries where high value jobs are most plentiful. One of them, as i said earlier, is information and communications technology or ICT. And I am glad that we have in this row, right, information technology graduating students.

Our English literacy and the aptitude and skills of our great Filipino workers give us a competitive edge in ICT. Filipino workers are ranked number one in the field of ICT in the world today — number one among knowledge workers. And we will continue to develop the skills of our knowledge workers to meet the needs of the ICT sector where high value postings are most plentiful.

Let me give you examples: even now, there are already many jobs available in ICT. The lowest paying job in ICT, the simplest job, is the job for call center agents. But these call center agents, many of them earn a starting salary of P15,000 at iyan ang pinaka-simple pa sa ICT. Then we go to the most sophisticated jobs in software development where analysts say we and India are the two countries which will most likely be the centers of software development in ICT in this coming decade.

We are one of two developing countries as the likely world centers for software development in this decade, that's why jobs are looking for us there.

And to prepare our youth to be the next generation of knowledge workers, we are upgrading math and science teaching in basic education, and also increasing the number of teachers to improve the quality of instruction. This creates jobs for teachers, 20,000 new items this year, especially in math and science. And I see in this row, we have our education graduates.

To improve the quality of education as required by the new economy, we are also increasing the number of textbooks per student. This creates jobs in the paper and printing industry.

Aside from ICT, we also have the competitive edge in tourism, in the natural wonders of our country and the natural warmth of our people. We are promoting tourism as a key employment generator.

I understand that here in Lucena where you are lucky you already have a hotel — what is it, is it called Queen Margaret hotel? Well, in Legaspi, they have Mt. Mayon but they don't have a hotel. A hotel is really needed for tourism. And I understand there are other hotels coming up as well, so these are jobs that will be made available to you.

Yesterday in Bataan, i learned that the resorts in Bataan are fully booked for the summer. Our holiday economics is working, and I hope it is the same in Quezon province.

Earlier, I was with Governor Enverga in the Bondoc Peninsula. The son of the Mayor of Buenavista said, thank you for letting the government employees have the option of working four days a week, ten hours a day. Now, I am so sunburned because I am always with my father going out for weekend vacations. That's why holiday economics really works even though people are criticizing me.

Aside from the philosophy of free enterprise, the second component of our medium-term Philippine development plan to fight poverty is agricultural modernization founded on social equity. We expect agricultural modernization to generate one million new jobs.

The third component of our fight against poverty is a social bias in our development plan. This will create further job opportunities such as in the construction of mass housing. Every year, we will build one hundred thousand homes for workers and fifty thousand housing units for the even more impoverished. So we have employment opportunities in construction in the housing industry. And we have a special project for the poor youth of the cities who can no longer study but do not yet have jobs — the out-of-school youth — this is the emergency employment program. They can repair roofs, fix railings, guard schools in their barangay, clean streets or canals or other emergency employment. But you, you will not have emergency employment because you are educated, and we expect that we will find a way for you to have a job.

Ten point three percent is the unemployment rate, that's high, that's a lot, and we hope that within four years, three years, two years, it will go down. But, in the meantime, we will look for jobs wherever we can find them, Philippines or abroad. It is not our policy to export labor but we recognize that if there is demand in other places for our labor, we will prepare our students so that they are qualified for those opportunities. That's why I am happy with those of us wearing white, our marine sciences, our sea engineers and merchant marines, because a large job in the human resource intensive, skills intensive service sector is our sea farer professionals.

And also, because those who practiced population planning in the last generation, now that population is getting old — they’re an aging population, they lack a population of productive age because they did family planning, the birth rate went down — there are not enough nurses to take care of the elderly. So, therefore, there is again that other employment opportunity. And I congratulate Enverga University because in the coming school year, you will have a bachelor of science in nursing so there will be even more jobs for our youth of the province of Quezon.

Not only that, Willy said, this Bachelor of Science because it's four years, oh my, after four years you will have a lot of job opportunities in different parts of the world, and I hope by four years also here in the Philippines.

But there are also short term courses, Willy said, the caregivers. So this, it is not our policy to sell labor abroad but if there are those who are hiring, our policy is to qualify our labor force for those opportunities.

We should also have a new system for handling garbage. That is also a policy. So now we are implementing recycling and zero waste management as started in smokey mountain and being started in montalban in rizal. So this kind of environmental management also provides jobs. I saw, opening of bachelor of environmental science in June 2002. Hopefully students here can also study that, environmental management of waste. And that is also a big employment opportunity in the coming period because of our increasing urbanization.

Whether in the urban areas or in the countryside, we will make Microfinance a cornerstone in our fight against poverty. What this means, small lending groups for small businesses — self-employment. So if we plan to provide loans to three hundred thousand women each year, this means jobs for three hundred thousand each year. This micro financing, the business is small, you do not hire others — it's just you. Like you are a seamstress who receives orders or a manicurist who does home service or you make fishballs — it's just you — that small. So you don’t hire others, but you employ yourself. That is one big policy we are also using for employment.

So today I also brought a jobs fair here to your graduation. And I want to announce so far the results: you have 145 who registered for the jobs fair, six have already been hired, and nine have registered at TLRC for microfinance. This jobs fair is still ongoing and it will continue after today, it will continue at the public employment service office of DOLE here in Lucena.

Now, other programs we have that provide jobs. Many of our barangays do not yet have electricity so we connect electricity in four barangays every day, four barangays a day until the end of my term in 2004. This also provides jobs both in construction and also in new opportunities that provide a community with electricity. For example, if there is no electricity, there is no irrigation; but if there is electricity, you can irrigate, you can put up storage facilities, you can provide additional jobs.

We will intensify efforts to promote small and medium enterprises, or SME’s, especially in the countryside. This will also provide jobs because SME’s are labor intensive. The difference between Micro and SME, the SME has small capital but you hire others; the Micro, small capital and it’s you, it’s for you as a one-man team or a mom-and-pop-operation.

Maliban sa free enterprise, agricultural modernization at social bias, the fourth component of our national agenda is improving moral standards and the rule of law. How? We must strengthen justice and the enforcement of law and order. This provides job opportunities for lawyers and law enforcers.

Last December, for instance, we hired 1,700 new policemen, college graduates lahat; and this year, we are, hiring 4,000 more new policemen.

To attain our full potential as a nation, we are coming to terms with the fundamental issues in Mindanao. In Mindanao, there is war because there has been much economic exclusion in Mindanao, especially against our muslim brothers. Thus, even as we wage war in Mindanao, we must address the cause of war. We must reverse the economic exclusion of our muslim brothers and bring economic development to them. This means jobs in Mindanao, especially in muslim Mindanao. Why am I saying this to you, you are from Quezon? Because many go to Mindanao for job opportunities.

My grandfather, the late Juan Macaraeg, he was an engineer here in quezon, in Lucena so my mother studied here in lucena, in kindergarten. But after that, he got a job as manager of Sta. Clara Lumber there in Mindanao. So, from Quezon, they moved to Mindanao.

That is what we are doing again: if we want to avoid war, development is needed. So there will be opportunities in Mindanao for the more adventurous of our graduates, even here from Quezon.

Aside from employment generation, our labor policy consists of employment preservation, employment enhancement and employment facilitation.

Employment preservation means pro-active dispute interventions, making the cost of doing business in the country more competitive, and forging multilateral and bilateral labor agreements and arrangements for overseas employment. As I said, nurses, seamen, and information technology.

Employment enhancement means improving worker competency — like what the TLRC will do — productivity and work values. We can do this through better work conditions, remuneration and welfare programs.

Employment facilitation means developing and improving access of Filipino workers to employment opportunities and alternatives. It also means providing stop gap measures for those who are not prepared for the demands of the labor market.

So the peso — the public service employment office, which organized your job fair — is part of that. It also includes the expansion and enhancement of the Philippine job network. You have Jobnet here at your job fair so you can look for a job on the internet. And as I said, we do jobs fairs like the one we are doing now here in your university, it also includes the provision of vocational guidance and employment counselling. All these are facets of job facilitation.

So if you are having difficulty finding a job — and I will not be surprised if many of you will have difficulties in finding jobs — then you will go to PESO for job counselling. But really my advice to you is that jobs are in information technology.

All these are what we try to do so that as you graduate, you will have a good chance to land a job and have a good future.

And so today, I welcome you graduates of Enverga University, to the world of the working Filipino, the world of the great Filipino worker.

And I hope you use your talents for the good of all, not just for yourselves — although, it is your right, of course it should benefit you, you should look for a livelihood — but above that, I hope that when you are already working, you will help me in the development of the Filipino nation.

Congratulations and thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 55th Commencement Exercises of the Manuel Enverga University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230034/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7648&Itemid=38