Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Filipino-Chinese General Chamber of Commerce Centennial Anniversary

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion, Manila Hotel, November 15, 2004]

Thank you very much, Dante for your kind introduction.

Doctor Dy and the other officers of the General Chamber; Don Emilio Yap, our host here in Manila Hotel; members of the diplomatic corps; Dick Gordon, Senator Dick Gordon and the other legislators who are here tonight; members of the Cabinet; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Good evening and happy centennial anniversary to the General Chamber!

I’m so pleased to see so many of you tonight, and so many who have been my supporters for over so many years, thank you for your support. and, of course, congratulations for 100 years of significant contribution to the growth and development of trade, commerce and industry in the country.

I would also like to give a special thanks to Doctor James Dy. In the film showing, you saw a Memorandum of Agreement with the Malacañang Press Corps. I want to thank Doctor Dy for his valuable assistance to the working press which covers Malacañang.

Toting Bunye told me that Doctor Dy who is also the chair of the Chinese General Hospital has renewed for the second year your Memorandum of Agreement with the Malacanang Press Corps. The MOA guarantees to bonafide reporters, TV crew and photographers covering the Malacañang beat, the following:

Immediate admission of media men and their immediate relatives in case of emergency;

50 percent discount on professional fees;

30 percent discount on direct hospital expenses.

Thank you for your generosity, Doctor Dy.

And to all the members of the General Chamber, thank you also for your various manifestations of generosity shown over the past century. And thank you, too, for enriching our country with the Chinese values of thrift, humility, hard work, discipline and sacrifice, and showing how these values can bring about great success. We need these values, not only for the success of individual entrepreneurs but also as a nation to solve our fiscal problem.

The country needed a wake-up call on the importance of getting our fiscal house in order. I think I’ve achieved that since last August. Now, there is a renewed sense of shared determination among you, the business community, among the legislators to put aside personal and party interest and work together in the best interests of the nation. You can see this in the congressmen staying up until dawn to pass the Alcohol and Cigarette Tax and the lateral attrition measure. You can see this in the senators who have resolved that they will pass an even more stringent version of the Alcohol and Cigarette Tax. You can see this in the active dialogue taking place regarding all our reform measures.

We have had always positive dialogue, including with you, the business community and also even with the credit rating agencies. As far as the credit rating agencies is concerned, I can surmise that their concern has as much to do with the timing of our reform measures as the measures themselves. That said, no one feels the urgency more than I and that is why, today, the legislative and the executive branches of government have been working hand in hand.

Let me also state, that we all realize, senators, congressmen and the executive, that we must pass significant legislation in the coming months, and not just one or two bills. Our united focus is the following:

The reform of NAPOCOR which will significantly reduce the consolidated public sector deficit next year because NAPOCOR is our biggest source of the national deficit;

Raise revenues through the enactment of at least three new tax measures;

Further tax collection efficiency and expenditure control;

Reduction in the consolidated public sector deficit.

But we realize that the root cause of our situation today is a festering, entrenched culture of corruption. And like a cancer, it must be cut out if the patient is to survive. Many people don’t pay their fair share of taxes today and they are aided and abetted by corruption in government. We’re making sure that these corrupt officials and tax dodgers are caught, ill-gotten gains and taxes collected, and that collections move up substantially.

In 2004 alone, we’ve already filed two dozen cases against government officials whose corrupt practices were identified through our lifestyle check and other programs because we must tackle corruption wherever it may be found, be it in our ports of entry, or the private sector, or the government, or the military, if we are to restore any sense of fairness in the system.

I have instructed the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces to surrender General Carlos Garcia to the Sandiganbayan, but because his warrant for arrest… His warrants for arrest in the Sandiganbayan is for bailable offenses, I’ve also instructed that once he bails himself out of the civilian jail, he must be returned to military detention.

The war against corruption also requires a war against smuggling. And this war against smuggling is being threatened… Strengthened in all our major ports and retail outlets, and I ask you, the officers and members of the General Chamber, to cooperate with me in that war.

We need all this to be able to fix our fiscal house. We have set a target date for a balanced budget by 2010. But to achieve it by 2010 we must begin today. Our resolve for fiscal restraint and economic reform begins now. Our economic plan has had solid results. Strong economic growth including robust stock market gains. In fact last year, portfolio investment… No, not last year. In October, portfolio investments in the stock market went up 29 percent over the previous year. And as a result of Dick Gordon’s reforms when he was still in dot, tourism has gone up 27 percent this year. we’ve increased revenue collections by 13 percent. And now a singular pursuit of deep reforms in energy and other areas is what we’re going to do.

We are on track as you can see with our fiscal targets this year, even overshooting our revenue projections. And we are doing everything we can — catching tax dodgers, firing corrupt revenue officials, keeping an eye on austerity to ensure that we have a more successful repeat performance in the years to come.

By the end of the year, moving into early 2005, the head of my economic team, Secretary Cesar Purisima — and mind you he’s a top rate auditor and accountant — estimates that about 60 billion pesos will be removed from our deficit: P40 billion will come from the adjustment in power rates, because I said NAPOCOR is the biggest source of our deficit; P5 billion will come from the 2 percent tariff on fuel that we’ve imposed; and at least P7.5 billion will come from the alcohol and cigarette taxes; and P10 billion will come from the lateral attrition law.

Why am I so confident or why is Cesar so confident that the lateral attrition law will bring in at least 10 billion? Because even now by tax mapping alone, without using performance incentives, the BIR has been able to raise an additional 6 billion pesos. Can you imagine once the incentives provided by the lateral attrition law cut in, we can double this amount.

At the same time, our TRANSCO assets will be sold for an anticipated 110 billion pesos. This should be sufficient to keep us on track with our deficit reduction program next year.

By the end of 2005, we expect to raise 70 billion pesos from the tax measures that we sent to Congress because Speaker De Venecia expects — he told me today that he believes — he expects that by the end of 2005, seven of the eight tax measures in our fiscal program will be passed.

So you see, we are very serious about putting our fiscal house in order. We’re not only balancing a budget, but balancing the interests of the people, because any new revenues will go to job creation, education and health.

This is a government that takes its fiscal responsibilities seriously. And time will demonstrate our commitment and I’m confident we will prove to you and to everyone who cares about our country our political will to reform and direct our resources to investment in our nation.

I thank the business community at large, because you have been so supportive of our efforts. And tonight I thank, in particular, the General Chamber for your support. I thank you for your help in addressing the fiscal problem. And I ask you to stay the course until the turnaround.

On that score, may I ask that everyone join me in a toast: to the Filipino-Chinese General Chamber of Commerce in building our nation over the last 100 years and to your success in the next 100 years.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Filipino-Chinese General Chamber of Commerce Centennial Anniversary. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615132941/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5745&Itemid=38