Speech of Honorable Gloria M. Macapagal Senator of the Philippines Before the Philippine Senate

[Delivered on June 3, 1993]

WE HAVE LOST THIS YEAR’S “WINDOW” OF OPPORTUNITY TO ADVANCE THE PINATUBO REHABILITATION EFFORT *

At the beginning of this year, the Pinatubo Rehabilitation Commission, through its chairman, declared that the commission would proceed speedily in its mission of defending the Pinatubo area from the lahar threat and providing the necessary services to the affected communities. The commission proclaimed in very certain terms that it must use the four-to-five-month “window” of dry and fair, if not ideal, construction climate. Indeed the Commission announced that the five-month window and secure the major portion of the Pinatubo area from lahar onslaughts and the continuing consequent ravages of social and economic dislocations.

Everyone predicted that lahar would flow with the rainy season and everyone hailed the commission’s brave assurances. The word was out. The commission had pointed out to the next five months as a “window” of implementation opportunities and it would spare no efforts in maximally utilizing that window.

The target was fullscale implementation of the programs that could be adjudged to be reasonable and necessary. The call was essentially: Implementation before the monsoon comes and rains wash out the ground conditions for rapid program implementation.

As I said earlier, this macho announcement was made last January on the occasion of the first joint meeting of the commission and the Congressional Oversight Committee on Pinatubo Rehabilitation.

Today, June 1, at the tailend of the five-month “window” of implementation opportunities, “the only implementation that has occurred is the snail-paced construction of works planned and supervised by DPWH. And no thanks to the commission which has absolutely nothing to say about the DPWH plans except that they are awaiting the planning report of the US Corps of Engineers.

In fact, the magnitude of DPWH implementation is directly proportional to teh volume of hewing and hawing made by local government officials, congressmen and senators on department officials. If these elected officials had just kept quiet and suffered the seemingly endless excuse of the DPWH for NOT beginning project implementation, nothing would have moved to this day.

But what’s happening to the other components of the rehabilitation plan?

On the resettlement component, particularly nothing. On the social services component, very little. On the livelihood component, very little.

The various departments involved in Pinatubo have submitted plans to the commission, alright, but the commission has responded to NONE. The commission has made no statement ― neither YES, NO, WE DON’T KNOW ― on the plans proposed by all these sectors.

In this situation, the departments that already have the funds in their coffers have simply proceeded doing what they think is best. Those that need to secure the positive statement of the commission on their plans, well, they are cooling their heels to this day.

It seems very evident that while we have the commission constituted, and while the commission has already hired a technical staff, it seems to be unable to take off. While the commission and its staff have with great flair transported itself to Angeles City to be close to the “zone of operation,” it has, in fact, done nothing at all substantial or started to do something substantial since it was organized. Even in its dramatic gesture of sitting its central office in the former Clark Air Base, all it accomplished was to put a great distance between itself and most of the members of the Congressional Oversight Committee as well as National Government executives whose policy or material assistance it may need.

What accounts for this non-performance?

Let us put the commission under a microscope. Its composition seems decent enough. However, the majority if not most of the members are simply too busy to give detailed attention to policy studies. In such a situation, the commission’s staff becomes absolutely crucial to the success or failure of the commission.

Let us now take a look at the staff. We have an executive director whose credentials show him to have been an executive on the entirely unsuccessful Southern Philippines Development Authority. His stint there was simply undistinguished. Now we have him as the chief executive officer of a P10-billion project. Of course, we must not forget that he is a retired military officer. In fact, I must recall to this Body that a many great officials and staff of the commission’s senior staff are retired military officers or are on detail from the Department of National Defense.

Perhaps somewhere in that feature of being ex-military is an advantage or an edge that translates into extraordinary efficiencies and effectiveness, perhaps even superlative creativity. My only problem right now is that I cannot see these advantages. All I see is a staff that seems to be bereft of relevant technical skills except for one or two. All I see is an unstable organization because forty five (45) of its senior staff are non-permanent detailed personnel from the Department of National Defense. All I see is the staff groping for the meaning of otherwise shop terms in urban and regional planning. Since unity of language is imperative, what do they do? They resort to the adoption of military terms and systems rather than the institutionalization of regional or urban or community planning methodologies.

My fellow senators, all I see right now in the Pinatubo Commission’s executive core is a lot of adopted military system and procedures. I see none of the civilian urgency proceeding from a comprehensive grasp of planning and operational problems and constrains on the one hand, and in-depth, and practical, appreciation of timebound, implementation opportunities, on the other.

The fact is, though the main work of the commission is plan and policy review and approval, I fail to see a modicum of the appropriate technical staff to do this work.

Truly, I see no planners nor policy formulators, I see no negotiators nor development coordinators. I don’t see the needed critical mass of system engineers, economists, development finance analysts, housing technicians, public administrators, social work specialists, development communicators and other technicians that need to appreciate the baseline analyses to help higher officials determine the implications of plans and programs proposed by the agencies involved in Pinatubo rehabilitation.

And neither the commission itself nor the executive officers can pass the buck on this as they have been left entirely alone in determining their plantilla and budget. In fact, as far as I know, the commission has rightfully asserted complete independence in its recruitment and placement of staff personnel.

Thus, the lousy state of affairs of the commission as a whole is completely the responsibility of the commission and its past and current executive officers. The even more sorry state of affairs of the Pinatubo rehabilitation effort is a consequence of the utility of the commission and its current staff.

When the Executive branch came to Congress with its request to appropriate billions for the Pinatubo calamity, it did so with loud and continuous please of urgency. In fact, many of us agreed on this urgency and immediately acted on the request. The incompetence of the commission’s staff and its glaring lack of the sense of urgency is thus not only incomprehensible but unforgivable.

Time and again, we have communicated to the commission, through its executive director, our urgent concern for the absence of performance on its part. We have transmitted technical memoranda, oversight and ad hoc committee reports to the commission, all in the expectation that the Commission would be goaded out its lethargy. Nothing substantial has come out of our efforts. It seems as though we are trying to talk to a brick wall.

Hence today, on the same note of urgency and utmost concern that the President of the Republic then asked Congress to appropriate the funds of the Pinatubo rehabilitation effort, I now seek that this august Body, in aid of further legislation, inquire into the state of affairs of the Pinatubo Rehabilitation Commission. Let us, even now, help in determining how government can forestall, next year, the lahar onslaught and its consequent social dislocations.

God forbid, but in the months the lahar calamities will most likely repeat themselves. This will occur because the Pinatubo Commission failed to live up to its promise proclaimed at the beginning of this year that it would maximally utilize the five-month “window” of implementation opportunities was never really opened by the commission and the five-month “window”―January to May―has now elapsed. It is June now and we must look towards next year’s window of opportunities. That is, if the commission’s new chairperson will take heed and undertake the changes that must be done.

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1996). Speeches of the senators : ninth congress 1992-1995 . Manila : Senate.