Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On ICT in Education

[Delivered at the Waterfront Cebu City Hotel, Cebu City, September 6, 2006]

ICT IN EDUCATION: THE WAVE OF THE FUTURE

ICT is the wave of the future. The foundation of tomorrow’s economic development.

It’s the provider of jobs to millions of Filipinos from constructing cell sites, manufacturing microchips, manning computer dependent industries, working at BPOs to small entrepreneurs, operating cyber cafes or selling mobile phones and internet cards.

The computer has changed the way we look at the world, the way we use information, the way we work, the way we play.

In 2001, with my State of the Nation Address, we started with small realizable goals—high-speed interconnectivity at cost affordable to the public, more efficiency among service providers, and technologies for multimedia convergence. In three year’s time, by 2004, and despite limited resources, we were able to link the whole country even as we started bolstering efficiency in math, science and English. Yes, English it did. And thank you Jesli for your very strong pronouncement about English as the medium of instruction.

Yes, English. Because we must engage the world to bring the benefits of global engagement home at a time of Philippine economic vibrance, at a time of increase in our gross international reserves to an unprecedented 22 billion u.s. dollars due to strong exports and remittances. Balance of payments forecast to hit two billion dollars from the original 1.6 billion- dollar target; 15 percent increase in OFW remittances; 14 percent increase of foreign exchange reserves; the peso hitting a fresh four-year high; and stocks rising to a three-month high and easing inflation to a lowest level in two years.

Those are macro figures. Let’s go down to some micro anecdotes.

In the town of Panamao in Sulu, that used to be the lair of rebels, cell sites have risen. The major islands of Tawi-Tawi now have access to internet. The Philippine Cyber Corridor stretching from Baguio through Cebu—where we are very appropriately—to Davao, runs along a digital backbone that carries ICT services to every municipality.

And let us thank the House of Representatives for approving the bill promoting the use of voice over the internet protocol or VOIP that will dramatically cut down the cost of telephone calls across continents and bring Filipinos closer to their loved ones abroad. Congratulations! Thank you, Nerisse.

When we started putting together the comprehensive plan for our digital highway in 2001, less than 2,000 people were employed in call centers. Today, five years later, over 200,000 are employed in BPOs and we expect their figure to grow to over one million by the end of this decade.

Our country is now identified as the second most preferred location for BPO operations in the world, next only to India. Semiconductors remain a top export and this sector continues to grow by 10 percent annually.

In my 2004 campaign, we articulated the goal of putting computer connectivity in every public high school. In compliance with this, we’re working on increasing the number of internet-ready computers particularly in the most populous high schools. So if your high school is still not internet connected, please let Secretary Lapus know so that we can attend to it right away.

But we need more ICT-competent teachers. And I’m glad you’re all here today. The DepEd and the commission for ICT are now crafting the National ICT Competency Standard for teachers or NICS, to be implemented in all public high schools. The majority of the public high school teachers should fulfill the requirements of the NICS by 2010.

Educational content can be dramatically increased with one keystroke. All of us must take in step to harness the force of ICT to advance the quality of education, the development of the Filipino youth and building a brighter future for the Filipino nation.

Educators, thank you for being here. Let us truly make our Philippine education system fit for the knowledge century of the new millennium.

Maraming salamat. Thank you to all.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].