Thank you, Defense Secretary Ermita. Thank you. You may sit down. AFP Chief of Staff General Abaya and Mrs. Abaya, PMA Superintendent General Adan and Mrs. Adan, the host city of PMA, may I greet Baguio City Mayor, Bernie Vergara, Baguio City Congressman, Mauricio Domogan, Governor Raul Molintas and Mrs. Molintas and I also see Congressman Felino Roman. I would like to greet the general staff and major service commanders and members of the diplomatic corps, the AFP and PNP officers and their ladies, the PMA faculty, I would like to greet you especially. The first time I see you now, especially the civilians now in your toga and I hope that you are happy that I have approved the merit system that was proposed to me by General Adan.

PMA Maliyab Class 2004, their parents, relatives, friends, even the Cadet girls, because of Lieutenant Joaquin’s discourse, your cadet girls, those are the sweethearts of the cadets who end up really marrying them afterwards, those are the cadet girls, congratulations also to all of you. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, PMA Maliyab Class 2004, I congratulate you especially your honor students, the Baron, the topnotcher. I would like to extend a special greeting to Lieutenant Rolly Joaquin, because last night I passed through Aguilar, Pangasinan on my way here. Earlier I was watching Mrs. Joaquin, she was crying while her son was giving his speech. Last night I just passed by and stopped there, there were many people on the road and they told me, because they knew I was going to PMA. “Ma’am, your valedictorian tomorrow is from our town in Aguilar.” Congratulations to you, they are very proud of you.

Mga Cabalen (Fellow provincemates) reminded me right there, that number 1 in PMA is from Aguilar. That shows how important it is to be a product of PMA and an outstanding product of PMA at that. Congratulations to you, congratulations to all the hometowns where you come from. Especially this class that went through so much hardship. According to General Adan, from your original ….. class only 21% are now here graduating. And if your own valedictorian almost dropped out in the first year, imagine the pressure the others must have gone through. That is why indeed it is fitting to salute the parents for their moral support, even some financial support. Though I am glad that today the cadets are very well aware that the government spends more than 2 million pesos per each one of you. And you have to return it to strengthen the country not to weaken our democracy.

Your parents give you financial support, your parents give you moral support especially, your mentors give you their moral support. But, they also give you excellent academic training. In fact, some say the academics has been too tough in terms of math, science and engineering subjects that is why there is a very big dropout rate and some of the alumni tell me on hindsight they might have done in the little less math and engineering and more on English and communications and humanities because being a soldier is not just fighting a war and doing calculations of accuracy. It is also winning the hearts and mind of the people in the communities in, which you operate. And your mentors gave you that, academic training and character education for your roles, for your future roles, your roles beginning today as custodians of the nations defense and its peace.

Today, graduates, young second lieutenants, you will be sent off to all corners of the country on different assignments with varying degrees of difficulty and danger. As often stated, “the price of freedom is perpetual vigilance.” The world and the Philippines have to live with the threat of terror as ever present anywhere. The security of our communities as well as of our means of livelihood and our public good is the business of every citizen. But, especially the business of our soldiers. Working together, we have reduced the threat of terror, but we cannot let our guard down. The tragedy in Madrid is another wake up call that democracy must be defended nationally and globally. We are working in our shores and with other nations on this universal task. We have not hesitated in employing our ….. Advantages, a superior force training and equipment in dealing with those who take up arms to destroy our society or do harm to our citizens and their local government. In fact, our graduating students of today will be able to enter the armed forces with much better equipment, facing better training, yet, in the years to come, better force protection than those who graduated four years before you or those who received you when you were pledged. Better training, better equipment, better force protection, more arms, and even better pay. Because all of these were done during the short period of my presidency. At the same time, I believed, that the war on insurgency and secessionism that we are waging, waging can yet be settled on the negotiating table. This is one reason why I asked when General Reyes submitted his resignation and he is now doing a great job fighting the kidnapping syndicate and now the smuggling syndicate, I chose as his replacement, the man who had been waging peace, that peace becomes an integral part of the defense policy, Secretary Ed Ermita.

I think we are doing well on the national security front especially in Mindanao where the overall level of conflict has subsided. As part of the peace negotiations, we are persistently pushing for concrete measures at the ground level and to detectively isolate terrorist elements from the guerilla bases of the MILF even as we constantly found at the lairs of the Abu Sayyaf largely as ….. One of your outstanding graduate is from Pikit and as he passed, I told him “help me take care of Buliok. Help me take care of enforcing the peace. Help me take care of bringing about true development that will bring about lasting peace in your area.”

The peace talks to the NDF are also moving forward. My administration has demonstrated that it has the fortitude to risk war, but also the courage to seek peace. We are fighting a war on two fronts, one front is made up of those who seek harm to our democratic law abiding way of life, the other front is poverty upon which the agents of desperate and lawless acts are recruited. Many students themselves from PMA come from families of modest means. And if we are going to look at the PMA graduates who are now on the stage, we know that PMA has been to many the gateway to a better life, a fulfilling, rewarding career, whether in the military or outside leadership. And it is a way not only out of poverty; it is a way towards leadership. Therefore, PMA is many things to many people. It is soldiery, it is leadership, and it is graduation to a better way of life. Indeed, we all must make a strong start in fighting for change in the lives of ordinary Filipinos. PMA has helped do that, but not everybody can be in PMA. In my short presidency, I fought hard for change. Change from the economic and political mess that I inherited. I guess the best way to point it out is that I created more than 3 million jobs in my short presidency compared to only half a million created during the Estrada administration. That is part of the war we are waging against poverty. Indeed, because we wage the war on two fronts, we wage the war with two hands, the right hand to defeat the enemy on the battlefield, the left hand to fight poverty so that the enemy will not find too many allies.

Class 2004, new officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, as your superintendent, General Adan said “carpe diem” – seize the moment, seize the day, be my right hand, be my left hand. Let’s fight the enemy. Let’s fight poverty. Let us take the Philippines to a better place in the 21st century.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy (PMA Class 2004). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090256/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5658&Itemid=38