Thank you very much, Mike for your very kind introduction. And thank you for being the first Cabinet member to submit your courtesy resignation. Of course, he was the first Cabinet member because he knew that I would not accept his courtesy resignation.

I’d like to also greet Nani Braganza, who I heard in the papers was the second Cabinet member to submit his courtesy resignation. I didn’t get to see it I think because since I had said that I would not be accepting courtesy resignations, the record section didn’t bother to send his courtesy resignation forward to me; I ‘d like to greet our congressmen who are so supportive of the housing sector. There’s Ed Zialcita who is from Metro Manila and Boy Nograles from the business district of Davao City; thank you to Florentino Dulalia, President of CREBA and other members of CREBA, thank you for your pledge of more than 300,000 housing; thank you to President Atencio and the other members of SHDA, thank you for your more than 200,000 houses pledge; thank you also to the various other associations who are here tonight. President… Ah, Chairman Yamson and the other members of builders alliance towards action or BATA, maybe that means you are the younger builders; and to Jean Menguito, vice president of women in shelter and environment. Thank you for telling me as we were having our soup that this is the happiest time in a long time for the housing industry; thank you to Cafe de Manalad for being here. Also for being one of my very small group of campaigners the first time I ran for senator in 1992, thank you; ating Cacung Cabalen, Chairman Wilfredo Tan of the Organization of Socialized Housing Developers in the Philippines or OSHDAP, thank you also for continuing to build socialized housing even if it is not as profitable as the middle- class housing in our country; well I’d like to greet also the other officials under HUDCC, and this is HUDCC Vice Chair Amado Bagatsing who… Who when he was in Congress also he used to be called their father or grandfather as the case maybe of the housing bills; and to Benjamin Bongolan, president of HGC. Now that you have your bond flotation, he’s got liquid money again for his operations; Romy Fabol, congratulations. Thank you for your momentous board resolution today, and Atty. Quimpo. I want to ask you, members of the industry, shall I convert his acting status to permanent? And to all of you distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Thank you, officers and members of all the organizations who are present here today — SHDA and CREBA – for this unprecedented response to our call to build houses for our working class. And thank you for this show of support for my administration.

I was reading a column that said that the business community has given up on me. I can see that you haven’t given up on me. Thank you for your help.

And I believe that your housing units will enjoy good sales because the economy no matter what they say — what the critics say — the number show that the economy is on track to achieve a 4 to 4.5 percent growth in 2002, compare this to Hong Kong which has gone back to recession; Singapore which is on recession; Japan which is at zero percent growth rate; and even the U.S. with its dicey numbers coming in to 2003. Yes, the deficit remains a challenge. We got to face that. But we are taking concrete steps to address it. That the economy is on track to meet its 2002 growth projections is evidenced by the better-than-expected performance of leading indicators in the first semester.

Take for instance inflation rates and interest rates, they are at record lows, and i hope that the low interest rates will help your housing projects. inflation averaged 3.2 percent in the first semester and is even lower today. And I believe this low inflation rate is reflected in the cement prices that you have to pay for. So I hope that the good cement prices will also make your housing projects more profitable. Interest rate averaged 5.54 percent in the first semester, the lowest in more than a decade.

So, in as much as GDP grew at 4.1 percent in the first semester, we are quite sure that the second semester GDP will grow at least 4 percent.

Now, let’s take the other indicators — exports. What did we expect exports to be in 2002? We expected export growth to be zero because they were negative last year. But rather than being zero in the first semester they grew at 8.8 percent. And now, they are even growing at double digit. So that augurs well for our keeping the economy growing on track.

Imports. Imports are an indicator of economic activity, and I am happy that the imports that are coming in are mainly inputs for value-added exports and they grew by 7.8 percent as of august although we were only expecting imports to grow at 6 percent. So better than expected.

Gross international reserves. We expected that the gross international reserves would be 14.8 billion dollars or worth 4 months of imports but they are instead 15.9 billion dollars worth 5 months of imports. So all of these are indicators of growing economic activity and also stabilization in our economy.

But as I said, we are not we are not pretending that there is no budget deficit problem. The reason why we are working on the budget deficit is that we do not want the budget deficit to contradict our low interest rate policy which is so important for your housing.

Thus, we remain focused on responsibly managing expenditures and maximizing revenue. Expenditures are on track, they provide adequate stimulation to the economy while remaining within the budget authorized by Congress.

Yes, expenditures now are a bigger percentage of our budget compared to previous years but that level of expenditure relative to the authorized budget means that we are more efficient in our disbursement and we have faster project implementation. Controlling the budget deficit, of course, is something that we are determined to work on. And we will operate this in tandem with a stringent anti-corruption campaign reinforced with ICT — information technology-driven reforms — in disbursement of funds and procurement. We also have a quiet but stepped up campaign against tax evasion.

Guillermo Parayno, my new man at the bureau of internal revenue, which collects 80 percent of our tax revenues is preceded by his impressive record as commissioner of customs. He has the personal integrity, the technological competence and the people’s skills to meet the target set for the rest of the medium-term plan period.

Under his leadership, several enforcement measures are already in place to increase revenue collections especially for the value-added tax, including cross-checking of importation data from the bureau of customs with that reported to the bureau of internal revenue. And as a result of this cross-checking, last 15th of the month, Parayno ordered the closure of 53 firms for underpayment of the value-added and other taxes.

Audit is being intensified for both corporates and individuals. And now we have, starting October, an on-line payment option widely available, complete with validation systems to make sure that the value-added tax scam that I discovered a few months ago will never happen again.

On the part of the Bureau of Customs, every month it has been progressively reducing its revenue gap until finally for the month of October, at last it exceeded its target.

With the reforms we are implementing, and with the reforms which we hope Congress will enact as soon as possible — led by these two gentlemen who are very active on the house floor that we have as guest tonight — we are confident we will achieve higher growth in 2003 especially with the pump priming of the domestic economy that is provided by the housing sector, the sector with the largest multiplier in the entire economy.

The structural reforms at the BIR include: the bill to corporitize the BIR. Executive order no. 119 which I signed reorganizing the BIR while we are awaiting the bill to become law for corporitization; the indexation of sin taxes, which Congress recommended during the summit that followed 9-11 and which I’m happy to remind you are earmarked for housing. Whatever we collect on the indexation of sin taxes — how much? About three billion pesos? — five billion pesos will be to fund housing another reform that I hope congress will enact is the rationalization of motor vehicle taxes.

On the expenditure side, the expenditure management reforms include the procurement reform bill because this procurement reform bill will allow us to save 30 percent of our budget, and the e-government to electronically release funds to agencies automatically for a more efficient utilization of funds.

The budget deficit. I want to explain to you tonight what we are doing to address it because it’s a burning issue among the business community. But I know that today an equally burning issue is the issue regarding Meralco. And as my partners in developing the economy I would like to share with you an exclusive — first time I’m going to share with you my policy on MERALCO.

My mind is clear on how to deal with this issue. It will in the context of the larger power sector as the key reform area facing us today.

First, we are taking steps to ensure the financial viability of MERALCO as an institution. Through the department of energy, the government is shepherding a series of consultations which began yesterday between MERALCO and its creditors. We will see to it that a rehabilitation plan is set up that is fair to creditors, investors, and most of all, the public.

Second, the decision of the Supreme Court regarding MERALCO’s obligations shall be implemented. We shall await the finality of the decision and then act accordingly. And if the final decision is refund, I will make sure that one way or another the consumers, you, the consumers will get your refund.

Third, I am duty bound to ensure that there will be no crisis in power services as a result of these financial problems. I’m constitutionally bound to serve the public interest. Nothing will stand in the way of this forsworn duty.

My decisions on these matters will not be influenced by my personal feelings or sentiments. I shall proceed on a comprehensive approach taking into consideration the viability of the company vis-a-vis the larger interests of the power industry and balanced as force against the higher public interest.

I shall not be swayed by populist politics nor vested interests. I shall not please the poor by tearing down the rich nor please the rich by trampling on the poor. We must have an even keel for the ship of state.

In these trying times, in these times of reform, I thank god that I have you as our partners in building a strong republic by building homes for the citizens of that Republic.

Mike Defensor mentioned to you some of the key housing reforms, and as you have said, they augur well for our partnership. We have given the banks the policy signal incentives to fund developers on their own. Because the government has limited funds because of the deficit, and rather than government being the one to provide you with the funds, what we are doing in fact is getting government bureaucracy out of your way.

These policy signals include — as you have thanked me — in the power point executive order no. 45 to fast-track the processing of subdivision licenses and permits. And as you have also mentioned along with Mike Defensor, the lowering of the end-user loan interest which I hear has already had immediate and positive effect on sales. The increase in the socialized housing ceiling to 225,000 pesos is another policy reform that I hope I understand you appreciate.

But even beyond the 225,000-peso houses, I realize that the middle-income housing sub-sector up to 2 million pesos is the most bankable sub-sector even if the market is not as large as the socialized sub-sector. And so I have included this sub-sector in our policy incentives.

And I am happy that the central bank’s monetary board has agreed to increase the loan collateral value for housing accounts to 80-90 percent of the loan value, aside from Mike Defensor’s 100 percent of the loan value. And that the central bank has agreed to increase the amount for the rediscounting window and eligibility for agri-agra status to two million pesos, which they were able to do because HUDCC changed its definitions.

And as a bonus, we have Bani Braganza which has recently given its ruling on many pending applications. And of course Pag-Ibig has been given the marching orders that it should increase its allocation of funds for housing from 15 billion pesos, not just to 30 billion, but to 70 percent of its portfolio. But they will go for 30 billion first they said, because they want to be prudent. Okay, 30 billion and after that we go for 70 percent.

In response to the policy signals and incentives, the banks have committed, the private banks have committed to fund both the creditworthy private housing developers and the end-users especially of our government employees’ housing villages in a project to be packaged by an experienced banker, Deogracias Vistan, and we hope that this will bear fruit in the next six months. So we have bpi, five billion pesos; and Philippine Bank of Commerce, one billion; China Bank another billion. So all in all, together with the GFIs, we have very comfortably sixty billion pesos to fund the 500,000 houses that you have committed to build over the next two years.

I am grateful for your pledges — over 300,000 for SHDA and over 300,000 for CREBA. And as we saw in the presentation of SHDA, this is really a percentage of what the members can actually accomplish. Because only a percentage of its members have so far been covered in this pledging session.

I was also informed that a significant number of projects you have committed are either already ongoing or slated to start next year. I have no doubt in your capacity to live up to these commitments.

It is worthy to note that nearly 38,000 units or 20 percent of the SHDA pledge will be built in Mindanao, the island of Boy Nograles. This will bolster economic development, social reform and peace and order in the region. But I was listening to Boy Nograles earlier. He said, “That’s a little.” he was saying, “It’s not enough, it’s not enough.” but anyway, Boy, there will be more I’m sure as the peace and order improves in Mindanao.

We see tonight the fruits of our meetings and discussions during the past months. During the anniversary celebration of CREBA in Malacañang last October, we talked about some of the solutions and now they are underway.

When you invited me to your meeting in Baguio I told Mike, “Mike, I still have to travel, I still have to open a golf tournament, I have to prepare a speech, I’ll have to travel again for… Let me spend those hours working out the policies instead.” and that’s why, in my taped message, I was able to present those policies.

And now I ‘m happy that our plans and programs are moving forward. And as said earlier, we’ve made available 200,000 hectares of land for housing and urban development for the next many years.

With these, and with your support, we should be able to reduce hopefully by 50 percent the current shortage of housing units estimated at some 5 million by the year 2010. The year when we hope we would have been able to beat the problem of poverty in our country.

Housing and related infrastructure projects are the traditional pump-primers of growth in developing economy. Your pledges combined with your solid track record will provide the much needed impetus to put our growth… To keep our growth on track.

So once again, dear friends, dear partners in keeping our economy on its growth track, thank you very much. I’m counting on all of you for your continued support, not personally for me alone, but for our people and the future generations.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Real Estate and Housing Industry Pledging Session organized by CREBA-SHDA. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210015/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8464&Itemid=38