I am happy to be with you all again. Sunday is usually a day of rest, but you are all here tonight, so thank you very much to everyone.

And here are Secretary Romulo and Ambassador Brady, all the way from Beijing, because nowhere is foreign policy more important than in protecting and advancing the interests of our overseas workers – you are the very important objective of our foreign policy, especially in places further away than Hong Kong — Bert I’d like to congratulate you all. The DFA recently reported a seaman released after 14 years in a Bangladeshi jail. And if you remember when I went to Saudi Arabia, we were able to release 700 prisoners. Now there are 150 being freed from Middle East jails. And that is very important in the Middle East, because there are two million Filipinos there.

But here in Hong Kong, Hong Kong is also a very popular destination for OFWs. You are 120,000 Filipinos living and working here, and I salute all of you who are here in Hong Kong. Congratulations! It is only right, your diligence and the quality of your work cannot be questioned, your good character, your loyalty to duty. So even though Sonia Brady is far away, there in Beijing, we have 120,000 Philippine ambassadors here in Hong Kong — you are our overseas Filipinos.

And not only here, which makes you even more important to our country, the Philippines. Your sacrifice and loyalty to your work, to your family, and to our country are honored and valued.

Earlier, the Consul General said that the number of emigrants from Southern Europe is dwindling, but if we look at Portugal, they are also relatively wealthy, 10 percent of their population are Overseas Portuguese Workers just like the Philippines, 10 percent.

In New Zealand, it is wealthy but 25 percent of New Zealanders are also overseas. The difference with New Zealand is that even though their yuppies are working abroad, their parents still send money to their children abroad. Filipinos, you are the ones sending money to your families as support, not the other way around, so you are helping your families, you are helping our country. Thank you very much to all of you.

But we aspire to the day, as the Consul General said, that a hardworking Filipino no longer needs to go abroad to find decent work. We’re working for a strong and growing economy, to pave the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job, and being an overseas worker is just another career option, not the only choice one has to earn a living.

A strong and growing economy is the central pillar that we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. And it is paying off: 2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in more than thirty years. Only when the economy is strong is the peso also strong.

However, it is also undeniable, truly undeniable, that the strengthening of the peso reduced the spending of OFW families. However, 80 million Filipinos also benefited because they were not as heavily impacted by the full price increase of oil in the world. Because if the exchange rate was 55 pesos per dollar, as it was before, the price of gasoline and diesel would have been even higher, by five pesos per liter. The government and corporations' dollar-denominated debt was also reduced, allowing us to allocate more to the budget for mass projects. The country's borrowing rate also decreased, so interest rates on housing and business loans remain lower, at only six percent for Pag-ibig. That has only happened now because of the strong peso. If the peso had not strengthened, the increase in prices in the country would have been even worse.

Nevertheless, to prevent the strengthening of the peso from being too burdensome for OFWs, you saw the vigorous actions of our administration this afternoon. We instructed government financial institutions to create ways to maximize the benefits OFWs receive from your earnings. If you recall in January, didn't Vice President Noli de Castro come here to launch the Hedging program of the Development Bank of the Philippines? He was with Mike Arroyo, my husband, at that time to protect the value of your earnings.

In the Hedging program, you can already decide, as Jojo said, what exchange rate you can exchange your U.S. dollars for pesos in the future. Or you can get some insurance and have the option to sell your dollars for pesos in the future, either at a certain protected rate or at the prevailing market rate, whichever is better for you.

This DBP Hedging Program – here is the President of DBP, isn't Rey David here, I saw him. There he is! Rey, did you mention the incentive to the first 100 OFWs earlier? DBP will provide an incentive to the first 100 OFWs who avail of peso insurance. They will be given a 50 percent discount on the insurance fee of the remittance, but only up to HK$30,000 per month.

Meanwhile, Consul General Vicente mentioned the DBP’s i-Net Negosyo Program to help your families in the Philippines prosper and start businesses. The DBP has a one billion peso loan fund for OFWs to establish small internet stations.

We also launched programs of the Central Bank, with our Central Bank of the Philippines Governor, Say Tetangco, here. You know Say can’t be ordered around because he is independent from the national government, but he is here to teach OFWs the Financial Literacy program. And representatives from the stock exchange are here so you can invest in the stock exchange, which is better than those pyramids. With the stock exchange, you can see the price of your stock minute by minute. These are all to provide knowledge about money and investment for OFWs and your families. Because we want to give OFWs the opportunity to not just be Overseas Filipino Workers, not just be ambassadors to Hong Kong, but to become Overseas Filipino Investors or OFI’s.

Another program is Tindahang Pinoy. When you entered, you saw a booth for Tindahang Pinoy, for those who want to sell Filipino products in the areas where OFWs work. Tindahang Pinoy has put together various products made in our country, such as Cornick or Boy Bawang, gapo from the north, broas and other native delicacies from the south; sardines from Sarangani Bay — there are many from South Cotabato here, you should sell sardines from Sarangani Bay in Mindanao, and dried mango from Cebu. And it’s not just food. It also includes business training for OFWs returning home, implemented by OWWA, which was formerly led by our new Secretary of Labor, Nitoy Roque. Congratulations, Nitoy!

The DOLE and OWWA will open a call center training program for OFWs here in Hong Kong. Aren’t there many teachers among OFWs here? Oh, teachers who are good at English. Well, your English skills in call center training will increase your income when you return to the Philippines. The training cost will be subsidized by OWWA, through their scholarships for OWWA members, as preparation for your return to work in the Philippines.

Regarding Land Bank, it is safe and affordable as long as you have a minimum of 20,000 pesos. In fact, this 20,000 pesos is smaller than many time deposits, with higher interest for five or ten-year deposits compared to ordinary bank savings.

Regarding the fee for sending money, Land Bank has an OFW Cash Card that is easy to use and has cheaper remittance fees. And there's Manny Pangilinan, an OFW in Hong Kong, by choice not by necessity. Smart, right? Manny, Smart is also electronic remittance. So, that's Manny's service because he knows the life of an OFW even though Manny Pangilinan is a very, very wealthy OFW.

Anyway, I congratulate those who use these products. Congratulations, to those who have availed of these products. May others be encouraged by the benefits you receive from government programs.

By the way, speaking of remittances, Congressman Danny Suarez is here. There he is. He has a bill, reducing the transaction cost for money remittances from abroad coursed through the Philippine Banking System and Remittance Centers to help our OFWs.

Let's return to the economy of the Philippines. The flow of investment is strong. We’re close to balancing our budget. But in the past, we had to make tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crack down on tax cheats, so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people. But we know the problems facing our country and what the people expect. And we are delivering on the economy, education and the environment. We want that when you return to the Philippines, you will return to a beautiful Philippines, that you have jobs not only because of the reintegration program, but because there are many opportunities in the Philippines.

So thank you very much for your sacrifices here in Hong Kong, we hope that when you return to the Philippines, your lives will be comfortable because of our efforts to strengthen the economy of our country, the Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you and long live the Philippines!

Source : Adamson University Library