Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2nd Public-Private Sector Dialogue on Post-Disaster Assistance

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hotel Intercontinental, Makati City, December 2, 2009]

Thank you very much Secretary Teves.

Other members of the Cabinet, members of the Diplomatic Corps, Chairman Manny Pangilinan, Archbishop Vidal and the other members of the private sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, ladies and gentlemen.

Good afternoon and thank you all for what you are doing here today.

If you recall, during the Mid-year Economic Briefing last October, I announced the creation of a special public-private reconstruction partnership to study the causes, costs and actions to be taken in the wake of typhoons Ondoy, Pepeng and Frank, and to seek fresh aid to fund reconstruction.

The idea was to harness domestic private initiatives, including business groups, the Church and civil society, into the government’s overall reconstruction effort. We felt this was good policy and we felt it would be a better way of mobilizing external and incremental resources, technical expertise and networks.

On October 22, if you recall, I issued an Executive Order creating the public sector portion, the Special National Public Reconstruction Commission. Correspondingly, the private sector headed by Manny organized the Philippine Disaster Recovery Foundation to serve as the counterpart organization of the public sector for post-disaster rehabilitation and construction efforts. The commission and the foundation then immediately signed a cooperation agreement to carry out the purposes that I announced during the Mid-year Economic Briefing. And I am very glad that all these have happened. And I thank Cardinal Vidal; I thank Gary for their leadership in this urgent and crucial task. And of course I thank the representatives of international organizations and foreign governments involved in this vital undertaking.

I reiterate the gratitude of the Filipino people for your speedy, and I must say, substantial response to our appeal and for your continuing desire to help us. Substantial because the pledges that Gary mentioned are even more than the needs assessment that have been made, so I really thank you for that.

Your support is crucial in meeting the needs identified not only by the private sector but also by the DSWD, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council, and the Office of Civil Defense. And I hope that we will be able to tap also the huge underlying global constituency for climate change adaptation, because our recovery from those typhoons is certainly part of climate change adaptation.

Because of the impact of the global crisis on the fiscal capacity of the Philippines, the primary response of our administration to the enormous calamities which climate change is bringing to our vulnerable country cannot be just another borrowing program. And so, though we have an annual Philippine Development Forum, I ask Gary to replace that for this year with this session, with this forum that we are having now, which I said to Gary should also weigh very heavily on grants because we don’t want to let grant opportunities go to waste though less in size than loans, they remain substantial as we have seen from the collection of pledges that Gary has pointed out.

And even if we resort to bonds in bringing in exogenous resources, we want to go beyond a mere borrowing program to provide the framework that is usually required by ODA programs. And I am very grateful that Gary presented the summary of the work on the need assessment because that is going to provide the framework for the things that we will source funds for.

So in sum, I hope that we can push, first, for more grants or non-repayable inflows. The underlying doctrine, as I said before, is that the Philippines is a victim of climate change, not a culprit. Victims are compensated, not penalized with high interest rates or conditionalities.

Second to grants, we want to push for concessional loans.

And third, commercial borrowings either through bonds or other instruments as may be recommended by this partnership should be the last financing option.

As we prepare to capture the opportunities presented by this partnership, this private-public sector reconstruction partnership and the resources that it is tapping in this session to recover from recent national calamities, we must not lose sight of our longer-term economic reforms and the very real pain many of our poor have sustained as a result of the global downturn. While the world may finally be emerging from the global economic crisis, much remains to be done to ensure that the Philippines continues on its path to long-term economic prosperity and that we are able to build a strong middle-class.

As our development partners know the story of the Philippines in 2008 and 2009 is that the country weathered a succession of global crisis in fuel, in food, then in finance and finally the economy in a global recession, but we never lost focus and we kept our economic fundamentals intact.

Our GDP is still in the block.

We will continue to work aggressively to ensure that the growth that has been generating jobs and revenue to invest in new infrastructure and critical social programs will continue. And I am very grateful to all of you, for your sincere and invaluable efforts to help the Filipino nation.

With your help, as summarized by Secretary Gary Teves, we will be on track very soon. And I hope, indeed, that as the people know that this is happening and that they can look forward to a meaningful reconstruction. I hope indeed that everyone, the nation will have a Blessed Christmas and a Joyful New Year!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 2nd Public-Private Sector Dialogue on Post-Disaster Assistance. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133717/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27019&Itemid=38