Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Puno.

Other Cabinet members, Mayor Benhur Abalos, Mayor Jerry Treñas, Mayor Mel Sarmiento, the other city mayors, the other city officials who are all here to give their moral support to our mayors, other guests, ladies and gentlemen:

To all of you, good noon. And thank you for this opportunity to address you at a time when we really need to join hands against the global crisis.

As we all know, the global financial turmoil has spread and jeopardized the well-being of people across the globe.

It is a crisis for two-thirds of the world. And we are not one of the two-thirds yet, so we must all join together to prevent this global crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis.

This is a time when national and local leadership must give all its attention to managing the impact of the global crisis. And in doing this, we must not neglect those who feel the hardship of the global downturn. As we continue to build an economy, we continue to grow and offer long-term opportunity. Crisis management is one area where the League of Cities of the Philippines has shown utmost efficiency and remarkable success in the past. (Applause)

For instance, the League of Cities exhibited leadership and effective governance in crucial moments in the life of this nation, like the crisis over SARS and the avian flu and the numerous natural disasters and calamities.

And as we… I believe should be our theme today, this time of the world situation, the League of Cities also deserves commendation for instituting ways to simplify business practices in the cities. (Applause)

For instance, many of you I have visited have one-stop shops. Your idea of one-stop shop for businessmen applying permits is a convenience well-appreciated by investors. This puts the Philippines on the map of attractive destinations for business which will ultimately redound to the benefit of our people in terms of jobs and income.

In my first State of the Nation Address in 2001, I said that we should minimize bottlenecks to productivity such as red tape at the national and local government levels. I said that we should try to make setting up a business a seamless procedure between national and local governments.

Again, in the Competitiveness Summit of October 2006, where the League of Cities was very active, one of the recommendations was to set a target that 50 percent of our local government units should be ISO-certified. With the backing of the Cities, this initiative will bring down the barriers of red tape, increase government efficiency and opening up the door to doing business more easily at the local level.

During this time of the year… or not of the year… During this time of economic history when there are firms under strain from the global financial crisis, what the Metro Manila cities have presented today is truly monumental and momentous.

They have especially gone a long way to comply with the requirements of competitiveness through the standardization of the Metro Manila city business registration and permit processes which was launched in this convention. What was presented today will reduce red tape and the cost of doing business in Metro Manila. So, congratulations to our Metro Manila cities! (Applause)

And we hope that in the other cities as well, whatever is the clamor of the firms who are under strain will be the response of the different cities — each one: urban city, rural city, Luzon city, Visayas city, Mindanao city — there’ll be different needs of the different firms. And therefore, you all have your own solutions to helping the firms becoming competitive in this global crisis.

Your achievements contribute to the Philippines remaining an island of stability in an otherwise stormy global sea of economic troubles.

You supported me when we had to reboot our economy several years ago, and that rebooting of the economy has held us in good stead.

As a result of dramatic reforms in revenue collection and generation — and some of you were congressmen then when this was done — fiscal controls, banking reforms in 2007, our GNP grew 8.0 percent.

And in 2006 when two-thirds of the world went into recession, our GNP still grew at 6.0 percent.

We have therefore, so far, weathered the initial global shocks well, and that is because of the painful reform medicine we took several years ago.

You were supportive when we made massive reforms in tax collection, revenue raising, banking and financial regulation, fiscal controls and the like. But more importantly — because we’ve done that reform already before. Now, we are less concerned about rebooting our economy than rebalancing our priorities against the dramatic change in the global landscape.

For instance, we are making transformational investments in physical and human infrastructure, not just to soften the blow of a softening world economy, but to prepare ourselves for the rebound.

As you know, because you travelled to coming here, it now only takes half an hour from Caloocan or Quezon City to Angeles City using the North Luzon-Clark Expressway.

Construction is ongoing to connect C-5 to NLEX so that we will have a seamless expressway system from Olongapo City to Batangas City.

And you can also travel by car from Laoag City to General Santos City through our Roll-on/Roll-off Ferry Nautical Highway System. (Applause) That makes your bonding even easier to do.

The increase in Value-Added Tax also increases your IRA. Although temporarily, there were new cities that had to share in your IRA (applause) for a while, it was not your actual income that went down, but your potential income.

And because Secretary Nonoy Andaya had said that if there’s any city that would going to suffer actual declining income, he was ready to compensate from other sources. Like for instance, “Kilos Asenso” or other sources in the budget. (Applause)

But at the end of the day, if you look at your finances before VAT and after VAT, your IRA in absolute terms has increased. That’s why in partnership with you, we have been able to invest unprecedented amounts in all those things that Benhur mentioned: in education, healthcare, and other services along with infrastructure.

And, we speak of infrastructure, we speak of building — building the edifice of a strong republic is the responsibility of all levels of government.

And I want to thank you, to take this opportunity to thank you, for taking the need for economic stewardship very seriously. You make the job of national government easier because you take on so much of what has to be done for economic reforms.

So on this day, together, let us renew the call for everyone to forge an alliance to face the daunting global challenges. The resilience of our economy is acknowledged by economic experts. The most recent group that acknowledges is Moody’s Investor Services, and these acknowledgements, internationally by accepted experts make us confident that, in spite of the global economic crisis, we are on our way to sustainable growth and the vision of having the Philippines on the verge of first world in 20 years.

So, let us continue to pursue that vision.

As I said earlier, and you were happy to be acknowledged, the League of Cities is very good in managing crisis. (Applause)

The League of Cities is very good in knowing what the businessmen need. And in complying the League of Cities will continue to be very good in pursuing our goal to be first world in 20 years.

Congratulations to all of you! (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the 2nd National Convention of the League of Cities of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105345/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=20689&Itemid=38