Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the commemoration of the 112th anniversary of the “First Cry of Nueva Ecija”

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Governor Oyi Umali, for your invitation to me here at this very important celebration of Nueva Ecija, the Anniversary of the First Cry.

Thank you also to Mayor Capinpin, our host city mayor; (Applause) our congresswomen, Cherry Umali and Nely Chavez; (Applause) and our various provincial officials, as well as the officials of the various towns of Nueva Ecija. And I will not mention the many Cabinet members who are with me today, but they are all open later if the local media want to interview them. (Applause)

And of course, above all, to the brave and courageous people of Nueva Ecija, Happy Anniversary of the Cry of Nueva Ecija! (Applause)

The entire nation recognized the courage of the people of Nueva Ecija when they accepted the challenge of Andres Bonifacio to revolt against the Spaniards. You were among, along with my province of Pampanga, the first eight provinces to revolt. That is why our province is rooted in our history with greatness because it is signified by the eight rays of the sun on our flag together with my province of Pampanga. So you remember when we celebrated Independence Day on June 12 with Nueva Ecija among the eight provinces where we celebrate Independence Day. Congratulations to all of us! (Applause)

The uprising of Nueva Ecija was further admired when you defeated the Guardia Sibil and the friars in San Isidro, led by Captain Mariano Llanera and Captain Pantaleon Valmonte.

We achieved our independence with the help of Nueva Ecija. But today we are still being challenged in the present time. But our enemy is different now, no longer the Spaniards. The Spaniards are even helping us now. The challenge to us now is development in the face of the weakening economy around the world, and the challenge is also rice self-sufficiency, because the price of rice is too expensive around the world. And the cry is also the ability to buy oil through our dollar earnings.

We have been working tirelessly to address challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with the spike in high oil and food prices. The fact is that this is a global phenomenon. These global forces are causing difficulties for all countries around the world, and the Philippines is not exempt. So, we have been working hard to make sure that our country’s food supplies remain stable and we put food on the table for every Filipino.

And in this effort, Nueva Ecija is very important. (Applause) You are leading in rice production throughout the country. (Applause) You have been blessed with vast and flat lands and rich soil that provides rice for our countrymen. You know, they ask why we still import rice? Well, that's because not all provinces are like Nueva Ecija. That is the reason. (Applause) Many other provinces in the Philippines are mountainous, the land is rocky and there are no large rivers that provide water. If Nueva Ecija, its plains and the goodness of its soil were like that throughout the Philippines, we would be like Vietnam, where the entire country is like the Mekong Delta, but it is not. Nevertheless, although Nueva Ecija doesn't have a Mekong River, we have poured a huge amount of government spending into agriculture, irrigation, and major roads, as Oyi said. And Oyi said that you are also part of the North Luzon Agri-business Quadrangle because you are leading in rice production, but you are also part of the Luzon Urban Beltway. That's why we are building good roads, including the roads we are building here. (Applause)

Earlier, I asked Oyi how our… our sphere is doing, because we have a very good expressway system from Tarlac and Subic, passing through Clark to Metro Manila. There will be a connection to the North Luzon Expressway all the way to C-5, straight to the Batangas Port. But there's a branch there that will cross Nueva Ecija to Aurora. (Applause) I asked Oyi earlier, how is that road doing? Oyi said that what's lacking is the portion from Pantabangan to the border. Well, I was already calling Jun Ebdane, but Cherry Umali corrected me. She said it's already in the 2008 budget. (Applause) So that is part of your being part of the Luzon Urban Beltway.

But that's not all, since 2001, we have put in new irrigation for two hundred thousand hectares for Nueva Ecija, including Casecnan and Aulo. Last year, I wasn't at a big meeting like this during the Sigaw ng Nueva Ecija, but Oyi, Cherry and I were at the Aulo Dam because we opened the Aulo Dam last year. (Applause) But that's not all, Artie Yap reminds me that the Irrigators Association presidents themselves said we revived the old irrigation systems in fifteen thousand hectares. In fact, our administration is the only one that repaired all the irrigation systems that were neglected since they were built. (Applause)

In 2001, less than one hundred thousand hectares had irrigation in Nueva Ecija. Now, it's 135,000 hectares. (Applause) Let's just give a few examples — the presidents of the Irrigators Association are here — but I said to Arty, just give me two examples of individuals who have benefited from our irrigation.

Marcelo de Vera — is Marcelo de Vera here? There he is! Mr. Marcelo – the story is, Mr. Marcelo is from Santa Ana, Guimba. He used to cultivate five hectares and harvest seventy cavans. Now, with Casecnan, he cultivates ten hectares, and his yield is 130 cavans per hectare. (Applause) Here, also, at the Aulo Dam that we opened last year — is Mr. Onofre Bautista here? There he is! Barangay Aulo — (Applause) he came up here on stage, I said, Mr. Bautista, I'll tell your story. He used to cultivate only one hectare and harvest sixty cavans. Now, with irrigation in Aulo, he cultivates two hectares, doubled, and his yield is 170 cavans per hectare. (Applause)

So Nueva Ecija should shout, Mabuhay! to the irrigators of Casecnan-Aulo-Pantabangan and other small systems. (Applause)

And many are proposing that the Balintingon irrigation will also be done through build-operate-and-transfer. (Applause) So, Oyi, I hope they formally submit their proposal. Meanwhile, I have instructed Secretary Artie Yap to prepare the bidding documents so that if they are shy about submitting a proposal, we will just advertise it so that proposals can be submitted. (Applause)

Earlier, we distributed checks – these are loan checks. Some are directly from Land Bank, others will go through various rural banks and cooperatives. And these are just a few examples of what Land Bank has loaned to farmers in Nueva Ecija this year. The total loan amount is 1.2 billion pesos that Land Bank has loaned to farmers in Nueva Ecija in 2008 alone. And to make the use of the loan more effective, I also instructed Secretary Artie Yap to strengthen the cooperatives in Nueva Ecija – there are 48 of them in total Artie, right? There are examples here on stage of those being strengthened in Nueva Ecija, Talabutab, Pakul, (Applause) Bagong Bayan, UPRIIS, and others. How are they being strengthened? They are given priority in obtaining loans through the Land Bank's guarantee fund. So, this is also a help to our farmers.

And part of the checks we gave – aren’t those subsidies for seeds? We provided Nueva Ecija with subsidies from May to August, this is the planting season. And earlier there was an additional amount because you are about to harvest, you are about to plant again. For 140,000 bags of seeds, the subsidy is 1,500 pesos for hybrid and 760 pesos for certified seeds. (Applause)

Earlier, in Oyi’s speech, he said to you, something I heard John F. Kennedy say: “Ask not what the country can do for you, but what you can do for the country” — you from Nueva Ecija. I can say one thing, in return for what we have invested in the farms of Nueva Ecija to meet the challenge of today, we count on Nueva Ecija to feed our people (Applause) and get them through these globally hard times.

But you are not the only ones feeding people, you are not just feeding the nation because we need to import oil, only 10 percent of which we produce within our country, and we also need to earn dollars through exports. And as part of the Luzon Urban Beltway, you are also expected to contribute there, and that is why the Cabinet is here not only to deliver projects that will further stimulate agri-business but also your exports. You might be surprised, Nueva Ecija also exports – organic brown rice, that’s what they export. One corporation is Better Country Community Corporation in Gapan City – are they here? I invited them to the Cabinet meeting – you also export rice coffee, which comes from Science City of Muñoz Food Products. You also export handicrafts from cogon and Runo Handicrafts and others. And that will be discussed later because the entire Export Development Council of the Philippines is here now with the Cabinet. (Applause)

We have also been introducing measures to lift the burden of high oil prices.

And for this, the government will continue to use our growing resources to help families struggling with rising prices worldwide and the impact of storms while building a foundation to protect the nation from the crises it faces.

Oyi told many stories about his time as a congressman, and I would like to thank Oyi for being one of those who helped us pass the tax reforms that are now funding irrigation, loans, and other assistance we provide to farmers in Nueva Ecija. (Applause)

And now as Governor, he has a different role to lead our unity in facing the new challenges of the times facing Nueva Ecija. So, as Oyi said, this: “Unity for the Continued Change of Nueva Ecija.” Let us unite for the continued change of Nueva Ecija and our country, the Philippines. Let us unite with the same cry — a cry for progress, a cry for enough food for all Filipinos!

Thank you for the large contribution of food coming from Nueva Ecija. (Applause)

Long live the spirit of the First Cry of Nueva Ecija!

Thank you all very much. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Commemoration of the 112th Anniversary of the “Unang Sigaw Ng Nueva Ecija”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115459/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1706&Itemid=38