Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Teodoro for your introduction. And thank you also for helping me fight for the cause of the veterans in the United States.

Undersecretary Carolina, President of the Veterans Federation Colonel de Ocampo, Chairman Diaz of the Veterans Affairs Committee. And we have here Congresswoman Roman and her husband Antonino Roman, Congresswoman Herminia Roman and her husband former Congressman Roman, and Congressman Roman Romulo — panay Roman tayo dito ah — and Congressman Dodo Mandanas. General Ibrado and the other members of the Armed Forces, our dear veterans, our sons and daughters of the veterans, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.

First of all, I greet the veterans here today. Because I want to reiterate that the entire nation recognizes the great honor you have given our country. So it is an honor for me now to be with you, you are the heroes who defended the freedom of our country and of the whole world. Because of your intense defense of Bataan and other parts of the Philippines when the enemies came here, the war was prolonged here and did not reach other places they were going to go, so you saved not only the Philippines but the whole world.

And I remember you even when I was in Africa where I came from, why? Because Africa today means so much to our peace and stability. The peace and stability of Africa means so much to our energy security, but more importantly, the safety and welfare of many of our overseas Filipinos, including our seafarers.

And on our part, like you during the Second World War contributing to the safety of the whole world, we also are an important contributor to peace and stability on the African continent. Because we have hundreds of Filipino soldiers and policemen in different United Nations missions in Africa including Darfur in Sudan and Cote d’ Ivoire. And these were very important conflicts that were discussed during the African Summit on Conflict Resolution that I just attended. Our soldiers and policemen in Africa are helping to preserve peace and they are a tribute to the professionalism and dedication of our men and women in uniform. They are our nation’s investment in global peace and they are your heirs, your spiritual heirs, they continue your tradition of courage for the cause of freedom.

And I know that their sacrifice in Africa is not a sacrifice joyfully borne. It is work where it can be found in faraway places, among strangers with different cultures and it is very lonely to be there in those distant outpost of the world. That's why we are striving to create here in our country good jobs so that overseas work will just be a career option and not the only option for a Filipino.

And one of the things we try to do to be able to create good jobs here in the Philippines is to develop our PHIVIDEC Industrial Estate. So, for instance, I was asking Colonel de Ocampo, how is PHIVIDEC of which he is the chairman representing the veterans? And he said it’s okay, doing fine. Thanks to the support of the national government and we are hoping that very soon — actually, they’ve already started to put up a training center. Hanjin which has a major project, a billion-dollar project in Subic and Bataan and Zambales will do its even bigger billion-dollar plus expansion in the PHIVIDEC area of Misamis Oriental.

I do not hesitate to visit our people and their hosts around the world from Africa to the American Midwest — now the hometown of President Obama — listening to the problems of our Filipinos, the needs of our Filipinos there and finding out how our government can help them by working out better policies on migrant labor, for instance.

For example, in Libya, I left Secretary Nitoy Roque there when I returned last night so that he could finalize his labor agreement with the Ministry of Labor of Libya. Another thing we do is to save lives and restore liberty. Our workers, because by the law of average if we have eight million people abroad there are probably some who will have problems with the law and there are countries with the death penalty. That is a big request we make that if we do not go there and personally ask a favor from their leaders, many of them would have already had their execution by death penalty.

Our vigorous international engagement has also brought in foreign investments. So look at these investments that have come into our administration, 15 times over what we started with and together with our overseas Filipinos, these investments have doubled our foreign exchange and strengthened our peso and avoided a severe increase in prices. In fact, our inflation rate is the lowest today in many many years. And in the midst of our global recession our credit rating has even been upgraded. So while our neighboring countries are decreasing their foreign exchange reserves over the past years, ours has grown by three billion dollars. And even though two-thirds of the world is in recession during the last twelve months, we have 34 quarters of uninterrupted growth. That is what we are experiencing in the Philippines.

But our global engagement is not only for peace, not only for investment, it has also corrected historical injustice. As Colonel de Ocampo said, even before I became president, whenever I went to America, veterans rights was always part of my agenda from the beginning. And I was so happy that last February, the day that we visited Washington, Senator Daniel Inouye, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations sponsored the benefits for our veterans as part of America’s stimulus package.

Mabuti sinabi nga ni Undersecretary Carolina nandiyaan yung language nung nasa batas mismo na provision that recognizes our veterans. Siguro para meron siyang kapareha, I will also give you what Senator Inouye gave me what he said when he defended the veterans provisions. But let me tell you what he said verbally first. He said: “On January 26, 1941, the President of the U.S., Mr. Roosevelt, issued a military order through General MacArthur calling upon Filipinos to volunteer in the Army to serve in the Navy, to serve in the Air Force, because the President sensed correctly that there was much instability and violence in Asia. He felt the time had come for the U.S. to be prepared for any eventuality. As a result of that call, 470,000 Filipinos stepped forward and volunteered to serve in the military under the command of General MacArthur.”

As we all know, on December 7, 1941, Pearl Harbor was bombed, and then the forces of Japan began advancing to the Philippines. The first major target was the Bataan Peninsula. The 14th Japanese Army surrounded the peninsula. That peninsula contained at the moment 80,000 troops. We all assumed that the 80,000 were American troops, he said. No, about 18,000 were American troops; the rest were Filipinos. Yes, the majority of the troops in Bataan were Filipinos, but somehow, he said, if you look at Hollywood on the Bataan Death March, you will hardly see a Filipino marching. So that's probably why the deeds of the Filipinos during that time are not recognized. In fact, he told me in other conversations, they see Audie Murphy there but not our brave Filipinos.

But anyway to continue what he said on the Senate floor: “Of the survivors of Bataan, 15,000 were Americans, 60,000 were Filipinos. The march took a little over a month. They were not given medicine or water. But the time it ended, 54,000 survived. Very few Filipinos survived. And then we had Corredigor. The same thing.”

In March 1942, the Congress of the U.S. — the Senate and the House of the U.S.– passed a measure thanking the Filipinos for their gallantry, for their heroism, and said: “If you wish, you may become a citizen of the U.S. and get all the benefits.” But the war ended, and in February of 1946, the U.S. Congress passed a bill rescinding, repealing the Act of 1942. As Senator Inouye said, believe it or not, Congress declared that the service the Filipinos had rendered was not active duty. So that was the great insult that happened to our veterans in our country.

And to go back to Senator Inouye, and he speaks for all of us when he said, we waited all this time. We have had measure after measure presented. We did so in the proper fashion but we got filibustered, we got ruled out and everything else. Yun ang sabi niya.

Well on my part, as I said, in my visits to the U.S. even before I became president and especially since 2001, I have been fighting for our veterans cause, for our veterans benefits. I remember the former U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs was really having a hard time with me because every time I went there I would call him to come and see me and we talk about this bill. He said it was very difficult for him to pass, but they provided some interim measures. Among the interim measures they provided, the U.S. has been equipping our Veterans Hospital since my state visit of 2003 in America, another direct benefit of our engagement with the United States. In any case, after the sponsorship speech of Senator Inouye, on that day that we were in Washington, the U.S. recognized you our Filipino World War II veterans.

So last July, I accepted the invitation of President Obama to be the first Southeast Asian leader to meet him at the White House, partly in order to express our appreciation for recognizing our veterans in their fiscal stimulus package. And I told him that this long overdue recognition will hopefully go a long way toward rewarding you, our patriotic Filipinos who fought side-by-side with Americans under U.S. command during those heroic days.

I also thanked him and the U.S. government for equipping our military and training them to enhance their professionalism and effectiveness, and to advance “soft” power by helping build schools, roads, bridges and building our local economy through American development assistance in Mindanao and across the nation. These joint efforts have helped strengthen our paradigm for peace in Mindanao.

There is a lot of help from the Americans in our fight against terrorism, especially during meetings between me and the President, the help gets better. For example now, we have cases against the Abu Sayyaf, our prosecutors are being helped by American forces with their safety, their transportation and everything, so the prosecution is improving. Because before, almost no one wanted to go to Sulu to prosecute because they were afraid, but because they are being helped with facilities, while Americans cannot be on the ground, they can help in so many other ways. So those are some of the ways that many don’t know about by which they help our fight against terrorism.

When I went to Washington, I was with Gilbert, Senators Inouye and Daniel Akaka, who is Chairman of the U.S. Veterans Affairs Committee of the Senate, visited us at the Presidential Suite to receive also our thanks for being most instrumental in having the veterans recognition included in the stimulus package.

I remember when the Democrats weren't in the majority of the Senate and Congress, and Senator Inouye was the ranking minority member of the Senate Committee on Appropriations, I remember he told me once because we were always communicating with him because he was the champion of the veterans in the veterans compensation package. He said to me, 'Wait and when my party returns and we become the majority again, I will again be the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations and I will ensure that we give rights to our Filipino veterans,' and that's what happened.

I also met with the Philippine Friendship Caucus in the U.S. House of Representatives to thank them for all the years they have fought for our veterans benefits. I always visit them in Congress to strengthen their resolve so that they will continue to fight for us, because remember those who fight for us are those where there are many Filipinos. For example, San Diego, the congressmen of San Diego really fight for our veterans benefits. But there are also congressmen in areas where there aren't many Filipinos who are becoming very protectionist now during America's recession. They are also fighting, they say, why give money to those who are abroad. That's why we need to strengthen the resolve of our friends in Congress there and that is what we have been doing. Last February, we did that and now this July, we thanked them.

And the senators and congressmen mentioned, when Gilbert and I thanked them, that the lump sum payment included in the stimulus package was in addition to the benefits you were already given. They said: “Please make sure to remind everybody that what we are providing for in the stimulus package is in addition to the present benefits they’re already getting, not as a replacement of the present benefits.”

They remind us, in addition to the recognition of your military service and your lump sum payments, those enjoying the supplementary security income will continue with it. For instance, U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Eric Shinseki, also visited us with Gilbert in the Presidential Suite. He pointed out that outside of the new veterans… when he called on us during our Washington visit that outside of the new veterans benefits his department has also been disbursing funds to veterans and their families, including death pensions in the amount of 17 million dollars a month. Kristie Kenney said 12 million dollars, but Congressman Mandanas corrected her, saying: “No, it’s not 12 million dollars, it’s 17 million dollars.” So the whole sum, the aggregate sum is even bigger than the new stimulus package.

They’re cumulatively more than what the stimulus package provides for. And he also assured me that the assistance to the Veterans Hospital would continue. He reported that the U.S. is providing an MRI facility to the veterans hospital. Then I guess I hope you don’t mind, I also told him, hopefully in the coming days if you can help put up facilities for veterans in the provinces where a lot of them live then that would be very helpful because the veterans are already old. Hopefully, they won’t need to travel to the Philippines anymore to receive treatment.

I know because… we already know now where the majority of the veterans live because when President Obama signed the benefits, we immediately acted to start the process of application and document submission, and included in my directive regarding this was the construction of processing centers in the provinces where many veterans live, so we already know now where the veterans live. And therefore I hope and I will ask Secretary Teodoro to make sure that that is carried out, that future facilities will not only be in the Veterans Hospital but in areas around the Philippines where we have many many veterans living there.

When I was meeting with Secretary Shinseki, many veterans texted me — although they went through friends whom they know have my text number — texted me, and their message was: that they look forward to the speedy implementation of the provisions for Filipino veterans. And that is what I told Secretary Shinseki, that he should find a way to speed up the processing of veterans benefits. And he replied that his Department, if needed, would hire additional personnel to fast track the claims. When I apprised her, so this also needs to be followed up by Gilbert, the promise of Secretary Shinseki, that they will increase the number of their employees processing claims to expedite the processing of the claims of our veterans.

When I apprised Senators Inouye and Akaka of the developments in the processing of the claims, he asked whether the funds for the processing of claims would be sufficient. And Secretary Teodoro reported that more than 31,000 claims have already been filed with the PVAO headed by Nessie Carolina, whereas the original estimate was only 18,000, so halos doble ang nag file compared to the estimate. So that is one of the problems, so now Senators Inouye and Akaka know about that. The first payment if you remember was issued last April 8. Now we expect hopefully the filing of claims to go faster now that Secretary Shinseki made his commitment and Secretary Teodoro will follow up on that commitment.

We must beat the February 16 deadline next year for the filing of all claims. And that is what I’m glad to be able to have the chance to meet with you about, to remind everyone, tell all your members they have to file the claims before the 16th of February.

You know Colonel de Ocampo was talking about our efforts for the veterans benefits. Kung hindi natin ginawa itong efforts baka hanggang ngayon wala pa ito. And therefore I was very honored, I am very honored that it was during our administration now that the U.S. Congress and the U.S. administration recognized more than 60 years of struggle endured by the surviving Filipino World War II veterans. I am also honored that it was under our administration that the veterans of WWII as well as of other wars finally received your old age pensions that were not paid by previous administrations.

When I became president, I saw the arrears, seven billion pesos, but we already had a budget deficit, a large budget deficit at that time, it seemed impossible that we could pay this debt, but now we have paid them. And that is thanks also to our congressmen, they can always put a provision paying you, but if they don’t help you with the tax measures we won’t be able to pay you. But they have helped us with the tax measures, with the Value Added Tax, so the debts of the old age pensions of our veterans were paid.

Now, that we paid the old age pensions, the arrears, we go to looking at the other debts that the national government has incurred because of unfunded legislation. One of these is the total administrative liability, the debt has become very large. That’s why I was talking to Nonoy Andaya last night and until this morning, until now as you see me texting, I’m on my cellphone, I was talking to Andaya. How can we start paying this? I told Nonoy, at least let’s pay the total administrative liability of World War II veterans for the year 2009 and let’s start there.

So let's all work together to reach our veterans, our heroes of yesterday, that respect should continue until now, to help veterans with the benefits they deserve.

To all of you, thank you very much for the opportunity to serve you. Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Filipino World War II Veterans Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412095511/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26202&Itemid=38