HARNESSING MICROFINANCE FOR JOBS GENERATION AND ENTREPRENEURIAL GROWTH

This occasion is very fitting, coming back from the United Nations. Because we are celebrating the U.N. International Year of Micro Credit, so it is part of our celebration of the 60th anniversary of the United Nations. And as Secretary Bobi Tiglao said, this is also the Philippine Year of Microfinance. This is your year, congratulations to all of you!

Yesterday, upon my return from New York, I mentioned in my arrival statement that we should immediately address some of the problems facing the country, especially the creation of jobs.

And we need this even more because of the danger of a sudden and sharp increase in oil prices worldwide, making the fight against poverty even more difficult. The fight is difficult because the oil crisis situation is difficult, but we must not give up.

Last year, during my inauguration as president, I mentioned my ten-point program. The first one was the creation of six to ten million jobs within the next six years. And I said there, by developing three million entrepreneurs and developing two million hectares of land for agri-business. These three million entrepreneurs will be through helping micro, small and medium enterprises. And Bobi Tiglao also mentioned our accomplishment report since 2001, two million very small businesses were helped with 20 billion pesos.

Many of these come from Land Bank, the National Livelihood Support Fund, the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, and there are also some from SB Corporation, although SB Corporation really handles small enterprises, not micro. But the assistance from the government, these banks or agencies I mentioned, is not directly to micro enterprises, so sometimes micro entrepreneurs do not realize that a large part of the assistance – not all of it, because NGOs provide a lot of help – but they do not realize that a large part of it comes from the government. So it is important for us to know in this stakeholders’ forum to state that this is a partnership between the government and NGOs, as well as the banks, the microfinance banks accredited by the Central Bank of the Philippines.

Land Bank, for example, does not lend directly to micro enterprises, they go through conduits. Most of the conduits are NGOs, those who are on stage, those are NGOs used as conduits. Those who came up earlier and received certificates or large checks, those are the conduits. And the government also has conduits, Quedancor is a conduit that lends retail, but most are NGOs because the Classic Grameen Bank that originated in Bangladesh started as an NGO, not the government doing it, but we want to fast track that's why the government enters as a source of funding that contributes to equity. When there is equity, other NGOs, or if there is a lack of conduits, they also act as conduits like Quedancor. But those who manage it according to the law – which I also authored, our anti-poverty law – the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation is the one in between our microfinance.

Therefore, I am instructing the PCFC again to have a directory of microfinance conduits in every town. Because we say PCFC, Credit, DBP, maybe the small entrepreneurs, the micro, will go to DBP, will go to PCFC, it's not like that. They will go to the conduits, but it is the job of the PCFC to have a directory of conduits in every town. And we should advertise this, scroll Mr. Heneroso, scroll it on our government channels. For example, San Pablo, Laguna card, like that, the conduit of microfinance. Or in Aklan, Taytay in Kauswagan, every town should know where the conduit is.

To let our incomeless assetless women know that they should also be the primary priority of microfinance institutions when seeking loans to fund their micro enterprises. There are areas without conduits. There are towns without conduits. I have said it and I repeat the order – because they aren't here, meaning they haven't yet been included in the microfinance loop – if there is no conduit in a town, the DSWD SEA-K should be the conduit. Because not all 1,600 towns in the Philippines have a microfinance conduit. But all towns have a DSWD, and the DSWD is connected to… They also have their own microfinance office for self-employment assistance. So, this is what we need to do to reach many people.

Our goal, as Bobi said, as I said, is to develop three million entrepreneurs from 2004 to 2010 through microfinance and small and medium enterprise loans. Microfinance is different from small and medium enterprise, so our mentioned conduits are important. Small and medium enterprises borrow from regular banks like Ambassador Tambunting’s very successful bank, they are number one in lending to small and medium enterprises.

We have a loan program for SMEs, it’s called ‘Sulong.’ Zoraida, what does ‘Sulong’ mean? Small and Medium Unified Lending Opportunities for National Growth, that’s for small and medium enterprises. And it has already lent 27 billion pesos last year alone.

Microfinance borrowers don’t go to regular banks, they go to NGO conduits or Quedancor, or if there aren’t any, we need to fix the system so they can approach the DSWD SEA-K. This is our answer to five-six lenders. Like five-six, the loan amounts are small, so it goes through conduits, because Land Bank doesn’t have the machinery to lend 2,000 pesos, 15,000 pesos, although Quedancor, by force, became a machinery. Only a few thousand pesos are loaned in microfinance, while in SMEs, loans can reach millions. And the system is almost door-to-door lending and door-to-door collection, going to community centers. And the collection is often not at the end of one year, right, Zoraida? So that debts don’t accumulate and grow too large.

Therefore, microfinance has higher administrative costs than regular banks. That’s why you can understand why microfinance charges higher interest rates because the costs are higher. At least, it’s still much smaller than those of five-six lenders.

Usually, microfinance has no collateral, while banks have collateral. But what is the exchange for collateral? Social preparation. So, in the DSWD, for example, beneficiaries are taught for several months about the ethics of repaying debts, including values formation. That’s why I see many Christian groups are very active because of that strong values formation component and co-makers with joint obligation. Microfinance doesn’t just lend to individuals, there are co-makers, there are microfinance groups, five people, ten people, 15 people. One person’s debt becomes the debt of the members of the group. And because of this good system, almost home service, values formation, frequent collection, the co-makers almost 100 percent repay the debts of microfinance borrowers, even better than the repayment rate of those who borrow large amounts from large banks. So, congratulations to all of you! Heroes of microfinance.

Earlier, during the celebration of our microfinance event, we distributed 73 million pesos as microfinance loans: 34 million from DBP, right, Rey?; 25 million from PCFC; 11 million from Land Bank; and 3 million from SB Corporation. We saw them give checks to the conduits, and then the conduits gave checks to those who borrow from them. So, congratulations to the conduits! Congratulations to those who received the funds, to the borrowers!

Because the role of microfinance in job creation is very important, there should be a lead agency that monitors the entire microfinance system in our country, whether this microfinance is government or NGO. And that is the job of the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation. Because what the small business corporation of Mel Alonzo does for SMEs, the PCFC should do the same. What I’m trying to say is that the PCFC doesn’t need to be the only one lending to everyone because we have an entire system. Like the SB Corporation, they don’t lend to all SMEs. Mr. Tambunting lends many, many times over what SB Corporation is lending. SB Corporation lends very little compared to what the entire SME system is lending. Because many loans to small and medium enterprises come from different banks.

So, microfinance should be the same way, the majority of loans come from large NGO conduits like Opportunity and Microfinance Bank, or the card, or Transformation… What? Center for Transformation, Taytay sa Kauswagan, Negros Women for Tomorrow. There are about half a dozen of these large sources. Then there’s DBP, Land Bank, but the PCFC should be monitoring. There should be a program director and that’s the job of the PCFC just like the SB does throughout Small and Medium Enterprise Development. So the PCFC should always coordinate with Land Bank, DBP, NLSF, the conduits, including DSWD SEA-K, which every time I have a meeting, I say to use the DSWD as a conduit when there is no NGO conduit in an area.

The PCFC, I am placing under the DTI, under the management of the DTI, because the PCFC and SB should be in tandem in monitoring the development of three million entrepreneurs. So I want to make sure that Secretary Ermita gets the papers following my instructions done so that this can be institutionalized because that’s the role of this stakeholders’ meeting, isn’t it, Bobi said, how to improve the delivery of microfinance. And I think bringing DSWD SEA-K, where there is no microfinance in a particular town, improves that. Putting PCFC and SB Corporation together under one administration of DTI improves that.

And in our celebration today, we congratulate the PCFC because it should be the lead agency in microfinance and all the partners in microfinance. And this day is important so that the flow of microfinance is faster and more effective, reaching all those who need jobs.

So to all of you, I congratulate you, thank you for your service to the people. Let’s not get carried away by too much politics. Let’s use our energy not for gossiping about politics but to support three million small entrepreneurs, let’s create three million jobs. That’s what we should do in the coming years and hopefully after this day, the microfinance community of the Philippines will be even more successful.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library