Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Dinner hosted by Philippine-Singapore Business Council

[Delivered at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel, Singapore, August 25, 2001]

I would like to thank the organizers of this business forum for putting together this occasion to discuss the new developments happening in many sectors of our economy.

My cabinet secretaries who made their presentations have already expounded on the latest developments insofar as the Philippine economy is concerned.

You’ve heard about the progress made in several areas, as well as the reforms we have undertaken and other market corrections we intend to go through. You heard it from them, and I would like to confirm that they spoke with my full authority.

Some of the reforms are not easy. There is no single formula for the myriad of the complex issues that our economic sector faces.

But our policy goals are straightforward. We want to win the battle against poverty within the decade by being competitive, by finding our niche in the new economy, by creating jobs for the Filipino people.

To attain such goals, we are ready to reform, and reform with strong and serious political will.

Our competitive advantage is clear and direct: human capital is the most valuable resource of the Philippines. Its strength is in its rich pool of well-educated, highly trainable, culturally adaptable, and English-speaking work force.

We have government-declared economic zones within the confines of over a hundred industrial and business parks across our vast archipelago well-suited to a variety of economic activities from agro-industrial manufacturing to high technology, this is in addition to the tandem of Clark and Subic, our showcase freeport ecozones. The choice of feature and location is wide, like the menu in a good restaurant.

I am reminded of the call during the national day rally made by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong, with whom I will meet after this forum to discuss what our two economies can do further together.

Prime Minister Goh saw the need to broaden the basis of Singapore’s growth and the need for a new economic model for the future. The prime minister urged Singaporeans that as they had made great strides against the odds in the past, you can do so again in facing the longer-term challenges for the new Singapore.

In consonance with that call, I urge you to include the Philippines as part of the basis for your growth.

The new economic model calls for going beyond the territory and into the region.

The prime minister also said that the years ahead will be very difficult. But we have done it before, and we can do it again. “we have the resources,” he said, “we have the ability, and you can do it.”

I believe your prime minister and I believe that together, we can be partners in overcoming the economic difficulties of the 21st century.

The Philippines can be Singapore’s partner especially in the high-growth sectors that inherently draw strength from human resources.

The Philippines has land and human resources. Singapore can be the Philippines’ partner as a provider of technology, capital, and marketing know-how.

The combined assets of our two economies augurs well for business collaboration.

Thus, this is our call to you in the business sector – to rally and overcome the economic impasse that the world faces. And as you do this join us as we dare to be bold in our national ambitions. Join us as we boldly go forward to face both the perils and the opportunities of the 21st century.

Come to the Philippines. Thank you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Dinner hosted by Philippine-Singapore Business Council. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212948/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8697&Itemid=38