Thank you very much, league president, James Marty Lim for your introduction.

I would like to greet our colleagues here, the Cabinet members led by Secretary Angelo Reyes and Secretary Ed Pamintuan and Secretary Cerge Remonde; liga Region III, Efren Dela Cruz, thank you for the gift you mentioned for me; our host mayor because Clark is in Mabalacat and Angeles, Mayor Morales; the Vice Mayor of Angeles; Governor Jose Yap of Tarlac; Governor Garcia of Bataan; board member Joson of Nueva Ecija; our host also Tony of Clark Development Corporation; Vice Mayor Salamera of Angeles — oh, I think I already mentioned that earlier; and we have important guests like President Francis Chua of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce; and to all of you barangay leaders of Region III, good morning to all of you.

I remember, the last time we were together in such a large group was in 2004, right? During the campaign. Thank you for your support for me.

Now I congratulate you on the passage of the bill resetting the barangay elections from October this year to October 2007, it passed the bicameral conference committee.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you, barangay officials, for the steadfastness you have shown in facing the challenges to our country's political system. You are the grassroots, if you support your president, our republic will be strong.

Thank you and because of God the country has persevered, so I ask you to ensure that our country continues to persevere. Also ensure that the law prevails — the rule of law. The future of our country, the future of our country lies in our unwavering focus. We must be focused. We must be determined to apply the rule of law, and the future of our country also depends on our ability to eradicate the poverty and suffering of our country.

But nothing will happen if we allow those who are causing trouble to cause trouble. So, to you, leaders at the grassroots, I ask you, instead of allowing each other to discredit each other, help me ensure peace and order and let's just build three million small businesses to create three million new jobs. Help me open two million hectares for agricultural businesses so that we can create two million new jobs. Let's do that.

Our export growth rate is rising. The last figures I saw, 11 percent despite the world's difficulties. The peso is stable despite our large spending on crude oil imports. And the unemployment rate is falling, 7.7 percent. As Max Soliven said, “the unemployment rate in Germany is actually higher than in the Philippines.”

We are now in the second phase of our reform for development.

What is this second phase of reform? It demands double the energy, double the discipline, double the resolve to succeed at a time when we are held back by the constraints in the global environment. And we are held back by such a degenerated political system. So let's double our vigor. Let's give ourselves vigor to face the problems that need immediate attention.

We need to create jobs as I said earlier, even though it has gone down to 7.7 percent from 8 plus percent, there are still millions unemployed. We need to work together to create jobs. We need to promote economic development and invest in education and health care for our people.

We need to continue our relentless efforts to end corruption in the system. And we need to ensure that the poor people you care for are protected from excessive price increases and that they get the food and gasoline they need to improve their lives. Those are our challenges facing us here at the first regional congress.

And the people want a government that responds to their needs at all levels of the community from me, the president, to you, barangay leaders.

Let's fix the political system together. Let's put more power, more capacity, more wealth together. Let’s put more power, more capacity, more wealth in the hands of the people. Thank you, dacal a salamat, bamban.

The disturbances and misunderstandings are only proof that the current system needs drastic change. Dacal a salamat, Mexico. Change before things get even more chaotic. And I want this important discussion to start in our barangays. Thank you, Tarlac. Thank you, Bataan. Because you, more than anyone else, will benefit from the change in our politics. Dacal a salamat, Angeles City. Uy, peka maragul a delegasyon. Thank you, Olongapo. Congratulations! Okey, barangay Mabayuan, dacal a salamat.

Therefore, I am happy with those who organized this meeting, including those I mentioned. Oh, Pampanga is also raising their flag. Thank you for coming to this meeting whose topic, you said—what is it now, it’s done, Bamban was the first, thank you, thank you. Zambales, thank you. Bataan, I already mentioned. Nueva Ecija, thank you—the name of your meeting, “Unity Towards National Development.” Let us unite so that the rule of law prevails.

I am tired of chasing the bully around the schoolyard. Those who will heed my call to unite, welcome. Those who will not heed and continue to cause trouble, we, from the top to the barangay officials, will enforce the rule of law, right? Therefore, I expect that this meeting will yield events that will please our citizens.

Let us move on. Let us find jobs for our constituents. That is our main duty. Let us unite in this duty. Congratulations barangay officials and leaders!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st Regional Congress of the Liga ng mga Barangay Region III. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092716/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5120&Itemid=38