Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Spring 2006 Conference of the Asia-Pacific Council of American Chambers of Commerce (APCAC)

[Delivered at the Shangri-la Hotel Manila, Makati City, March 16, 2006]

Thank you, George for your introduction.

Thank you, Ric for your welcome.

And I would also like to welcome the different leaders of the American Chamber in Asia-Pacific, not to mention Governor Felix Camacho of Guam, welcome to the Philippines!

I’m glad that we have here our Cabinet members headed by Secretary Peter Favila and the members of the diplomatic corps including Paul Jones of course who represents the United States here in the Philippines.

I’d like to welcome the members of the American Chamber of Commerce from all over the Asia-Pacific. And I thank the organizers for allowing me as well to have as my special guests some of the top foreign investors in our country, whether or not they’re American.

It’s a good time to be able to speak with the foreign business community today given that the American business community is such a major part of our foreign investment community.

Yes, the world is flat! And the flatter it gets, the more it helps the Philippines create a new economy and leave behind an old economy and an old political system.

As Ric already explained to those who might not have read Friedman or who know Friedman to be Milton, but anyway they think alike. The author and journalist Tom Friedman says that world is flat and as Ric said, he outlines the tectonic shifts in the post-cold war order and the impact of technology that has leveled the playing field among the rich and poor, among the first world and the third world across the globe.

There is a revolution in technology that you all know about because you’re movers and shakers of the world and this shift in technology is linking the world and creating new collaboration and opportunity like no other time in world history. The Philippines’ investment in high speed internet and fiber optic cables has led to an explosion of the outsourcing industry here in the Philippines.

In Manila, Cebu, Clark, Davao, Dumaguete, Baguio — and Ric was with me in Zamboanga — among other locations, 125,000 good jobs at good wages have been created for young Filipinos in the call center and outsourcing business that didn’t exist just five years ago. Five years ago less than 2,000; now 125,000 — that is revolution indeed.

The revolution in technology is driven by chip manufacturing and we are proud that Intel has created the largest overseas production facility for world-class Pentium chips right here in the Philippines. Thousands of Filipinos work in a high-tech, highly professional environment and feed not only their families, but feed the world the core technology that drives the new flat global order.

The revolution in technology will help liberate generations of poor people and give them the tools they need to move from obscurity and poverty into a new entrepreneurial middle-class.

To keep up with the rapid evolution of technology and the power of the marketplace, we in the Philippines are reforming our political system to make our democracy move faster.

In real time, economic reform efforts at home are validated or rejected by the global marketplace. And as it happens, I’m glad that our recent economic reforms have been embraced; the recent attempts at political instability had been discounted. Our market is up — stock market, bond market, peso — but woe to the backward-looking political opportunists who stoop to unholy alliances with the apostles of an ideology already discredited by the world. To them my message is: the markets will punish our nation and our people if we stray from constitutional democracy.

As the poet John Donne wrote, “no man is an island” and never has this refrain been more true than in the archipelago of the Philippines and in the flat world in which we exist today. Modern economies are outstripping our political system, and so we are changing it by constitutional reform.

I am committed to microfinance and the power of entrepreneurs, not to micromanagement and state-run enterprises. I want to create engineers, not sloganeers. I want to create good jobs, not mindless mobs.

We must figure out how to win, not how to avoid losing. I know that in this flat world of Tom Friedman there is fear. Fear by workers around the world that jobs will be lost, lives will be changed. The Philippines can and must win with our new friends and our new competitors. We must think smarter and work harder to see that everyone gains.

For instance, for every call center job that Vikas Kapoor, the president and CEO of IMRC in New York, adds in the Philippines, he is able to add one job at home in the United States. That is a win-win solution in the flat economy.

The world over, of course, there is fear and there is a need to lift up the poorest among us. Because great as the market system is bringing about a flat economy across the world, it is not enough unless we ourselves take efforts to make all the poor share in the benefits of the flat economy.

Government must be a partner to ensure domestic tranquility and fairness to the people, not to dictate or interfere with the marketplace. And that is the philosophy of our administration.

And because therefore in a free enterprise economy such as what we firmly believe in and what we carry out, I value everyone in this room. The American businessmen from all over the Asia-Pacific and the foreign businessmen in the Philippines from all over the world. We are just an e-mail away; we are under scrutiny 24/7. This opens up our societies and creates greater accountability and transparency.

And therefore to you I say, American businessmen from all over the Asia- Pacific, businessmen from all over the world who are doing big business here in the Philippines, we will do our part to make the Philippines a business-friendly place to live, work and invest.

Our economy is strong, our commitment to reform is solid. And if we speak about reform, we talk about reforms that have to do with fiscal reforms, revenue collection, anti-corruption. And this morning, I am very proud to have received congratulations from the leader… One of the leaders of our Filipino business community, because today we are in the process — even as we speak — of conducting the biggest raid against smugglers in the history of the Philippines.

Five hundred customs agents are involved in this giant raid. And this is going to fight corruption, this is going to raise revenues, this is going to protect the businessmen who are doing legitimate production. And this is the kind of reform that we will continue to do alongside our political reform to make our process of lawmaking more attune to the new flat economy.

And so once more, to all of you, welcome to the 7,000 islands that make up the beautiful flat world of the Philippines.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Inaugural Opening of Dell Philippines Customer Contact Center. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214422/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2418&Itemid=38