Thank you very much, Undersecretary Marius Corpus.

I would also like to greet our police force under the leadership of Director General Oscar Calderon. And of course, I would like to greet all the padpao under the leadership of Mr. Ramon Bergado, president, as well as those who teach and train security guards under the leadership of President Pelegria Tablang. You may all be seated.

I am pleased to be with you all again. I remember I already spoke before PADPAO one day. There weren't as many attendees then, and even though today is Saturday, a non-working day, I am here because you are a very important part of our national security system. And this system is the one that enforces the law and maintains peace and order in our communities. So your partnership with our PNP is good.

And because of your leadership, our streets, barangays, and communities are more peaceful, more orderly, and more secure.

So this time, during the election period, we are praying that violence will not increase. That violence will not escalate further as the election approaches. That's why we are promoting – and this is always with me behind the scenes, I constantly coordinate with General Calderon – we are striving, we are promoting vigorous measures to protect the candidates, the people, and the votes of the citizenry. And among the candidates we are protecting, their… Their safety is ‘AGAP,’ right?

The political process is just as important as the political outcome. It will truly be… And we can ensure that the elections will truly be democratic and will show, will reveal the will of the people. Let us all do everything we can to help our democracy overcome the trials we face. Every election is a test of democracy. In this way, we can further strengthen the foundation for a good future for our country, economy, and society. Together, we can show the world that Filipinos thrive in a democratic system based on free choice. The value of a strong democracy in strengthening the economy and ensuring the prosperity of the people is undeniable.

Together, our efforts must be directed at reducing the violence. That is why I am requesting those participating in this meeting to focus on how security agencies can help ensure the orderliness of the upcoming elections.

At stake… I also thank President Bergado for saying that your institution, those two institutions, support team unity. Thank you all very much.

I hope you can tell all the security guards who are part of your organization and all those training security guards that our future is at stake in the upcoming elections. Also at stake, and included in what is at stake, are the continued reforms of our economy, the cleaning of the environment, the improvement of hospitals, investment in education, and the creation of good jobs.

I hope you will inform or state or reiterate that “reforms build; revolt destroys.” And because reforms build, that is why I do not lose focus on my work.

Through hard-fought economic reform battles that we have led with the help of some courageous members of Congress, the Philippine economy has finally broken loose from its historic legacy of lethargy.

New revenues, better collection, and a crackdown on tax cheats along with fiscal discipline has put the Philippines on a path to sustainable economic growth and stability. This is now gaining global attention. Recently, Texas Instruments announced a one billion dollar investment to further expand their operations in the Philippines.

Ang Pilipinas ngayon ay nag-aalok ng isa sa pinakamagandang halaga sa Asya para sa mga lokal at dayuhang mamumuhunan.

And as there are increasingly more investments, both from foreigners and Filipinos, of course their plants and offices will require the services of a security guard agency.

Our economic reforms are at the forefront of our campaign against poverty. Poverty reduction is our primary objective. It will remain the focus of my remaining years in office.

Bringing down the budget deficit, which we have been able to do, is just the first step. In the next three years, we will deliver to the people the tangible benefits from our reforms.

Reform can only be achieved when we invest in our people and infrastructure. That investment in our people includes helping training schools easily conduct training for our security guards. That is part of our investment in our people. Alongside that, we will strengthen investment in our country and citizenry in order to:

Number one. To improve infrastructure to encourage businesses to grow and employ more people, because more jobs means less poverty. For example, the roads we are fixing, the north expressway leading to Central Luzon, construction of many businesses in Clark continues. Texas Instruments will put one billion dollars there, but Hanjin was earlier. They have already started their one billion dollars, about 300 million dollars of their one billion dollars is already in Subic. I remember when I went to Hanjin in Subic, well, they have already employed about ten thousand welders. And that’s not finished yet because their one billion dollar investment is not yet complete. I asked the welders, “what was your livelihood before?” Previously, they were marginal fishermen. They barely caught enough fish for their own food, with only a little to sell outside. And as welders, they have a large job, a large salary. More jobs means less poverty.

Our second program for the next three years is to improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food-for-school programs. I don’t know if the security guards have Philhealth. Because the… isn’t it, employment arrangements differ? There’s salaried employment. With salaried employment there is… that’s included in the SSS, health insurance is already included there. Then there are others, it’s contractual. So, that doesn’t necessarily include SSS. That’s what we aspire to, especially for the poor security guards. And I know many poor security guards in areas where there are many poor people. When I ask them, what is your spouse’s livelihood, your husband’s for example, many of them say security guard. We also want to provide Philhealth or health insurance to those poor security guards who are usually just earning extra, if they are not covered by the SSS.

And some of our security guards also have children studying in public school. And I don’t know if they were informed that now, in our public schools throughout NCR, we are providing food-for-school. The children, one child per family, receives one kilogram of rice each day they attend school so that poor families can eat.

Our third program. We will enhance support for education as a weapon against poverty through better buildings, new books and teaching materials, and livelihood courses, like what our young security guard mentioned – the ladderized training for security guards that can lead to a Bachelor of Science in Criminology degree.

You're kidding me… How many units are needed to teach Bachelor of Science in Criminology? Because… But I just found out – I already knew there was a ladderized program – but I just learned that it’s 39 units for credit in Bachelor of Science in Criminology. That’s a significant reduction in the required additional studies. And if you have a degree in criminology, well, you can even join the Philippine National Police.

Because the law of the Philippine National Police requires a college graduate. And the Philippine National Police, because it is large… Our budget has increased due to our tax reforms, so we are hiring new policemen. Therefore, training should continue so that, as a security agency, or when they finish… Finishing college with a degree in criminology, because there is ladderized training, many more will enter who are well-prepared for the job of a police officer.

This ladderized training led Mrs. Tablang to the Malacañang Palace last May… No, April 30, because we were celebrating ladderized training, ladderized education. There is an agreement between the Philippine National Police and Angeles University. So the learning of our trainees in your training schools, 39 hours of that, will be credited by Angeles University towards its Bachelor of Science in Criminology course. And we expect that if this is successful, many other universities will enter into agreements with the Philippine National Police.

Fourth, our program is cutting red tape and continuing to reduce production costs in the system.

And of course, we will continue to fight against terrorism and strive for peace and prosperity in Mindanao. And in this fight against terrorism, you have a big role to play in defending our economic centers from crime and terrorism.

In our Human Security Act – this is our new anti-terrorism law which is not yet in effect because it will be effective after elections – here you have a strong shield, you private security guards and you police, you have a shield not only for the people but also for the economy, against the forces of evil.

At kaya marami pa tayong dapat gawin nang magkasama. At siguro kung sinusuportahan ninyo ang pagkakaisa ng team, ay dahil sa administrasyong ito, nakapagtrabaho tayo nang malapit sa isa’t isa para sa kapayapaan at kaayusan ng ating bansa.

As you close your two-day convention, therefore, my message to you is: “continue to be strong advocates and committed leaders in our campaign for peace and order.”

Greetings to all of you!

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Sa ating Human Security Act — eto yung ating bagong anti-terrorism law na hindi pa umiiral ngayon dahil it will be effective after elections — dito may matibay na panangga kayo, kayong mga private security guards at kayong mga pulis, may panangga kayo hindi lamang para sa taong-bayan kung hindi para sa ekonomiya, laban para sa mga laban sa mga puwersa ng kasamaan.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremony of the 1st Tripartite National Security Convention. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150649/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2016&Itemid=38