THE FIRST 100 DAYS: CARING FOR THE POOR

You, leaders representing civil society, are one of the main reasons why I am now the President of our Republic. We were together at EDSA II, and you and the people you represent are the reason why there is a president, whether it be me or past presidents, or future presidents. In a society, the rich and powerful may take care of themselves, but the poor, the unfortunate, are the ones who need the government to help them, so that they may share in the sufficient attention to the wealth and power of the country.

This empowering function of the government has become even more important in the last few days. Our programs for the poor have already been outlined. If you remember, we met at the University of the Philippines during the time when our protests were heated. We have been developing these programs for a long time and we already have some being implemented. Many of our countrymen are still impatient and seem to be unable to endure any longer. For them, it is not reasonable that I have not been president for long. It doesn't matter to them that I have only been president for one hundred days. They want it now, they are impatient. Where are the results? I think people will not resort to violence if they are convinced that there is a peaceful and effective way to achieve their aspirations in life. I think a poor person will not cling to a knife given to him by a scheming politician if he is convinced that there is a government offering a decent life, dignity, true democracy. I think the different sectors of society – rich and poor, women and men, city dwellers and farmers – will not fight each other if everyone understands and helps each other. In short, I think no poor person will revolt if there is no one who feels aggrieved and disadvantaged in the country.

It is not hidden from our government that fact. That is why the Cabinet has decided to accelerate and intensify assistance to our poor. The Cabinet decided to double the care for the unfortunate.

This meeting of ours has been scheduled for a long time, whether there is a riot or not, we will really talk about how to implement what is good for our poor. But God is good at “timing”, it just so happened that before we scheduled this, there are many things we can reflect on from the events of the past few days.

We need to let those who demonstrated know that the government is actively responding to their needs, whether it be jobs, food, shelter, education, medicine, justice and others. We must prove to them that it is not necessary to overthrow the government and for the poor and rich to fight each other in order to improve their lives.

In this endeavor, we appeal to those close to the marchers at Malacañang. Hatred and discord will only result in more chaos and hardship for our people. Let us work together to address the grievances of your colleagues. That is what we should say to our friends and comrades who marched to Malacañang.

When we also call on you, the leaders of the basic sectors to help us reach out to the people who rallied at EDSA and Mendiola along with other disgruntled elements in our society. In fact, you and your organizations, you are the ultimate weapon in our battle against manipulative politicians and rioting mobs.

You, you are the first line of defense against desperation and mass violence. Please help us reach out to our rallyists of past week whose legitimate grievances were exploited by ruthless politicians who don’t mind seeing scores massacred in their evil gambit to make murderers out of our police and soldiers, and create a pretext for the government’s violent overthrow. Thank goodness, the professionalism and mega-tolerance of our police and soldiers thwarted their dastardly plans. Forgive me, help us, bring the message to the sectors you represent or sectors where you have influence. Tell them, convince them that this government is truly serious about helping and serving the poor and the unfortunate.

What has the new People Power Administration accomplished in its first one hundred days in office, especially for the poor and the small people? First of all, we have established a government that is honest, clean, and respected.

On January 20th, we were very afraid, not only of the future of the country but especially of the plans and schemes of the government itself. That changed with the start of the People Power Administration and the entire nation benefited, especially the poor. Because of the restoration of confidence in the government, the peso recovered. The economy began to revive and capital entered. Thus, the increase in the prices of goods was prevented and capital flowed in, for example, the value of new businesses approved by the BOI and PEZA doubled, which alone will create more than seventeen thousand jobs.

Because there is no influence peddling in the new government, smuggling has been greatly reduced, and smuggling by businessmen close to the former administration has even stopped. The excessive flow of sugar from abroad, which previously killed sugarcane farmers, has been reduced.

I nullified Executive Order 313, which gave a large portion of the coconut levy to a small but powerful group. Because our real aim is for this fund to be used for small coconut farmers.

The rapid spread of jueteng, which drains the income of the poor, has been stopped. In three months, our government has done more against jueteng than in almost three years of the previous administration. And because of the government’s peace initiatives in the problem with Muslim and communist rebels, fighting has almost stopped in many parts of the Philippines. Thus, thousands of citizens who were displaced by the war have returned to their communities to build new lives and livelihoods. On the other hand, the police raided the army of kidnappers, drug syndicates, and the terrorist Abu Sayyaf.

It is these hard war’s gains that there would be power grabbers who threaten to destroy. And I am determined not to let them succeed. I believe, last May 1, you saw that determination. And I thank you for your support.

Now I appeal to you and to the communities and sectors you represent to support our government in its struggle to defend the precious legacy and achievements of EDSA II. We also call on your support to push forward our anti-poverty agenda because we all worked on this before and until now. And at its heart is addressing the inequities that make the majority powerless, marginalized and vulnerable.

We must pursue poverty reduction within the overarching frame of social justice so that policies and programs do not become mere palliatives, but instruments to reduce inequality and promote sustainable development. Hence, poverty reduction is not only an integral part of the medium-term plan in this administration. It is the overarching theme of the updated Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan.

We have also revitalized the Social Reform and Poverty Alleviation Act, and I am proud that I was the principal author of that act in the Senate. And what we are doing now, this is the beginning of the effective implementation of our anti-poverty law. And now, we shall make that anti-poverty law more effective.

First and foremost, we are reorganizing and constituting the National Anti-Poverty Commission, and working for an autonomous process of the basic sector representation in the NAPC.

We set up various bodies directly under my office to better address the concerns of marginalized groups. They include Mindanao for the rehabilitation of war-torn Muslim areas. The Office of the Presidential Adviser for Indigenous People’s Affairs, and the Cabinet Cluster on Socially Equitable, Agricultural Modernization and Public Services, and on the safety nets for sectors affected by globalization.

We anchor our anti-poverty strategy on the five-core thrust that were enunciated by Ging Deles earlier. But let us repeat them so we can internalize them.

First, the redistribution of physical and resource assets; second, human development services; third, participation of the poor in governance and institution building; fourth, security and protection from violence and fifth, more opportunities for livelihood and social life.

The government has launched dozens of programs for the poor and the disadvantaged. On the first one hundred days of office, let me mention a few. Perhaps the program that benefited the most people directly is the Department of Agriculture's program for coconut farmers, which distributed rice to one million two hundred and fifty thousand farmers affected by low copra prices. One million two hundred fifty thousand peasants. That is the number who benefited from the DA's rice assistance program. And for the entirety of farmers, fishermen, and others who depend on the bounty of the land and sea, we will allocate Php20 billion for the modernization of agriculture to increase yields, increase income, and compete with foreign products.

The Department of Labor and Employment through its public employment offices has helped more than 110,000 people find jobs nationwide. And it is revoking Department Order 10-97 to stop the oppressive practice of labor only contracting.

To help the sectors affected by globalization, as I said earlier, I created a Cabinet Cluster on Safety Net for sectors affected by globalization. And the Secretary of Labor and Employment leads it. As a first step, we will allocate Php27 million from the State Insurance Fund for those who have lost income, as well as those who are self-employed and not employed by a company. And to help those who need to learn a new job due to globalization, DOLE will create a development fund for workers with a fund of Php50 million, including Php18 million from the President’s Social Fund.

The Department of Social Welfare’s flagship program, the Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services, has served more than 270,000 families in 100 urban poor communities and almost 4,000 depressed barangays.

The Department of Agrarian Reform distributed titles to more than 10,000 hectares of land to more than 8,000 farmers including contentious private lands like Hacienda de los Reyes in Barangay Imuk, Calauan, Laguna. I hope we can distribute one hundred hectares this year. That is my dream that I hope will come true.

For our retired soldiers, the Philippine Veteran’s Affairs Office, settled monthly pensions of more than 260,000 pensioners for old age, death and disability would total disbursement of Php2.5 billion. For our teachers, in addition to what DECS is doing for them, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) is also setting aside a one billion peso loan to extend the reach of our teachers while waiting for the often-delayed arrival of their salaries.

The Health Department provided more than 230,000 TB patients with free medicine and more than 7 million children with vitamin A, 5 million children with the worming treatment and 45,000 youth with immunization.

The DENR reinstated its Community-Based Forest Management Program benefiting more than 400,000 household. And I immediately ordered that public lands currently occupied by our poor countrymen be made into areas for affordable housing. Almost eighty thousand families have already benefited and more than thirty thousand families will be helped soon.

For women, our goal is to provide working women with essential services for health, protection against violence, childcare and others.

These are just the beginning, there is much more to come. And this workshop is just right because we have already provided a program for the next two hundred days. And here we will look for the doable items on this list to be implemented until the end of this year.

It is a difficult task for the government to create a program against poverty, especially when we have an inherited budget deficit of Php 225 billion. But an even greater challenge is to have the private sector as a partner in helping the underprivileged.

The privileged Filipinos must realize that true justice, development, democracy and reconciliation in our land will not happen without the willingness of the elite to share or give up some of their wealth and power.

I am not preaching communism. I am invoking Christian love, charity and social justice. In this regard and in the interest of leadership by example, let me reiterate my personal contribution to bridging the gap between those who have and those who do not have in our country.

Last month, I directed the HUDCC to process the transfer of Macaraeg Estates — which should have been my inheritance from my late mother in Iligan City — for urban land reform. In addition, the family of my husband Mike is offering more than a thousand hectares of Arroyo sugarland in Negros Occidental for Agrarian Reform.

In the past, we saw how manipulative politicians stoke the flames of class warfare among our poor and oppressed brothers and sisters. That is the wrong way forward. Instead, I call on everyone to embrace the core values of our government — winning the battles against poverty, improving moral standards, promoting the politics of consultations, and leading by example not just in government but all across the society.

Our cause is just. Our objectives are clear. With God’s grace and the people’s interests in our hearts, we will not fail.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library