Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Philippines-China Business Forum

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Kerry Center Hotel, Beijing, PROC, October 30, 2001]

Secretary Roxas and the other members of the Cabinet; members of the Philippine Delegation: Senators and Congressmen, Mr. Varela, Mr. Yu, Mr. Chua, Mr. Ng; members of the Chinese and Filipino business community; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, I would like to thank the organizers of this business forum for this mutually constructive effort.

I last visited Beijing in March 2000, as the guest of Vice President Hu Jin Tao — I was Vice President of the Philippines then — and now I thank the people of China once again for the honors extended to me. Even at that time when I was Vice President, I had the opportunity to meet with China’s highest leaders, President Jiang and (Premier) Zhu Rongji.

Ten days ago I was in Shanghai for the APEC Leaders’ Summit. And let me congratulate once again the people of China for the spectacular hosting of that historic event.

Now it is my honor to be back in China again, for a State Visit. And I thank President Jiang for his gracious invitation and for the superb arrangements he has provided for my delegation. The APEC economic leaders last week, issued a declaration in the course of the summit, which reads in part, and I quote:

“We are determined to reverse the current economic downturn and maintain public confidence at a time of uncertainty by fighting protectionism and committing to the launch of a new round of the World Trade Organization …”

China’s bid for WTO membership created the impetus for the restructuring of China’s state-owned enterprises, and has spurred the drive towards international competitiveness.

Thus, China’s corporations make business decisions not based on what the political leaders of China say but on your own calculations of where it is profitable to go. And that is why we are here to speak not only to the officialdom of China but also to the business community of China.

I congratulate China for your accession to the WTO two weeks from now. Every nation, including the Philippines, is poised for the opportunities offered by this event.

China’s accession to the WTO is both a welcome and a challenging development. On the one hand, some Philippine products face stiffer competition from China both in the world market and the domestic front. On the other hand, we also welcome the prospect of greater access and participation in China’s highly promising domestic market.

I come to China once again after many, many other visits in the past to bring the message that the Philippines desires a healthy, comprehensive, long-term relationship with China.

There are limitless possibilities inherent in the relationship between our respective nations and peoples.

The historical basis of our ties is deep and abiding. Neighbors by geography, we have had regular and active trade relations dating back to the sung dynasty.

This relationship, rooted in commerce, is reflected in the important role currently played by many Filipino-Chinese in business and industry — and many of them are in this hall today.

At no other time have our relations with china been more important a today. The rapid pace of events has placed China at the center of world attention, not only as the fastest growing economy, but also as a leading partner in the globalized regime.

The Philippine’s proximity to China, our long trade relationship, and the active presence of Filipinos of Chinese descent in our own business arena are some factors that would certainly work to our advantage, we hope. On the other side of the horizon, the projective tariff rate reductions and improvements of channels of distribution in China, will definitely spur the volume of trade transactions between our two countries.

One of our traditional exports to China that will benefit most from these developments is tropical fruits. Philippine fruits are expected to become more affordable and accessible to a wider span of Chinese consumers. I was told earlier this year that when China enters WTO, all the rest of the world will collapse and that there’s nothing we can sell to China because China can produce everything we can sell. Not so, because China is above 20 degrees latitude from the equator and there are tropical fruits that we produce below the 20 degrees latitude that we can sell to China. So therefore, unlike many other countries who think that their economy will die because China is entering WTO, we the Filipinos congratulate China and hope that we can do more business with each other because you’re entering WTO.

Similarly, we can also expect an uptrend in exports of other traditional products such as minerals — and we signed an agreement today regarding that — marine-based products, and other resource-based commodities.

Aside from aggressively marketing its traditional exports, the Philippines is also looking forward to the introduction of non-traditional exports to the Chinese market, such as natural fiber, coco coir and professional services relative to education and marketing.

China is going to be the host of the Olympics in the year 2008 and there are many ways by which the Philippines can participate in your preparations including providing you — whether here in China or in our Philippine language schools — with teachers who will teach the Chinese people the English language.

On the investment side, the Philippine government will continue to adopt and implement policies along the line of enlightened liberalization, deregulation and privatization. It will also work towards further enhancing the business environment for both existing and would-be investors. This would include, among others, lowering the cost of doing business in the Philippines, improving the country’s physical infrastructure, and affirming good governance.

Telecommunications is a primary area of reform and development, especially for purposes of improving interconnectivity. E-commerce will be broadened and deepened to meet rapid market paces attendant to the new economy.

The passage of our Power Industry Reform Act of 2001 is a government initiative towards restructuring the country’s power sector, with the goal of reducing electric costs and consequently, the overall cost of doing business in the Philippines. The law provides for the division of the power industry into four sectors, namely generation, transmission, distribution and supply.

This law is expected to help spur economic activity, as it aims to accelerate the total electrification of the country; to ensure the quality, reliability, security and affordability of the supply of electric power; and to guarantee transparent and reasonable pricing of electricity. This will all be done in a regime of free and fair competition and full public accountability.

The Power Reform Act encourages private sector, and business and corporate sector participation to enhance the inflow of corporate capital and to broaden the ownership base of the power generation, transmission and distribution sectors. To date, a total of eight foreign and three local companies have signified interest to take part in the privatization of the assets of our National Power Corporation.

We are also geared towards boosting Philippine competitiveness in electricity and we hope indeed that the Chinese business community will look at the opportunities for investments in the newly revitalized power sector of the Philippines. I am glad that we had our power sector officials on the stage this afternoon presenting memoranda of understanding with their Chinese counterparts.

The Philippines also seeks to be competitive in e-business. Our Electronic Commerce Act provides the legal framework to simplify domestic and international exchange of information, transactions, arrangements, and agreements through the use of electronic and optical media. Just earlier there was a signing between the Philippine Chamber and the China Chamber, and this is partly with respect to a website that will connect the two chambers with each other. The law also penalizes computer hacking and guarantees greater online security.

This law is expected to improve the e-business environment and hopefully bolster commercial traffic and the development of a critical mass of users.

We hope that the Chinese business sector will also take advantage of our Build-Operate-and-Transfer laws to invest in telecommunications infrastructure to support high-speed connectivity at low costs, or perhaps explore the use of satellites for our internet backbone, especially since our country is made up of more than 7,000 islands. I was glad to see earlier also in the Memoranda of Agreement presentation our leaders in the satellite industry in the Philippines doing a memorandum with their counterparts here in China. Investing in what is called the internet’s “pipes and plumbing” is highly lucrative and imperative in the development of information and communications technology in the country.

The implementation of our ICT plans is overseen by the Information Technology and e-Commerce Council (ITECC), of which I am the Chairman.

We have liberalized the ICT sector in terms of various tax breaks and credits for foreign investors, the employment of foreign nationals and the development of ICT friendly regional centers. ICT is a leading component of the Philippines 2001 investment priority plan, thereby giving investors access to incentives offered under this plan.

At present, we have five ICT parks offering competitive financial and tax incentives for ICT businesses, and we hope to see our Chinese corporations locating there.

When I became President in January 2001, I told the people about my vision of winning the war against poverty within the decade. To succeed in this, indeed, one of them is to promote a good investment climate to promote the growth sectors of the future, and that includes ICT; and the investment climate includes also providing for better and less costly power infrastructure.

Another one of the components I listed in our national agenda is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity.

The Philippines is still, like China, predominantly an agricultural country. Approximately 50 percent of our population depends on agriculture for their livelihood and income. Our primary aim is to uplift the living standards of our farmers, through increased productivity. This will impact substantially upon the economic development of our country.

To further modernize our agriculture sector, we need to build many things: we need to build more water impounding structures and lower the cost of farm machineries and post harvest facilities. Likewise, we need to build additional farm to market roads to minimize post harvest losses. I was very happy that earlier this afternoon, I also witnessed the presentation of Memoranda of Agreement with regard to the supply of Chinese agricultural machinery for our Philippine agriculture. Agricultural modernization is one area where broader cooperation with China would redound to our basic national interest.

Indeed I am very proud that we are now already piloting the hi-breeds coming from China, and we hope this will indeed increase the productivity of our agricultural sector.

In the overall scenario of this forum, I understand that our business delegates and their counterparts have extensively discussed possible ventures — not only the ones we signed today, but other ventures in agriculture and food; electronics and manufacturing services; ICT enabled and other professional business services; and tourism.

I hope that the tourists, especially from Shanghai and Beijing will be coming to visit the Philippines. We now have Philippine Airlines going to Shanghai and I have told the Department of Foreign Affairs officials — and I’m telling the Secretary of Justice — that in order to make it more convenient for Chinese tourists to go to the Philippines on package tours — and many of the tour groups organize package tours coming from Beijing and Shanghai — we will relax visa restrictions: you will not need to get your visas right here in Beijing or in Shanghai, you need to get them at the port of entry only when you get to the Philippines.

Incidentally, of course you still have to apply for your visa here, you get it there, but to make it also more convenient for the people of China, people of Shanghai to visit the Philippines, tour there and do business there, I am very grateful to the Chinese government that this afternoon, part of the exchange of notes will be on the establishment of a Philippine Consulate General in the City of Shanghai. I hope that my visit and this Business Luncheon will assure China’s business leaders that as you join the WTO the Philippines is a good choice in which to do business.

With your support, and with our current crop of dynamic economic and business leaders in my country supporting good, clean and effective governance, we will be able to achieve and sustain a business climate attractive for doing business for the long term.

Earlier, you saw my Secretary of Energy speak Chinese, and as you can see from his face he’s not even Filipino-Chinese and yet this is how much we value China. I am very proud that my Secretary of Energy speaks Chinese. I am very proud that I have Cabinet Secretaries who know the international financial system and business community — I have seven Cabinet members from Harvard, I have two Cabinet members from Wharton, I have three Cabinet members from Wall Street. And I hope indeed that as you, China, enter the world economy, you will find that these credentials will make life good for you as you do business in the Philippines.

I believe there are two priorities to regain stability and growth in east today.

The first and most urgent priority is dealing with terrorism.

The other priority is global and regional cooperation to lift the global economy from the brink of recession. The unprecedented cooperation and coalition building that was cemented at the APEC Leaders’ Summit in Shanghai under the leadership of President Jiang Zemin to ensure security and safety could work equally well to ensure economic security which globalization has both provided and at the same time threatened.

We must seize this opportunity to turn the tide so that the world economy can be put back on track.

And just as China led the world leaders in forging a coalition against terrorism, when we were in Shanghai China is also now poised to lead the world economy into the 21st century out of recession because of its giant role that it will play in the World Trade Organization.

Congratulations, good luck in your new role and thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the Philippines-China Business Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212559/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8745&Itemid=38