Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the necrological rites for National Artist Ramon Obusan

[Read by NCCA Chairman Ambeth R. Ocampo, December 28, 2006]

Distinguished guests, friends, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good Morning. I am honored to read the message of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo.

We join the whole nation in mourning the loss of National Artist Ramon Arevalo Obusan. Less than seven months from the time we honored him with the conferment of the Order of National Artist in Malacanang, we are gathered yet again today, to pay homage to someone who has accomplished phenomenal work in Philippine dance, a man who has broadened and deepened our understanding of our cultural life and expressions.

Ramon Obusan has touched our hearts, our lives, and our spirits and his greatness will be remembered by generations of Filipinos. Among them the countless ethnic groups whom he took in, in the course of his researches, the dance scholars who studied his volumes of video documentaries detailing the unique and rich heritage of indigenous Filipino dance, and the foreign community across continents, whom he entranced in his world tours, securing the place of the Filipino performer in the world stage. He has thus been a shining example of how far the Filipino artist can go, following his passion and caring for his nation through the arts.

He shall be missed by all of us who have all been witness to his daring and innovativeness on stage, bringing to life the moving image, truth, and diversity of our race.

Today, even as we bid him our final goodbye, we know that death cannot diminish the light of National Artist Ramon Obusan. His legacy of greatness, compassion, and grace will live on in the minds and hearts of all Filipinos.

Thank you, Ramon Obusan, for your work which shall remain a living reflection of ourselves, showing us who we are.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Necrological Rites for National Artist Ramon Obusan (To be read by NCCA Chairman Ambeth R. Ocampo). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141649/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3046&Itemid=38