Because this is the Centennial of the Labor Movement of our country, we honored earlier those who led and suffered for the movement when it began. Those who started 100 years ago, of course, are no longer with us. That was 100 years ago, so their grandchildren are here. We also recognized the leaders of this generation, our veterans who are still alive here in our Labor Movement. We are also honoring, even though our current leaders are gone, but some of them have become martyrs in the current generation.

Popoy Lagman, we did not give him a posthumous award, but there is another award I want to give him. For this award to be more meaningful, I now order Sec. Joey Lina and our police to launch an intensified manhunt for Roger dela Torre, alias Ka Rowel, who is allegedly the one who killed Popoy Lagman. There is an eyewitness, and a case has been filed against Ka Rowel for the murder of Filemon Lagman. Finally, hopefully, justice will come. Even if we do not share the same beliefs, everyone has the right to life. So even if we do not share the same beliefs, if human rights are violated, even if they have different beliefs, they also have the right to have justice from us.

Earlier in Cebu during the celebration of the Labor centennial, the streamers said “One hundred, One hundred” perfectly fitting for a hundred years of the labor movement, let us come together on only one road, the road to eradicating poverty in our country. And I am pleased to receive that tripartite declaration earlier from Tito Carlos, Pat Sto. Tomas and Atty. Mendoza and that will be the content of our discussion this afternoon. Because what they signed as representatives of labor, investors and the government is a promise that all of us here will work together to enforce decent work, and what is decent work, according to the drawn-up policies of the International Labor Organization. The Philippines must follow the policies of the International Labor Organization or our Secretary of Labor Pat Sto. Tomas will be accountable to the president of the International Labor Organization, none other than Pat Sto. Tomas, the president of the ILO. So we can understand why Pat Sto. Tomas pushed for this ILO tripartite declaration. This document given to me earlier outlines what we want to achieve in the short term, this is what we call the content of our employment strategy. This strategy includes five principles. First, the creation of employment because according to Atty. Mendoza the most important thing of all is to create jobs. Second, the promotion of labor standards. Third, social protection, fourth social dialogue, fifth tripartism. The challenge for all of us is to make this declaration work.

Regarding the first part of the employment strategy, the creation of employment. Let us thank God that in the past year, our economy has created more than a million and a half jobs despite the many disturbances in our world. Therefore, our unemployment rate has decreased from 11.3% when I first took office to 10.3% now after a year in office. But 10.3% is still high because according to Ka Quinto(?) that means 10.3% is still millions. So we must unite to create a lot more jobs. And we must have job creation through investments and also through employment facilitation. To do this employment facilitation, the goal will expand the computerized linkaging of the labor market information networks to include more employers and workers organizations, as well as government units.

Regarding the second policy, of our agreement on strategy, the promotion of labor standards. We have already had new rules on sub-contracting to provide greater job security and in response to the issue of contractualization. So I want to clarify again to everyone, labor-only sub-contracting is illegal.

We are also fully implementing the policy of wage simplification as you fought for in the process of increasing the minimum wage, a single wage order was set for you by our Regional Wage and Productivity Boards last year since I became president, which you signed a petition to increase wages. Last year, when I spoke at my SONA, I said I hoped Congress or the Wage Board would decide on a proper wage. That is still my belief today. My father, Diosdado Macapagal, when he was a congressman, he set the first minimum wage law in history. When he became president, he also signed the second minimum wage law in our history. So I also believe that Congress has the power and wisdom to find out what the proper minimum wage is in our society. And I adhere to the principles in the labor position paper that was given to me earlier. I affirm the principle and the democratic nature of the right to self organization. So you are given our respect to the unions this day.

The third element of our ILO based Employment strategies is Social Protection. This is also the content of the agreement and the declaration given to me earlier. The government has offered P27 M to the state insurance fund to lend to displaced workers. About 2,000 workers have already benefited from this loan. There is also a separate socio-economic assistance amounting to another P27 M to about 5,000 sugar workers and their families. And earlier Zoila Dela Cruz received a P12 million check for struggling workers in the sugar sector. DOLE and my Social Fund have also allocated P22 M for a demonstration called the Poverty Free Zone Project in each region and to help small communities become progressive and have self-sufficiency. I also ask for the help of the Philippine Ports Authority or PPA of DOTC and DOLE to address the needs of our port workers.

When I assumed the presidency, I recognized the situation of the informal sector. Therefore, the government also launched a Social Protection Program for Workers in the Informal Sector the day before yesterday. This program aims to include workers in the informal sector under the Social Security System.

And we continue to recognize the great contribution of overseas Filipino workers to our economy. Therefore, the DOH, DSWD, and DOLE will send doctors and social workers to various overseas posts starting this June. And we have P25 M to be allocated for this to take care of our OFWs especially in providing medical and counselling services in the countries where they work.

Regarding the fourth part of our employment strategy, social dialogue. This means that the relationship between workers and investors should not be adversarial. In my State-of-the-Nation address I said “to reduce excessive friction in labor and management relations, we will go the extra mile to work for industrial peace” perhaps our labor and employment sector listened to us because their relationship became more peaceful last year. Last year, there were 43 strikes compared to 60 in 2000, so industrial peace has expanded. Included in the fifth part of our employment strategy is tripartism which means we must continuously facilitate a regulatory functions in government. For instance, all proceedings arising from the disposition of labor cases and processing of documents are administrative rather than judicial proceedings that is why as part of the centennial observance of the Philippine labor movement Secretary Sto. Tomas will consult with all sectors concerned to conduct a comprehensive review of the structure and procedures of all the agencies administering labor justice are undertaking registration functions. In other words, the red tape in DOLE will be reduced, the number of signatures required for various DOLE, POEA, OWWA, National Labor Relations Commission services will be divided for you workers.

And in my State of the Nation Address last year, I also asked Congress to pave the way for our OFWs long-dreamed of, the right to vote. Our administration strongly proposes a law on absentee voting to give our OFWs a voice in the elections. I also support the proposed law that aims to grant dual citizenship to our overseas Filipinos.

Our announced National Provident Fund or SSS Flexifund for our OFWs will also begin. This will take the form of a Social Security scheme that will encourage savings and investments as well as entitle them to benefits such as multi-purpose loans and insurance coverage. And if they hold this up to retirement age the provident fund can finance the member’s old age needs in the form of monthly pensions or lump sum payments.

For our workers here in the Philippines, I know that the price of basic commodities is important to be affordable for workers. Therefore, NFA will add more rolling stores circulating in various areas to bring affordable goods closer to you, such as rice at P14 and half the price of medicine. Even now, more than 1,000 NFA stores are circulating, we will still add more to serve the Filipino worker. I also welcome the initiative of the Bukluran ng Manggagawang Pilipino, Employes Confederation of the Philippines and Metro Manila Development Authority who signed a Memorandum of Agreement today for the establishment of stores for basic necessities at affordable prices and the designation of MMDA rolling stores to medium-sized enterprises where workers can buy what they need at low prices. And at the same time the essential drugs and medicines, specifically frequently used by the poor are now available to you at 50% of last year’s price at government hospitals and at NFA rolling stores. Now, 73 hospitals have it. By September, half-priced medicines will reach 600 hospitals, covered by local governments and 800 pharmacies in barangays across the country for the sake of the poor Filipino worker.

More than three million have already been covered by the Indigent Program of our National Health Insurance which will pay for the hospital bills of poor beneficiaries. And for the housing of workers, I am tasking HUDCC to make available to the homeless workers the foreclosed properties of government financial institutions like Pag-IBIG, NHA, NHFMC, SSS and other agencies on a rent to own basis. So, you will pay this in 25 years. And for this year, I want 20,000 units to be made available to our workers. This is where P10 billion for workers housing.

We must also provide assistance to displaced workers. The DOLE will aggressively implement the Quick Response Team Operation Balik Trabaho to provide an immediate and integrated package of assistance to displaced workers including their dependents, including the delivery of employment services such as profiling, job matching, referrals, guidance, skills retraining, livelihood and entrepreneurship development. And it will also give assistance to workers in obtaining their separation benefits and in making informed choices on reemployment options that should be pursued. Because I have learned that workers have difficulty in getting their separation benefits.

We must also set up our safety nets for sectors affected by globalization. I will just leave to the new Presidential Adviser of Safety Nets, incoming Secretary Boy Herrera.

I spoke about the price of medicine, hospitalization, transportation, basic goods…

That regarding electricity. Let’s talk about electricity, I have instructed Secretary Vince Perez to study the Purchase Power Adjustment or PPA. And I am also urging, because I cannot tell them what to do, they are independent, I am urging the Energy Regulatory Commission, to carefully examine and expedite the review of the month PPA filings and to listen closely to the voice of the people.

It is time to audit the PPAs filed by the electric companies. On this matter, there is a proposal by the DoE that PPA charges can also be, in addition to the audit and the review, significantly reproduced through financial reengineering.

The proposal, if implemented can bring the cost of NAPOCOR power by as much as 85 centavos per kw hour. But for this, we need legislation. So, I told Vince, work with Congressmen and Senators, let’s pass a bill that would give power to bring down the PPA through re-financing and I hope that in the near future, can be included in our priority legislation in Congress.

It has been more than a year since I became President and I am grateful for the great support of the legitimate and responsible labor movement to our administration. It is pleasing to think that our celebration of 100 years of the labor movement is very appropriate. It is fitting that we rekindle the fire lit by our first labor leaders. Let us push again, with progressive thinking and action, our factories so that we can begin another meaningful chapter in the history of our country. There is only one superstar of our country and that is the great Filipino worker.

Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Labor Day Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225857/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8317&Itemid=38