Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the National Multi-Stakeholder’s Dialogue on Disaster Risk Reduction

[Delivered at the New World Renaissance Hotel, Makati City, July 25, 2007]

Thank you for being here today, and thank you Bert for this initiative of getting all the stakeholders together.

Indeed, disaster mitigation should be everyone’s business, and I’m glad that you are all here. All of us have a stake in saving lives and keeping private and public property away from harm’s way. And although everybody has that obligation, there are some who suffer more than others when there is a disaster especially the poor.

And yet, many of the risks that communities undergo and individuals undergo can really be prevented, if we all get together and decide and plan on how we will do disaster mitigation.

I remember that sometime ago, I gave Glenn Rabonza that assignment. Let’s not just talk about reacting to disasters, let’s have a masterplan for disaster mitigation. Of course, when we look at the world around us, we thank God that we were spared from the great crisis that have been happening around us. For instance, the tsunami. Thank God! We were spared from that great tsunami; and then the mega-earthquakes. Thank God! We have been spared from the mega-earthquakes; and our own preparedness, we were also spared from a SARS outbreak; and again thank God, in our preparedness we were spared from the avian flu and have been spared so far.

In other words, we have shown that there are things we can do, as in the case of SARS, we were able to contain it; and in the case of the avian flu, we have been able to prevent it altogether. There is something we can do, especially when we consider our own country, our own disasters. Although we have been spared from the great tsunami, the SARS, the avian flu, we have our typhoons, our floods, our landslides, our mudslides, our volcano eruptions and our man-made disasters. And if we were able to do something about SARS, then we will be able to do something about preventing avian flu so far, then there’s something that we can do also about these disasters.

For one thing, it is important that our people remains strong in coping with and overcoming disasters. And it is really up to many of the agencies – national and local – to help them cope. Then it is important that the agencies of the government pool resources and manpower and team up with local government units and the private sector, to lift the beleaguered communities back to their feet and restore normalcy at the soonest possible time after a disaster strikes.

The NDCC is a council, it is not an implementing agency. Why? Because according to the local government code, disaster response is devolved. There is the Barangay Disaster Coordinating Council, there is the Municipal Disaster Coordinating Council, there is a Provincial Disaster Coordinating Council and then it is in the Regional Disaster Coordinating Council where the national government comes in. In other words, under the principle of subsidiarity, the response must come from the community itself in the beginning. And when it becomes a bigger disaster, then what the community can afford to cope with, that is when the higher level of authority comes in.

Nonetheless, government of any level must always be at the forefront of compassion and social action in times of dire need. We are fortunate that our national character is such that when something bad happens to someone, we pour our hearts and contributions to the victims and their families, and the whole nation prays for those who die, and the nation prays for the speedy recovery of those who are injured in the devastated communities. And that is one good thing about our society.

In fact, one good thing about our society is that we are a very expanded social security system in itself. In other societies, when the old people grow old, they put them away in a home. In our society, when people grow old, someone a child or one grandchild takes in the person. That is what happens too when there is a disaster. Somebody will always come. Now the question is whether they will come in and spontaneous and if it’s big, becomes half hazard way, or whether they will come with a lot of feeling but also a lot of organization and efficiency.

Lessons from previous disasters should guide us in further improving our strategies and work plans. We remember recent disasters — the M/T Solar 1 oil spill — and everybody came to help. Congress gave almost 900 million pesos and now Guimaras is back on its feet.

Of long ago, relatively long ago, the Payatas tragedy. And then very recently, the M/V Blue Water Princess sinking. These underscore the fragile nature of our environment, even if these are not mega-disasters such as what our neighbors have experienced especially in the Indian Ocean. But they also show, and we must as a people seek to do more to preserve our precious natural resources because at the end of the day, many of these great calamities are coming because of climate change. So if we are going to talk about disaster mitigation, we have to talk about addressing climate change. A year ago, we revealed a comprehensive blueprint called “Berdeng Pilipinas” or “Green Philippines” initiative. That is our entire environmental program.

We as a nation must move aggressively not only towards a Green Philippines, but remember that Green Philippines includes energy independence and protecting our land, air and sea. This is ambitious but it is achievable. Planting trees is certainly achievable. Your new boss, Secretary Reyes, has started planting trees. I’m looking for a way to justify the tree planting should transfer to the Department of Energy as well.

For environmental protection, we have to take care because the environmental protection is very, very much related to how big or how small the disaster will be when it strike. And this is very consistent with our values as a nation.

A good response necessitates coordinated information management and contingency planning. One thing that I have seen in our disaster response is that right away — we have now because we have invested in our technology. And Nina has taken care to choose very, very good leaders of our scientific agencies related to the weather and to volcanic disturbances, we have had a good system of information. And we’ve been able to also send out these information very quickly to the local governments. So let us put these altogether in a comprehensive framework on disaster risk reduction, that will bring together the necessary institutions and players to bear upon the task. And I understand that is the subject matter of today’s meeting. Right, Glenn?

And this framework must include international — that’s why Nileema is here — regional and national cooperation and coordination. Because not all disasters are national. As we have seen, the disasters really are beyond boundaries. And even if a disaster is national, sometimes in the same way that it’s too much for a barangay to cope with, sometimes it becomes too much for a country to cope with. Just to give an extreme example, the 100,000 people who died in Aceh during that great tsunami. So I’m very grateful that in our own disasters where for instance we lost a thousand people in Southern Leyte, although compared to the hundred thousand people that Aceh lost just a few weeks later, still in our disaster big for us but relatively small when you compare to the events of that month. I’m grateful for the swift international assistance extended by the United Nations and other governments to augment our resources during times of disaster.

And just last year, we had those series of typhoons that hit Bicol. Again, I thank Congress for the ten billion-peso Calamity Fund that they provided of which we have already released seven billion pesos, the largest one-time release for calamity in our history.

But, because a lot of funds are coming — national government, local government, international assistance, non-NGOs — each agency of our government must be accountable in specific terms, even as we drive community participation to mitigate, endure and survive disasters.

In terms of mitigation, the DENR has a very big role to play, because it must fast-track its work in providing useful maps and geo-hazard information. Already, we have geo-hazard information for 700 municipalities and cities, but we have almost 2,000, 1,500 plus municipalities and cities. In other words, we’re about almost half of the work done. So we have to find a way to fast-track that work. Of course, the DENR was quite practical about it, they started with the eastern seaboard because most of the disasters come from the pacific ocean.

And then the schools, we have to build schools that will withstand earthquakes. We have to build schools that double up as evacuation centers. Gina, as our consultant, has a very nice idea of having this collapsible modules that can be set up anywhere that there is a disaster. That is something that the NDCC should be thinking of. And so earthquake-resistant schools, other infrastructures, and then we have to keep people away from landslide-prone areas. We have to take land-use planning seriously.

I remember that at the time when we had a disaster in Quezon, there was also a disaster around that time in Taiwan. And some of the agencies – foreign donors – were impatient that what they donated in Taiwan, they already saw houses being put out; what they donated in the Philippines was taking forever. Actually, part of the problem was maybe lack of organization, but also part of the problem was that that area is so geo-hazardous that we could hardly find any place near the original homes where the new homes could be built. So these are all the things that we have to do and start to systematize and all national and local governments must incorporate.

And therefore, every year, we must incorporate in all our budget at every level the annual budget we must have substantial funding allocations to support the thrust of the NDCC.

Of course, every local government has a five percent disaster fund. And sometimes… Of course, there are times when the disaster is obviously big, so we come in right away But sometimes there’s a disaster that, well, we don t know how big it is. And when the local government comes and ask for support from the NDCC, what Glenn should say is, first, have you spent your five percent? And if it’s beyond their five percent, then we have to come in. So, I enjoin everyone to continue supporting us in this collective effort to keep our communities, our homes and our families safe and sound.

To all of you, thank you for having a stake in disaster mitigation.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].