Investing on the people & infrastructure

Reform will only be achieved when we invest in our people and infrastructure. That investment in our people includes helping to make it easier for training schools to train our security guards. That is part of our investment in the people. And alongside that, we will strengthen investment in our country and citizenry to:

Number one. Improve infrastructure to attract businesses to grow and employ more, because more jobs means less poverty. For example, the roads we are fixing, the North Expressway leading to Central Luzon, construction is ongoing and many businesses are being established in Clark. Texas Instruments will put in one billion dollars there, but Hanjin came first. They have already started their one billion dollars, about 300 million dollars of their one billion dollars is already in Subic. I remember when I went to Hanjin in Subic, well, they have already employed about ten thousand welders. And that's not finished yet because their one billion dollar investment is not yet complete. I asked the welders, “what was your livelihood before?” They were previously marginal fishermen. They barely caught enough fish for their own food, with only a little to sell outside. And as welders, they have a large job and a large salary. More jobs means less poverty.

Our second program for the next three years is to improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and food-for-school programs. I don’t know if the security guards have Philhealth. Because it varies… doesn’t it vary in employment arrangements? There’s salaried employment. With salaried employment there’s… that includes SSS, health insurance is included there. There are also others, it’s contractual. So if it’s that, they don’t necessarily have SSS. That’s what we aspire to, especially for the poor security guards. And I know many poor security guards in areas where there are many poor people. When I ask, what is your spouse’s livelihood, for example, many of them say security guard. Those poor security guards who are usually just extra income, we also want to give them Philhealth or health insurance if they are not covered by SSS.

And some of our security guards also have children studying in public school. And I don’t know if they have been informed that now in our public schools throughout NCR we are providing food-for-school. The children, one law per family receives one kilogram of rice each day they attend so that poor families can eat.

Our third program. Enhance support for education as a weapon against poverty through better buildings, new books and teaching materials, and livelihood courses like what our young security guard said, the ladderized training for security guards that can lead to a Bachelor of Science in Criminology degree.

Our fourth program. Cutting red tape and continuing to reduce production in the system.

And of course, we will continue to fight terrorism and strive for peace and prosperity in Mindanao. And in this fight against terrorism, you have a big role to play in defending the centers of our economy from crime and terrorism.

In our Human Security Act – this is our new anti-terrorism law which is not yet in effect now because it will be effective after the elections – here you have a strong shield, you private security guards and you police, you have a shield not only for the people but also for the economy, against the forces of evil.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library