Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Romulo, our Secretary of Foreign Affairs who, the last time I was here in 2003, was our Executive Secretary then. Whenever I traveled, he was always left behind. So he said he was a domestic helper then. But when he became Secretary of Foreign Affairs after the 2004 elections, he was always with me on trips, so he said he was an OFW too.

I also want to greet Ambassador Berenguel whom I have seen many times in different assignments. And thank you, and although the Philippine community here is small as he said, it is larger than his previous assignment there in Eastern Europe. And I will introduce the members of my congressional delegation. You saw that we are an all-women group. Because after the APEC, the next international summit will be in Cebu, in Mandaue City, the East Asian Summit. And the host congresswoman of the East Asian Summit in Mandaue City is Congresswoman Neri Soon-Ruiz. It’s good she’s here so she can see what else Hanoi has done that Mandaue City can also do.

Then next to her on the end, is the congresswoman from Bulacan. You know, in Bulacan during the last term, there were two congressmen named Willy, so they called them ka-Willy-Willy. Then when they said about Lorna Silverio, it was said to be desirable. Congresswoman Lorna Silverio.

From Mindoro Occidental, is Congresswoman Girlie Villarosa. And my Cabalen, congresswoman from Pampanga, is Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc-Sagun. We are all women politicians but our Cabinet members are men: Secretary Bert Romulo; our Trade Secretary, Peter Favila; and our Press Secretary, Toting Bunye.

We also have with us because she leads the APEC Anti-Terrorism Task Force, so haven’t you noticed there haven’t been any terrorism attacks in the Pacific region in recent years? We have bragging rights because of the good work of General Benjie Defensor.

To our compatriots here, thank you for waiting, my plane was delayed. Good evening to all of you and here we are again because we were together in 2003, there were fewer of you. Because back then, the Spanish Ambassador to Vietnam was part of the Philippine community here, because his wife was Filipino, he was here then. After a few months, he became ambassador to the Philippines, Ambassador Sagaz. He sends his regards to all of you.

And as Ambassador Berenguel said, you all know why we are here now, the APEC summit which will be held tomorrow until Sunday. And 21 countries… Ah, 21 economies, economies not necessarily countries because there is Hong Kong included there, Taipei is also included there. So economies is what they are called. This is a very large group, composed of economies surrounding the Pacific Ocean, what is called the Pacific rim. So there are our neighboring countries in Southeast Asia: Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam, and of course our strong relationship here within ASEAN. There are also our economic partners in North Asia: China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, Korea. Also in Oceania: Australia, New Zealand. Likewise in Europe which is also part of Asia, Russia. Most of them are dialogue partners of ASEAN or are with us in the East Asia Summit. They are the ones who will go, visit Neri Soon-Ruiz in about… Two weeks, three weeks from now. In the Western Pacific there is Papua New Guinea, a fellow archipelago.

On the other side of the Pacific, there is North America, composed of the United States and Canada, two of our strongest trade and development partners. We are also with APEC the three economies in Central and South America: Mexico, Chile and Peru, with whom we share a lot historically and culturally because we were all former colonies of Spain. So it is very important for the Philippines to be part of APEC.

I hope this meeting was scheduled after the summit so I can tell you what was discussed. It is only convenient for both of us – you and I – however, it is important that we have the opportunity to meet again and catch up.

As Ambassador said and as I learned when we last met, the Filipino community here in Vietnam is small, especially if we compare it to other places like Singapore which I will be visiting after this, or like Hong Kong, Ambassador’s assignment before he went to Eastern Europe. But I saw that the last time, I see it again now, your influence and impact on your host country far outweighs your number. So congratulations to all of you!

How many of you are there? About a thousand here in Vietnam. But most of you, as Ambassador said, and as I saw the last time, are professionals or skilled workers, including accountants, engineers, teachers, managers. Your situation here is very good and the Vietnamese have a very high regard for you. In other words, your contribution is not just national, but regional and even global.

Thank you for your help to the Philippines. Not only the remittances you send but also some of you helped our compatriots affected by the landslide in Leyte last March. And thank you also for the dollars given by Mr. Galang and Mr. Danganan earlier which will benefit our Filipino students through classrooms that we can build using this money. Thank you very much.

I have already given the 5,500 dollars in cash to Secretary Romulo, because it’s thick. I said Bert, if you can give it to Secretary Jesli Lapus so he can build the schools.

Thank you for watching, you are able to watch NBN-4. So you are not too homesick. And I want to add that news, we were really having a hard time before because there were not enough classrooms. But now because our peso is strong and because of our economic reform, the interest we pay to other countries has decreased, we saved 22 billion pesos next year in interest payment. And from that savings, 16 billion pesos will be put into additional budget for our classrooms.

Twenty two that is. Sixteen will be put into additional funds for education, we will also increase health by five billion, and we will increase social welfare by one billion so that’s where our 22 billion pesos in interest savings will go.

We shouldn't be left behind by our neighboring countries. I’m very proud to say that in our administration, the average growth rate in the six years… No, five years of my administration is the highest average growth rate of any administration since my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal. And our per capita income now is 1,400 dollars, so we are now a middle-income economy.

Even… Nevertheless, even though our per capita income is higher than Vietnam’s — you are here, you are witnesses — Vietnam is rising quickly. It has only been more than three decades since the Vietnam War ended, which also lasted almost three decades. But in such a short time, they managed to rebuild their country.

And what is the reason? Many analysts say this is proof of the discipline of the Vietnamese. They are said to be the next China. What is China’s secret? It’s the same thing, their discipline. Perhaps, on this occasion, we Filipinos should try to learn from the example of the Vietnamese and Chinese in their discipline in order to achieve the development of our country.

With Vietnam’s rapid development, we can also see many opportunities to further accelerate development in the Philippines towards the stable or strong republic that we aspire to. There are many big opportunities for the Philippines with Vietnam’s rapid economic growth, and you know this. I’m sure as Filipinos, you are proud to find such familiar names as San Miguel, Jollibee, Robina and Oishi here in Vietnam. And we really see the world getting smaller and smaller.

Here we are in Hanoi carrying the banner of Philippine excellence and our growing prestige in the world. This year, the Philippines is leading or chairing the ASEAN, so the ASEAN summit will be held. And because we are the chairman of ASEAN, we are vigorously pushing for closer cooperation in economics and security in the larger region of Asia Pacific. This is a larger region than ASEAN, this APEC. Seven ASEAN countries are part of APEC and there are also big countries like America, South America, Central America, which are not part of ASEAN but are part of APEC. The East Asia Summit also includes India but is not in APEC, and we have three ASEAN countries that, as I said, are not included in APEC. But there is a large overlap between the two groups. And because of the overlap of the two groups, the leaders of these economies often meet.

Tomorrow, our discussion with President Bush will focus on the long-standing commitment of the Philippines and America to fight terrorism and poverty in line with APEC’s larger agenda of human security and economic cooperation. And as I said, the Philippines is the Chairman or Head of the Anti-Terrorism Task Force of APEC.

Our goal is to be a thorough member of the emerging regional synergy in economics and security due to our strategic location in the Pacific and the presence of millions of Filipinos abroad, including you, whose presence is felt in the building and bridging of countries in the Pacific. Growing political and economic stability is shaping a strong wind to push the Philippines forward in the world.

Last November, Secretary Romulo was here in Vietnam for a meeting of our joint commission for bilateral cooperation, on how to make our two countries closer. It’s only a sea that separates us, the South China Sea.

One of the landmark agreements in that meeting was that we would strive to raise our total two-way trade to two billion dollars by 2007 from a little more than one billion dollars by 2005. Well, we are already buying from them, the rice. We import a lot of rice from Vietnam. Now, what will we sell to them? I hope you, our overseas Filipinos, can help us sell our products here. Because many of you are businessmen, managers, accountants. You can add to your work, also become traders, bring Philippine products here to Vietnam. After all, trade between Vietnam and the Philippines is nothing new.

Even three or four centuries ago, Philippine merchant ships docked in the old port town of Hoi An, to bring home high-grade silk, porcelain, mother-of-pearl and other precious cargo, some of which were then brought to the new world through the Manila-Acapulco galleon trade. So during that time, Vietnamese goods going to America passed through the Philippines. We were the hub, and until now, we still want to be a hub in trade between the American continent and the Asian mainland continent.

Another pillar of our relationship with Vietnam is maritime issues. A good example of our cooperation in this area is what is called the Joint Marine Seismic Undertaking, which also includes China. This was a few years ago, when I went here in 2003, just after Oilipinas and China made this agreement. What is this agreement? At first, it was an agreement between the Philippine National Oil Company and the China National Offshore Oil Company. And later on, the PetroVietnam joined to cooperate on data gathering and analysis in the South China Sea to assess the potential for petroleum development in the South China Sea.

At first, it was just China and the Philippines. And when… You remember I went, I made a state visit here to Vietnam. When I went here to Vietnam, Vietnam objected as to why China and the Philippines agreed to explore the South China Sea when they also had a claim. So we tasked the predecessor of Ambassador Berenguel, you remember Ambassador Vic Lecaros, to convince Vietnam to join this agreement as well. So three countries made the agreement, we researched the South China Sea together. Now, that research is finished. It is being analyzed in laboratories or on their computers. And Secretary Romulo said that now that the research is finished and the desk work is being done, we should move on to the next step of our cooperation. And that is… Imagine if we find oil. Actually, we have already found oil off Palawan, in Malampaya. The Malampaya Company, not Malampaya, Palawan. The name of the project is Malampaya. We have already found oil there, but we can find more oil, our economy will improve. And I hope, I really long for that day.

I long for the day when going abroad for a job like what you do is an option and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino worker. And our economic plans are designed to allow the Philippines to break out of the cycle of having our Filipinos go abroad because they have to, because there are not enough jobs in the Philippines. That’s why we remain so stubbornly focused on the economy, and why we want our super regions to work.

Now, what are these super regions? Well, we need to spread the wealth in the Philippines and keep the people working at home. So we’re creating appealing employment opportunities by focusing on the development of priority sectors such as agri-business in North Luzon. So that’s one super- region made up of Regions I, II, CAR and part of Region III. And then industry services and logistics in the urban beltway from Clark-Subic in the north through Metro Manila to Batangas port. So that’s another super region made up of parts of Region III, parts of Region IV… No, Region IV, part of Region IV-A including the province of Congresswoman Villarosa and Metro Manila. And then tourism in Central Philippines, because more than half of the foreign tourists go to Central Philippines, made up of the Visayas, Palawan, Bicol and some islands of Region IV-B. So that’s one super region as well. And then agri-business in Mindanao. And in another… In telecommunications technology and education for business process outsourcing in the cyber corridor which cuts along the length of the other super regions from Baguio through Metro Manila, to Cebu and to Davao.

So, this is what we are doing so that our infrastructure investments are not wasted. And as a result of what we are doing, as well as the tax reform, I hope you have heard, in the media or from your families and relatives in the Philippines about… Regarding the growth of our economy, the increase of the peso. About a year ago, our peso was 55 to 1. Now it is 50 to 1. Likewise, our credit outlook, a year ago, was negative. Now, it is stable. The decrease in our budget deficit, about two years ago, it was 200 billion pesos. This year, it’s 100 billion pesos. I was aiming to have a balanced budget by 2010. But the way we’re going, our economic managers, Peter Favila, are insisting it will be 2008.

And of course, the result of all of this, or the result or the reason, but all those factors interact, is the growth of our foreign currency reserves. And of course, where do our foreign currency reserves come from? Sure, there are exports. Sure, there are investments. But the Philippines has a secret, not a secret because the whole world knows it—our overseas Filipinos.

So your contribution to our country is huge, very big. You contribute to the growth of Vietnam, but you also contribute to the growth of the Philippines. And I hope your support for our beloved country continues so that, as I said, it will just be a choice and not a necessity to work in another country like Vietnam.

To all of you, I’m so happy to see all of you. Hope to see you again soon whether here or in the Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Filipino Community in Vietnam. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203429/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3034&Itemid=38