HEALTHY START FOR OUR CHILDREN

Every child needs a “healthy start” or a healthy start to the day and a healthy start to life. That’s why I told Lina Laygo, let’s name our program Malusog na Simula — a healthy start. This “Healthy Start” child nutrition program aims to fill our children with hope as well as a healthy breakfast— coco pan and milk.

We must nourish the hearts and minds of our children through the grace of education. But before that happens, they need full stomachs first. Children, are you hungry? Okay, I’ll speed up my speech so you can have some pan de coco.

Our children should start every day happy, healthy and full of hope. All they should look forward to is knowledge and not the basic need for food on the table for breakfast.

Providing nutritious breakfast to children, who would otherwise go hungry, is the most important thing our country can do. It is good manners, a social necessity and economic well-being.

I made difficult decisions to heal broken bones so that our poorest children would not go hungry. With the money we earn, we can help raise our children with proper and nutritious food. But before we do that, we need to find the money to earn. That is phase 1 of our economic reform.

Because before we created these new taxes, what about the budget of our country? Tax collections, 700 billion. That 700 billion — 300 billion goes to debt service, paying off debt and interest; 250 billion goes to the salaries of teachers and employees; 150 billion goes to the IRA of local governments. That’s 700 billion already. That’s our taxes. Where will we get the money for the feeding program? That’s why we need to raise taxes.

Thank you to Congress for giving us a new 100 billion pesos in taxes so that phase 1 of our program has been formed and we can start phase 2. Including what we are doing now.

The second part of my economic plan is to deliver the benefits of a strong and stable economy to the people and there is nothing more important than investing in the health of our children through this breakfast program.

Our children are our future. We need to do everything and within our power that we all have the power as a society, as a government, as individual citizens to take care of our future.

We have gathered today to protect and care for our most valuable asset — our children. Our government, our civil society and our private sector have united on the most important issue of our time, how to rise out of poverty.

Today, we have created a small step to end hunger and give our children a healthy start. We will do this in the poorest areas of NCR, that’s where we will start. And this Camarin has been identified in surveys as one of the poorest and one of the places where many are hungry. So we started this program here.

In my travels around our country, I spoke to mothers — mothers like you, right? — and fathers whose only wish is to give their children the opportunities they never had, right? Our “Healthy Start” program is a small step towards fulfilling those dreams.

Our goal is to build a Philippines that starts with ensuring that our children are given a healthy start. As elders to them — us, us, us – we have a responsibility to the children of the whole Philippines to ensure that their basic food needs are met so that they can contribute properly to the stability of our country.

So this day, thank you to all the agencies under the coordination of the Council for the Welfare of Children — DepEd, DOH, DA, local government. Thank you all because what we are doing is for the future of our country. So to all of you, thank you. Children, you can now eat your bread and milk.

Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library