LAUNCHING THE NATIONAL YEAR FOR THE PREVENTION OF CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT

Katrina said that it's a good sign that our dove is listening here because it means our year of preventing child abuse will be successful. As said here in this sign, I proclaimed October 2006 to October 2007 as the year of preventing child abuse to express our unwavering determination to stop abuse and neglect of our children. And now I learned that we are the first country to make this proclamation.

It's time to take concrete actions nationwide — to prevent threats to the health and well-being of our children. And we already have the weapons to do it. Because we mentioned the various partners we have in defending the rights of children. And we also have enough laws. In the past, we personally pushed for laws against trafficking of women and children, laws against violence against women and children, and protection for working children.

We already have laws, we already have various partners, so this year, according to our dove, should really be successful.

Child protection — because everyone here helps prevent abuse or care for those who have been abused — but child protection goes beyond preventing acts of violence and abuse and providing assistance to victims. Fighting poverty itself is protection for our children.

Providing relief to the common citizen is protection for the family and thus for the well-being of children.

Speaking of family relief, there is good news coming, because Christmas is coming. For motorists and families passing through the North Luzon Expressway during the Christmas vacation, as a gift, the North Luzon Expressway will give a special ten percent discount on toll fees to all motorists using NLEX from December 20th to the end of this period. This is to allow our countrymen to be with their loved ones during the holidays. This is a preview of the toll rate reduction that we have already announced will take place in January next year.

Why did we announce this? Because I want to give an example of how our economic reforms reach the benefit of ordinary families. Our tax reform, the level of confidence that went to our country, both government and private companies, the payments for debts have been reduced because the peso has strengthened and interest rates have fallen. That's why the North Luzon Expressway, its savings due to lower debt servicing, a strong peso and low interest rates, are now being passed on to our motorists.

The same is true for our country. Through our reforms in the national treasury that gave great confidence to our country, interest rates we pay have fallen, the peso has strengthened, so next year our interest savings will be 22 billion dollars. And where will that 22 billion dollars go? Twenty two billion pesos, I mean. Twenty two billion pesos. And where will that 22 billion pesos go? Sixteen billion pesos to increase spending on education, five billion pesos to increase spending on health, and one billion pesos to increase spending on social welfare — all in all 22 billion pesos.

That five billion pesos we will spend on our health, our goal is to reach more than eighty-five percent of the poor with health insurance. And we all know that if a family is covered by health insurance, all members of the family are included, children and even the mother's childbirth.

And where will the 16 billion pesos we will spend on education go? We are about to complete or fill the missing classrooms, because we want to eliminate classrooms with a student-to-classroom ratio of more than 100 to one. Because if it's less than 100 to one in elementary school and there are two shifts, our schools will be spacious. And we can achieve that with our 16 billion pesos.

In addition, more high schools will be connected to the internet and more scholarships will be provided to poor students, especially our teenagers so they can study in what we call a ladderized system of education where they start in a technical school and can use the credits here for college education.

And those social work. One thousand… Oh, one billion is being added to our social welfare. And we expect that through this, Alice Bala's social workers will reach more victims of domestic and other forms of violence and poor families in need of moral and livelihood support. Livelihood because it includes ─ right, Alice? — your CIDSS and your microfinance.

We have expanded these services and have been noticed by the United Nations Development Program for our efforts to achieve the millennium development goals.

This year we are proclaiming against child abuse and neglect, that's a logical extension because we are really internalizing the millennium development goals. And according to Jeffrey Sachs, the anti-poverty guru and Nileema Noble, the UNDP here, they have hardly seen any other country that has internalized the millennium development goals to such an extent.

But we cannot yet rest, as according to the data, one in every four of our population still struggles to put food on their table. We want there to be food on every table because that is the way our children will grow up healthy. So we must all do this during the time of preventing abuse and neglect of children.

All our partners are represented here. And I ask all partners to put the anti-child abuse campaign squarely in the context of our larger war against poverty.

Let us vow, not with words but with deeds, to secure our nation’s future and therefore ensure the security of our children.

To all of you, partners, guests of honor, our children, congratulations! Let us make this time, this year against child abuse, even more meaningful.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2006 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].