Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Cyber Corridor Visayan Tour: Visit to John B. Lacson Foundation Maritime University RRLS Information and Communication Technology Academy

[Delivered at the John B. Lacson Foundation Maritime University, Molo, Iloilo City, Iloilo, February 3, 2010]

Thank you, thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you Secretary Chua for your introduction.

Thank you very much Chairperson Arcelo for your very very kind words of welcome; Dr. Sebastian. I’d like to thank the officials of the Philippine Government who are here with us today: City mayor of Iloilo, Mayor Jerry Treñas; Governor of the province of Iloilo, Niel Tupas; my Chief Presidential Legal Counsel, Raul Gonzalez; the head of TESDA who has helped provide all these scholarships, Buboy Syjuco; our new Press Secretary, Cris Icban; Secretary Ric Saludo, who is taking care of the Reconstruction Commission that includes the areas of typhoon “Frank”; and from the province of Negros Occidental, Congressman Ignacio Arroyo Jr.; other officials of this esteemed university. I’m happy to call it a university, the first and only private Maritime University in Southeast Asia. Congratulations for that!

But excellent as your Maritime education is, we’re actually here now to showcase your ICT education. I’m here as part of a tour of the Super Regions: Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Luzon Urban Beltway and the Cyber Corridor. These Super Regions were designed to spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila.

The Cyber Corridor was identified by the private sector, academe and government comprising the strongest actual and potential locations for ICT investments like call centers, back office, software development, medical transcription, engineering design, animation and game development. This Corridor includes Metro Manila and Metro Cebu, the two original ICT Centers of Excellence. And now in addition, 10 urban areas being promoted as the best new destinations for ICT: Metro Laguna, Metro Cavite, Davao, Bacolod, Metro Pampanga, Metro and Central Bulacan, Cagayan de Oro, Lipa and of course, the City of Iloilo.

And I dare say, that one of the factors why Iloilo has been identified as a great potential for BPO investments is your ICT Academy. I’d like to congratulate you for that! I understand that you offer courses in Contact Center Services, Medical Transcription, Computer Hardware Servicing, Programming, Spreadsheet Application and Photoshop. And I also understand that you will soon offer Visual Graphics Design and Technical Drafting courses. That’s why it was essential that I visit you in the course of the Cyber Corridor tour. Visits to schools are an essential backdrop of our Super Regions tour because I want to reach out to the youth of this nation. You are the future. The future of this nation depends on you, the next generation.

You’re very young and you were children in January 2001, so I’m sure you hardly remember what it was like. Certainly, the Philippines has come a long way since that time when you were still kids. But even your titas and your lolas, even for them, they probably have forgotten that at that time the nation was on the brink of political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made, few jobs were being created. The debt of the government and its corporations of 3.6 trillion pesos was bigger than our GDP of 3.3 trillion pesos. There were almost no foreign reserves.

It was a time of lower salaries and higher prices. Tax revenues were so low that we could hardly invest in expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I did not seek the Office of the President in 2001; it was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. As an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy and invest in human and physical infrastructure.

These would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver an unprecedented 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth, create 9 million new jobs, and add 53 million people to healthcare with government coffers that helped us withstand the global economic crisis.

In my first State of the Nation Address in 2001, I said that we would create wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills-intensive services such as ICT.

From scratch with only 2,000 workers in year 2000, we created what is today a global powerhouse: the BPO industry. We achieved this by promoting strategic investments in three areas:

First, digital infrastructure. We encouraged more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. Thus, the cost of international calls went down from 40 cents to 2 cents a minute for those using VOIP. And the number of internet users jumped from 2 million in year 2000 to more than 24 million today.

And so that no Taiwan tremor or tsunami can cut off our cyber services from their global clients, we encouraged PLDT and Globe to invest billions in having more than one international telecommunications gateway into the country from abroad.

The second area of investment was an appropriate policy and legal environment. We created the Commission on ICT headed here by Secretary Rey Chua. It was guided by the policy that the ICT sector should be guided by the market, with minimal government interference but rather with government support. For example, if the market calls for call centers, we should not force the investors to specialize in something else. Instead of regulating, we gave incentives to developers of IT parks, assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites like Iloilo and built more transport facilities to those sites. For instance, the Iloilo Airport and the access road from the airport to Iloilo.

This philosophy drove the fast growth of call centers. And now the market is leading to the growth of the higher value added segments of the offshoring and outsourcing industries, such as accounting, legal, medical, personnel and administrative services.

Third area of strategic investments, the development of human capital. More than 5,000 public schools now have computer laboratories. Almost 4,000 of them are connected to the internet. In technical education and skills training, Buboy Syjuco has invested three times as much as the combined budget of the three previous administrations, a very large portion of this investment goes to scholarships for the BPO industry. For example, as Dr. Lacson Arcelo said, your school has produced over 400 of our scholarships under the Finishing Course for call center agents. And I’m so proud the 250 have already been assured of jobs, that’s more than… that is about 60 percent hiring rate. You know that nationally the hiring rate is 6 percent, so your 60 percent hiring rate is 10 times more than the national average.

Our 400 young trainees form part of almost 3,000 graduates of Region VI’s BPO training programs. Thanks to the strategic investments, billions of investments have been poured into the country creating almost half a million jobs in BPO alone. Today, the Philippines with 90 million people has challenged India’s one billion population for BPO supremacy. Compared to 0.02 billion dollars in 2001, which is almost nothing, our BPO industry has earned more than 7 billion dollars in 2009. And that’s not far behind India’s 9 billion dollars for call centers even if their population is one billion and ours is 90 million.

The 500,000 jobs created in ICT are part of the legacy that I am happy to leave behind. And I am happy with what Dr. Lacson Arcelo said at the end of her remarks that: “your achievement is our achievement; your legacy is our legacy.” And I’m proud to say that that is a legacy of hard work, a strong and stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investments in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in physical infrastructure like roads and bridges, irrigation and RORO ports.

Much work remains to be done. But with your help, I am determined to turn over to a new government a New Philippines ready for the challenge of bringing the nation to the verge of first world in 20 years. And I believe that during that time the leaders of our nation whether it will be in politics, in civic life or in business and the professions will include among them our outstanding alumni from the John Lacson Foundation Maritime University and its related ICT Academy.

To you, Congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Cyber Corridor Visayan Tour: Visit to John B. Lacson Foundation Maritime University RRLS Information and Communication Technology Academy. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235043/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27439&Itemid=38