Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Congressman Oging Mercado for introducing me and thank you for your continued support of our laws in Congress, thank you.

To Governor Mian Mercado, formerly mayor here in Maasin City, thank you very much for your continued support, so I always win big here in Maasin City. To Vice Governor Maamo; to our bishop, Bishop Cantillas, not only Bishop of Maasin but also the head of the Episcopal Commission on our OFWs and bishop. And to our host, City Mayor Samaco and all the officials of Maasin City, thank you for your invitation to me. And to my colleagues in the national government, Secretary Jun Ebdane and Secretary Gabby Claudio, and National Youth Commission Chairman Richard Nalupta, and to all of you, brothers and sisters here in Maasin, Happy Anniversary on your Charter Day!

I am happy that I was finally able to visit here. In July, on Southern Leyte Day, my visit was already planned but was postponed. But it's good that we were able to visit now on Maasin's Charter Day and for the province, Governor Mian, you have an occasion, an opportunity to see the completed Agas-Agas Bridge, the flagship bridge of our province.

Perhaps as Congressman Mercado knows, you all know that investing in human and physical infrastructure is a central pillar of our economic plan. The difficult decisions we made to raise revenue and to regain control of our fiscal condition after many, many years of neglect of our revenues are paying off and I am happy that Southern Leyte is benefiting.

Even this covered court center, as reminded by Governor Mian, is our joint project and the Agas-Agas Bridge and many more of our nautical highway from San Ricardo all the way to Tacloban. Because I want to build up our provinces so that we can spread the benefits of the economy beyond Manila. And to that end, Southern Leyte and Maasin City have a big role in our decentralized development.

Southern Leyte and Maasin City, including Central Philippines, are our tourism center. And that alone makes Maasin, the capital of Southern Leyte, an important part of our Tourism Superregion master plan. Thank you even though our arrival was late, you’re still here. We were a little late because there at the Agas-Agas Bridge there was still a demonstration of bungee jumping, sky diving and lifeline trip because that’s really what we want to see and the whole Philippines our unique tourism attractions here in Southern Leyte. And even before these adventure sports on the Agas-Agas Bridge, your diving there in Limasawa is already known. So Southern Leyte is very important in our Tourism master plan.

You are also part of our Eastern Nautical Highway, formerly the highway, Director Matugas knows this because he is from Surigao, formerly from Lipata to Liloan, but now we have made it Surigao City to San Ricardo and we will improve the road to Tacloban then Biliran then Masbate all the way to Bicol, that is our Eastern Nautical Highway. And our plan is to continuously update, enhance these developments so that we can complete world-class infrastructure throughout the country that will raise our competitiveness as an investment, business and tourism destination.

Even now that we are inaugurating the Eastern Nautical Highway here in San Ricardo, Governor Mian Mercado has already been saying that there are European investors in the beach resorts, so what more now that the roads are beautiful, the Agas-Agas Bridge is beautiful, more investors will hopefully come here to Southern Leyte. Because our government is focused like a laser beam on our economic fundamentals since the day I became President and together with you, we will ensure that we have a good, solid and realistic budget that responds to the needs of our country.

So in the coming year, like what we did in recent years due to the additional resources generated by our fiscal reforms — and thank you to Oging for his great help in our fiscal reforms — we will continue to invest in important infrastructure projects and social services such as education, such as healthcare so that our people can benefit from our reforms. While we remain committed to fiscal reform and reducing our budget deficit to ensure that our country remains on the road or on the path of sustainable development for a long time.

So, we will balance our desire for fiscal prudence like a family that does not overspend and a balanced budget is what we will balance with our need to invest in people.

For this reason, we launched our National Youth Service Corps, to provide young people, from the age of 18 to the age of 24, with jobs and livelihood opportunities. These are the ages when they start thinking about their future. We want to ensure that they are given the opportunity to help communities for the progress of the country and an opportunity to improve themselves as well.

Therefore, we are on track with our proposed budget for the coming year. And as a matter of procedure, the President has 30 days after Congress convenes, our State of the Nation Address July 27. So, August 27 we will submit our budget to Congressman Oging Mercado and your colleagues in Congress.

And through the budget they will give me, we will continue to guide our economy, we will give everything we can do so that we do not sink into the global recession that is now happening all over the world. But during my visit here in Southern Leyte, it seems like Roger's fourth or fifth time, fourth or fifth time as President but as DTI, as senator, as Vice President countless times.

Because of course I am happy to visit you because I have felt your support always in my first candidacy for senator, in my… as vice president, in my senators in 2001, in my own candidacy in 2004, in my senators again in 2007, there has always been a big win here in Southern Leyte.

Therefore, if your support continues, and I know it will, we can do what is needed for the progress of the country and especially here in Southern Leyte and in Maasin City.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 9th Maasin City Charter Day Anniversary and inauguration of Maasin City Wet Public Market. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412100332/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25928&Itemid=38