Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the International Conference on Anti-Terrorism and Tourism Recovery

[Delivered at the Rizal Ballroom, Shangri-la Manila Hotel, Makati City, November 8, 2002]

Thank you, Secretary Gordon. And congratulations because in the month of October compared to October last year, tourism arrivals increased by 40 percent. Thank you, Dick. Congratulations.

Secretary Roy Golez who organized this meeting together with Secretary Gordon. And I’d like to also greet Dr. David de Villiers of the World Tourism Organization; Ambassador Taylor from the United States; Ambassador Shigeta from Japan; the Ambassadors who live here in the Philippines, I’d like to greet all of you; the foreign and local participants of the International Conference on Anti-terrorism and Tourism Recovery; other national and local government officials; conference lecturers and resource persons; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen:

I’m very happy to be here with you tonight. I thank you all for coming here at such short notice, considering that I asked Secretary Golez to invite you only as I departed for the APEC Summit in Los Cabos last October 24.

The fact that you all arrived in such short notice only emphasizes the urgency and importance of our undertaking.

We share the pain and suffering of the families of those who were killed or injured in the terrorist attacks. We must find strength in our actions and not seek refuge in fear.

Terrorism impacts directly on tourism. Given the impact of terrorism on tourism, our first challenge is to deal with it and make this a safe and secure world.

As a forum for facilitating the movement of people across borders, the world tourism organization indeed has a stake in making sure that we are able to have a safe place in this world today. We must work together as nations and therefore this is truly an important forum. The World Tourism Organization has the responsibility of moving people, goods, services, information, investments. And that’s why your organization faces the challenge of making sure that this world is safe at the same time you also still facilitate the movement of goods. It’s a twin job that’s very important — achieving the goal of making goods move and people move but also taking necessary steps to protect against terrorism. This requires a combination of the application of new technology and cross-border cooperation among government agencies.

We must work together as nations around the world to fight terrorism. We can’t sit back and wait — oh, Secretary Lina. I’d like to acknowledge the presence of Secretary Lina, in-charge of our police. He knows we must not just sit back and wait — we must take this fight to the terrorists before they undermine not only our tourism but our very way of living.

We understand the challenge terrorism poses for all countries that value peace and order. It confirms that we must continue to take a firm stand against terrorism and work diligently with the family of nations in the global campaign to end the scourge of terrorism once and for all. On my part, the moment I took office, I declared war on terrorism in the Philippines. That’s why when 9/11 happened I immediately declared my solidarity with the global coalition and joined the family of nations in the fight against terrorism.

After September last year, the pacific countries, the European countries, countries all over the world crafted an initial response encompassing financial monitoring, aviation security, energy security, customs enforcement.

Many things have happened since then. In short order, the terrorists who were behind the attacks in 9/11 were driven out of Afghanistan and the government who played willing host to them was sent packing. Here in our own country, we set to work to crush terrorism militarily and economically. We moved aggressively to challenge the Abu Sayyaf on their turf, militarily and have met success, cutting their numbers to less than 200 or about 200 from numbering thousands. Of course, it takes one rifle shot or bomb to project yet more fear in society, but we are making significant progress.

The Abu Sayyaf remain a threat but a diminished one. We have worked to crush their armed soldiers and break up their intelligence cells. Remember, solitary acts of destruction are still possible. What is increasingly more difficult for Abu Sayyaf is extensive, coordinated military attacks.

These terrorists have proven once again that they are not guided by moral or religious conviction. They are nothing more than murderers of innocent people driven by an ideology of mayhem. We have experienced the same mindless violence in the Philippines. The only antidote is to have no fear and crush their efforts.

No religion calls for mass slaughter of innocents. We have Muslims in the Philippines, particularly in the southern islands and the vast majority of them are peace-loving people. Their wants are for a better life and to be lifted out of poverty. The terrorists are out of touch with their religion and with basic humanity.

No civilized nation can condone terrorism on moral or religious grounds. I won’t, the Philippines won’t.

I’d like to acknowledge the presence of Foreign Secretary Blas Ople.

In the Philippines and even abroad, we are pursuing inter-faith dialogues to promote Christian and Muslim solidarity. Terrorists wish to instigate a religious war. We must make this an opportunity for religious understanding, ecumenism and solidarity.

The Al-Qaeda connection in the Philippines is real but not necessarily strong. It is possible that after Afghanistan, more Al-Qaeda are making their way to Southeast Asia. The real issue is breaking up the regional and global network, stopping the money flow and breaking up the militant cells wherever they may be across the globe.

The Philippines is just one of many nations, scattered throughout the world — including the United States and Europe — where Al-Qaeda is trying to operate. If anything, we are better prepared and taking more aggressive steps to stop terrorism in the Philippines than in many other parts of the world. Because we know from first-hand experience the pain of terrorism. It becomes a cancer if you don’t cut it out.

We support a U.N. resolution on Iraq. This must be a fight of the community of nations against a nation that are shown it doesn’t intend to abide by U.N. resolutions to destroy its weapons of mass destruction.

Here, I can assure you that we are doing everything possible to protect our citizens, our governments, our tourists here in the Philippines.

A few of my opponents have criticized my decision. I knew the moment last year, when I committed the Philippines to a leadership position in Asia in the global war on terrorism that I would be subjecting our nation to a heightened degree of attention on this issue.

But, I also knew that we had to share with the international community our experience, including our challenges and our successes, in dealing with terrorism if this effort was to be a true coalition.

I have to tell you: I make no apologies for aggressively seeking to root out terrorism in the Philippines and to putting considerable effort in seeking regional consensus on fighting terrorism.

Coupled with our participation in global efforts to stamp out terrorism, we are also working to promote cohesion and cooperation at the regional level. For example, last may, we created a three-nation anti-terrorist working arrangement between the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia. Cambodia joined this coalition last July.

Such successes, however, did not prepare us for the horror inflicted in Bali just a couple of weeks ago. It reminded us that the war against terrorism is going to be long and difficult and that it knows no boundaries. It comes at a time when there are fears that the global economy may be in for a double dip.

In this regard, may I go back to the Philippines and our economy. I am glad that the labor solidarity movement, the umbrella organization of the country’s mainstream labor groups: TUCP, FFW, AFW and Tupas have decided not to press for a wage increase at this time. This is an act of patriotism that was immediately followed by the employers confederation, who committed to pay for any increases in workers’ contribution in SSS premiums for as long as there are still no wage increases.

While government works hard at creating new jobs through investment as well as through tourism and the encouragement of small and medium scale businesses to build up domestic demand, we must also put in place job preservation mechanisms at a time when the world is in economic difficulty. This patriotic act by the labor unions — the four biggest labor unions of the country — is one such mechanism by which existing jobs can be preserved.

The same is true of the employers group who made their own contribution to a social accord that will allow us to weather this difficult time.

On the part of government then I wish to direct the following agencies to ensure that government does its share:

The Department of Labor to strictly enforce existing labor standards so that the workers may get their lawful due; the National Food Authority to assist workers to get cheaper rice and other basic necessities; the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council to intensify its drive to provide affordable housing to workers through rent-to-own and similar schemes that will allow workers decent dwelling places.

We must learn to conserve our gains during difficult times. More important, we must stand together to move this country, our country forward.

Here, in this country, I thank labor and management for understanding that today dealing with terrorism is our most urgent priority.

In the aftermath of Bali, we are looking to expand our coalition — Thailand joined our trilateral and then quadrilateral coalition earlier this week. Through this coalition, which is now a five-way coalition, we work to share intelligence on terrorist activities. We will tighten border patrols and if necessary partake in joint peacekeeping operations. We are looking to take more aggressive action through this international conference on terrorism and tourism recovery.

In December or early next year, the Philippines will again host another event — this time, multilateral seminar games on emergency responses to terrorist threats. I’d like to invite once again your security, defense and police officials to these seminar games. We are hosting these games in accordance with one of the initiatives in last year’s ASEAN Summit.

Our collective actions have constrained terrorists operations, but by how much and where, we don’t know. But it’s very clear, we have to expand deterrent measures especially talking about tourism to include airport security, tighter airport security and others.

We support measures to secure movement of people from point of origin to point of destination in the same manner that we support measures that will deter movement of terrorists across borders. We are here in this meeting to promote the principle of secure tourism.

But just as we are taking security measures to prevent terrorist acts, we should also address the poverty and hopelessness that provide recruits for terrorism.

Anti-terrorism is a global fight if not the challenge of a single nation or region. The tragedy in Bali once again shows this that i said that terrorism knows no boundaries.

Thinking globally is what we must do in this fight against terrorism. Thinking globally means: sharing information, following every lead, and taking harsh measures to destroy militant cells. But we must also seek out and destroy the handmaiden of terrorism which is poverty. The family of nations must unite and fight to defeat poverty as it unites to defeat terrorism. We must also work to build our democratic institutions to allow for greater freedom and participation for our citizens in civic life.

I would like to join my Southeast Asian neighbors in asking the western countries to refrain from issuing travel warnings and advisories that discourage tourism and investment from going to our countries.

We should not be penalized by those who are well aware of the tough decisions and the actions we have taken to not only deal with terrorists on our own shores but also to work with other countries to ensure that in our region and around the world we cooperate by sharing intelligence and by assisting in apprehending terrorists who are not restricted by national borders.

On the part of the Philippines, I believe the strongest argument we have against such penalties is the reputation of the Filipino workers all over the world.

I do hope that our friends in the western world and elsewhere will think long and hard about how they can support the efforts we are taking to not only remove the scourge of terrorism from the Philippines and the other countries in Southeast Asia but also the work we are doing to ensure that the various countries in our region are just as active in fighting this global war.

We need cooperation from our friends internationally, not misguided condemnation. At the end of the day, they must realize that no nation is not doing anything to fight terrorism. On the part of the Philippines I would say that though there are many others fighting just as much as we are nobody’s fighting more than we are. We look forward to working closely with the western world and our neighbors in what is unfortunately going to be a long war.

Just as we search out and destroy terrorism, we must search out and destroy the terror of poverty. There is evil in being hungry just as there is evil in being a destructive terrorists. We must work together as a family of nations to alleviate both.

Whether it’s the fight against global terrorism or the promotion of tourism, at the end of the day, it’s always about the economy and improving the lives of our citizens.

And so I congratulate you for being here in this anti-terrorism conference. And I hope that from the resolutions that have been made and are being made, we will be even more triumphant in the fight against terrorism and in the promotion of the movement of people across nations.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the International Conference on Anti-Terrorism and Tourism Recovery. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210152/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8480&Itemid=38