Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 13th Nikkei International Conference on the “Future of Asia” Deepening Cooperation Toward a True Community

[Delivered at the Imperial Hotel, Tokyo, Japan, May 24, 2007]

I thank Nikkei for inviting me once again to this prestigious forum. It’s my honor to be able to speak for the third time. I was here as our moderator said in 2002 and 2003. At that time, on those two times, the topics were: Emerging China and then ASEAN’s Role in the Genesis of a New Asian Order . Now I return as current chair of ASEAN and I’m very happy to hear that the theme Deepening Cooperation Toward a True Community was inspired by the events in the ASEAN Summit and East Asian Summit in Cebu that we hosted last January.

It is not only the 10 years after the ASEAN financial crisis that we are commemorating this year. We are also commemorating 40 years of ASEAN.

ASEAN had a vital first 40 years of existence. We are proud of what ASEAN has contributed to world peace, security and economic growth. ASEAN has kept the peace, expanded our economies and drawn closer together through trade, diplomacy and cultural exchange. Last January at the summit in Cebu, we put down a marker to draft an ASEAN charter – this is a down payment on an EU style union.

We took a bold step forward in forging a more unified ASEAN. Bold because of times and bold because we are a very diverse, multi-ethnic, multi-religious region at different levels of social and economic development. It is remarkable that ASEAN has resisted the temptation to drift apart. Instead, we remain on a steady arc of community, of comity, of cooperation.

Yet for all that ASEAN has accomplished, this latest bold step doesn’t mean we have won the race. We are in a marathon, not a sprint. Our eye is not just on ASEAN at age 40 Our eye is also on ASEAN at age 80,40 years from now We must ask: Because we’re talking about the future of Asia, we must ask: What will ASEAN look like 40 years from today? If today, we are a market of 500 million people, 40 years from today, we will be a billion people in ASEAN. If today, we are the fastest growing region, in 40 years, we will likely be a more mature, modest growth region. And if today, we are unsure of global security and the threat of upstart nations getting nuclear weapons – what will we face in 40 years?

Each question begs an answer. We need to make sure our answer is consistent with our social needs, we made to make sure our answer embraces a sustainable economic model, we made to make sure our answer ensures regional and global peace.

When we think ahead and ponder the next 40 years, we see increasing prosperity and the possibility of greater income disparity. We see a more peaceful world and nations, more nations with nuclear capability. We see a cleaner environment and the challenge of global warming affecting government policies and our economic model and having a decisive impact on our lives.

All of the hope and anxiety about the future leads us to one conclusion: We must all press for ever closer cooperation in ASEAN and indeed, in all of Asia, if we are to collectively benefit from the good and collectively tackle the big challenges together.

The number of truly globe-size issues we will face in the 21st century will require truly globe-size cooperation. The place to start is building stronger regional entities like ASEAN and expanding their political, economic and security influence to other partners around the world.

This is also true of other pacts, other arrangements, other organizations, other associations. The WTO comes to mind, particularly at this time when the Doha Round is on the ropes. We hope the Doha Round is successful, because it was designed to be the round that would focus on development, to be the round that would bring the benefits of the global trading system to less developed nations.

As an economist and leader of a nation of 85 million, I believe in the value of trade to alleviate poverty and free people to live a better life. Our policy to aggressively engage the regional and global marketplace is perhaps part of the reason why our Philippine economy now has achieved 25 successive quarters of economic growth. And if we are to remember what those 25 quarters were, starting from 2001 up to now 2007, we should recall that some of those years, some of the neighboring countries of the Philippines, some of the neighboring economies, were experiencing recession but not in the Philippines.

Today, exports and imports are booming even as the Peso strengthens; we had our best year ever in foreign direct investment and with our stock market; not only two days ago, not only did our stock market surpass, the free financial crisis levels, it was the highest in the entire 80-year history of our stock exchange. And we have created 6 million new jobs under our administration.

But that doesn’t mean we believe trade is pain free; it is not free from pain, not for many people, not for certain industries not for a number of nations. But in the main, it is the wave of the future.

Yet on this road to globalization, the developed nations have let many of the developing nations down. When trade served their interests, it was a green light; now that they might have to give up certain subsidies or markets, the yellow light of caution is up. And there are fears that light may turn to red before this is over.

So while we want a successful trade round, we will not just wait around: We aim to go full speed ahead in the Philippines and in ASEAN to strengthen our economic ties, regardless of what Doha does or does not bring.

As President of the Philippines, I have been aggressive in seeking multilateral and bilateral trade relationships. As current chair of ASEAN, we helped lead the call for the revival of the Doha Round. We helped in our decision to move forward with free trade negotiations. The Free Trade Agreement between ASEAN and China, as well as the FTA between ASEAN and South Korea, are moving into their final stages. It is now up to the ASEAN member countries to individually ratify these two FTAs. We are moving forward with our plans to pursue an ASEAN-EU FTA. Negotiations on the FTA with Japan also hold out a lot of promise. We hope that those involved in the negotiations would find the resolve to agree on the finer points of the draft FTA. For instance, on the rules of origin. So that by the November meeting, we could have a signing of that agreement.

These agreements demonstrate our collective voice in the ASEAN. But more importantly, they reflect our commitment to expanding global trade and investment for the benefit of all.

Because the future will belong to those nations that seek common ground to resolve common problems. This is true in virtually every aspect of our lives: economy, social justice, energy diversification, security. ASEAN is the most tested viable and mature entity at our disposal to propel our relatively smaller ASEAN nations to compete with China, India, the European Union and the US.

At the same time, for ASEAN to become a true expanding union, it must continue to nurture its relations with key partners: Japan, China and South Korea.

President Sugita was talking about our East Asian Summit in Cebu with 16 nations, at a time when the world is experiencing strains on alliances from the WTO to iraq, vital alliances must be forged new ones to keep the world stable and strong. Some sort of Asian community will be a bold step in that direction.

We look at the experience of the EU, historically, the EU has shown how a region beset by conflict can become a force for peace and security. The same way in our region that has faced many of the same historic divisions, a more united region will also achieve the same.

But also we must recognize that community building is a long process. The EU took 50 years to reach its present stage of integration. So even if they say that we are very diverse, too much has been made of our region’s diversity as a barrier. We believe our diversity is a strength not a barrier to an Asian Union. And we learned that from ASEAN.

Over the 40 years, ASEAN has proven that it can make a difference for peace and prosperity in Asia. Despite the diversity of the nations in ASEAN, and it will continue to do more as we builds toward an ASEAN community by 2015.

To go back to the ASEAN community, for the East Asian Community that had the second East Asian Summit in Cebu, there is general consensus that the idea of an East Asian community has a more political, rather than geographical definition. In the process of establishing the East Asian community, we look to the engagement of all parties that have a stake in East Asia especially a stake in ASEAN because it is in the framework of ASEAN that we have develop the concept of the East Asian community. For instance, geographically India is not part of East Asia, it’s part of South Asia but it is participating in our East Asian Summit. Russia is on the Pacific Ocean but it is still as of now not part of the East Asian Summit that is because economic engagement is a more compelling ectorn in the minds of our ASEAN brothers than a geographic location.

The East Asian community, we cannot deny is made especially important because of the emergence of China. We view the rise of China as an opportunity, not a threat

ASEAN’s relations, the Philippine’s relations with China are now more confident, mature and comprehensive. They are punctuated with substantial and important projects aimed at deepening exchanges on a number of areas, especially trade and investment.

Because the region, certainly comprises at least China, South Korea and Japan, aside from ASEAN and perhaps Australia, New Zealand, cordial and stable relations between China, South Korea and Japan are essential elements of a stable and prosperous East Asia community. And we have faith that relations among them will continue to warm. We are very pleased that ASEAN is able to provide in the plus three summits regular opportunities for Japan, China and South Korea to engage each other in dialogue and consultation. We in the Philippines are pleased to have hosted such a plus three meeting on the margins of the summit in Cebu in January this year.

The relationship between Japan and China is especially important implications. It has especially important implications for regional stability in Asia. And we are happy, very happy to hear all the news all over the world about the increasingly cordial relationship between the two Asian economic giants. We are happy to read even from the editorials of the newspapers in China that one of the reasons for the increasing relationship of trust between Prime Minister Abe and Premier Wen Jiabao of China was their meeting in Cebu last January.

In East Asia, we must forge deeper international cooperation on the initial ideas for a regional security framework and we hope that the forthcoming ASEAN regional forum hosted by the Philippines in Manila this coming August will be a venue for that. We must also forge some kind of cooperation on the mobility of human resources and we must forge understanding on a regional cooperation framework on environment and energy security. This will make the ASEAN community “one caring and sharing community”. The ASEAN Region must be committed to the role innovation will play if we are to succeed in a truly sustainable economic model of development. In doing this, innovation, led by countries like Japan which is still the leader in technology is as valuable as political will.

Speaking of Japan, where the population is aging, we must also rationalize age and demography within the ASEAN region to increase the flow of services, talent and knowledge.

And in accordance with the principle of rationalizing, within the ASEAN region, more Filipino nurses and caregivers will come to Japan when our economic partnership agreement – the Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement will enter into force.

The Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement or JEPEPA as we call it, will bring about greater liberalization of trade and services between our two countries, it will bring about facilitation and liberalization of investment, it will bring about enhanced technical cooperation and capacity-building. All these will promote an increased flow of resources not just capital resources but human resources and all these will create a bigger market that will provide greater opportunities and larger economies of scale for both Japanese and Philippine and businesses.

Japan is the second largest economy in the world, let’s not forget that. Japan is the largest in Asia, let’s not forget that. Therefore, Japan is a valued partner of the developing ASEAN community and it is a major member of the broader East Asian community.

Japan has the political, economic and cultural power to help the world choose the right path in the crossroad of the 21st century in the future of Asia. It has the power to help the world stick to that path for the harmony and prosperity of mankind especially in Asia.

Japan’s values of peace with strength, innovative enterprise, green energy and enviro-technology can help save the world especially Asia from a scenario of strife and hunger, ignorance and disease.

We in ASEAN, we in the Philippines are proud of the fact that Japan has become such an economic powerhouse these last 40 years. The last 40 years of ASEAN existence. So we in ASEAN like to think we helped play a nurturing role in Japan’s becoming such an economic powerhouse.

Japan has been our economic anchor for a generation now. I would like to be a little personal at this point. I of course, I was not born yet during the war, World War II. But although Japan and the Philippines established diplomatic relations in 1956, the people to people relationship was not yet so cordial in the beginning. But when my father, Diosdado Macapagal invited then, the then Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Japan who are now their imperial majesties to visit the Philippines, they charmed the Filipino so much that our relationship became warm, the ice was broken and ever since then, Japan has played an important role in the Philippines.

Japan plays an important role not only in the Philippines, it’s a partner of ASEAN, it plays an important role in regional diplomacy, and it is by far our largest source of official development assistance. With these role that Japan has been playing over the last 40 years, with the rise of China and with the influence of India, Japan’s role will become even more central to maintaining stability and balance in the regio

For instance, in the southern Philippine island of Mindanao, Japan has joined the International Monitoring Team to help nurture the peace talks there to a successful conclusion. Perhaps more important, Japan has been making significant economic investments to build up the economy of that southern region of Mindanao. The role of “soft” power – that is, none military activities – has been the most significant development in the Mindanao peace process and Japan has been leading in that. Therefore, I would like to thank Japan for helping the Philippines forged a new paradigm for peace in Mindanao. This new paradigm offers more soft than hard power. It relies on interfaith dialogue and an expanding cast of international players to keep the peace.

Aside from Japan, aside from the OIC countries, aside from our ASEAN brothers, we now have European Union, Sweden, US and other countries joining us in this peace process. The Philippines therefore joins well meaning allies in strongly encouraging Japan to expand her present concept of exercise of collective security.

We would like to see Japan playing a leading role in contributing to community building in the region, and that means also, including maintaining and pursuing international peace and security as we try to forge the East Asia community of our dreams.

Indeed, on every other major front, we see Japan being an integral player if not an outright catalyst for change and progress. Japan will provide in the years to come the necessary leadership to the important arena of sustainable development.

For the Philippines we can say that Japan-Philippines relations have never been stronger: There has been a welcome influx of Japanese tourists. There has been impressive upswing in Japanese direct investment.

Late last year, Marubeni and Tokyo electric power purchased power plants in the Philippines for $3.5 billion and announced a $500-million additional expansion. A few months later, the American electronics giant Texas instruments awarded the Philippines an investment of one billion US dollars to build a world-class manufacturing facility. For this Texas Instruments investment, we beat out China and a number of other nations for the privilege to be the investment destination. For us in the Philippines, greater economic integration leads to improved competition and performance that helps our people. Combined with our tight fiscal policies and our investments in infrastructure, the Philippines has finally arrived as a premier investment destination in Asia. And we thank ASEAN, we thank Japan, we thank the entire robust economy of the region in aiding our comeback.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in decades.

Last week, Filipinos demonstrated our political stability through peaceful, fair and free elections. Our elections have sent investors the message of political stability which ensures continuing economic reform. The message was that the Philippine economy is stable and strong. And even as the senatorial elections are still being canvassed, in the congressional and local elections, Filipinos have voted overwhelmingly for administration allies. Therefore, the path we have set for economic reforms has not been upset by partisan elections. The election will not undo our economic progress.

Earlier this month, in another expression of confidence, the Philippines won reelection as a member of the United Nations Human Rights Council. This important development underscores the fundamental commitment of the Philippine government to uphold human rights.

The result of all this political development will be a focus by our administration on continued economic reform, pro-growth, pro-trade and pro-investment strategies that will help lift up our people out of poverty.

We are investing aggressively in our I.T. backbone. We are bringing the internet to every high school and spending more pesos for education. This is because we have found a niche in a business process outsourcing and I.T. sector. When I was a new president in 2001, there are only 2,000 employed in the business process outsourcing industry. Today, there are over 250,000 and we have a two billion dollar industry. We are bringing incentives to start micro and small businesses to build entrepreneurial class.

And we continue to develop a larger manufacturing base along with our booming service economy to create good jobs At the same time, we realize, we must also become more self-sufficient and cost effective in our energy consumption. There is no reason we cannot do both, develop our manufacturing and be energy efficient There s no reason why we cannot have a win-win through innovation, proper policy planning and united political and civic leadership.

For instance, we have launched a biofuels program. This program will rely on investment and innovation to create jobs, skills and self-reliance while keeping our environment clean. In this case, our model is Brazil which has pioneered in biofuels. Indeed, we must continue to learn around the world and in our region.

In conclusion, as our economic engines drive us to first-world status, and we hope to achieve that for the Philippines in the next 20 years, we must not do so on the backs of the poor nor at the expense of our environment. I am optimistic about the current approaches to economic growth. The approaches mentioned by President Sugita, were with the rise of China, the awakening of India and the re-emergence of Japan, growth is now more domestically driven within Asia rather than export oriented. I believe these approach to growth can transform our economies and lift up the poor.

As a region, as an ASEAN region, as an Asian region, we have a chance to get it right. We can emulate the best practices of development while avoiding the mistakes of modernization that have plagued many nations before. We must use every tool available – education, technology, microfinance – to lift up our poor, if we are to achieve equitable, sustainable growth.

In sum, I am optimistic about our ability to work together as a region – ASEAN and East Asia and to solve our own problems and in the process, create a new Asian paradigm for progress that will be a model for the rest of the world as other regions and other nations continue on their own path to progress. I firmly believe that comity, cooperation and community will define our collective future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].