Thank you very much Secretary Puno.

Inspector Enciso, give attention at ease.

Vice-President Noli de Castro; Director General Avelino Razon; president of the Public Safety College, Dr. Cojuangco; Police Chief Superintendent Abarzosa and other officials of the PNPA; Secretary Remonde and other government officials; faculty of the Philippine National Police Academy; other PNP officials; parents; friends who are graduating today; Graduate Class PNP “Oman-Silang” Class 2008. Congratulations to all of you. (applause)

Special greetings also to our two women who are among the ten best graduating students. And thank you to the ten best graduating students. (applause) And a greeting and thanks also to your valedictorian, Inspector Enciso, for ensuring the loyalty of the “Oman-Silang” Class 2008 to our Constitution and to our democracy. (applause)

Congratulations to Chief Superintendent Abarzosa, the first PNPA alumnus to be named director of this Academy. (applause) The other day we read the full page ad of the alumni and addressed the issues there by Secretary Puno. But if we talk about systematic prejudice against non-PMA, perhaps Abarzosa is a very good example. Because Abarzosa was very junior, he wasn't from PMA, he was very junior when I made him chief of the Manila Police District. A truly coveted assignment. (applause) Congratulations also to our president of the Public Safety College, President Tingting Conjuangco for initiating reforms, among them allowing new graduates of previous classes to undergo the officers basic course.

This is very important as our valedictorian said — reform. Reform is what we are promoting now in the country — reform in the economy, government and security.

In the economy, 2007 was the best year for our economy in over 30 years. Our strengthened economic fortunes come none too soon for there are clouds on the economic horizon that we must guard against. The global economy is facing significant challenges.

The global forces are putting more strain on our working poor, and many of our working poor are ordinary police officers. As prices for commodities like rice and fuel increase in the world market, we cannot avoid that our country will also be affected. We are a price-sensitive nation. So we are working to soften the blow from the current global economic challenges to those working hardest to make it into the middle class and including our ordinary police officers.

The best thing we can do in the short-term is to provide responsible, targeted relief to those most in need. So, for example, we are now including the police in the Extra Performance Bonus in December, which was not done before. And we have increased the subsistence allowance and hazard pay of our police officers.

And we are starting large housing projects for the police because we don't want to see the police living in squatter areas next to the hatchet men of syndicates. So here, behind the PNPA, and as Tingting said, there are more outside the fence that are actually PNPA land, this should be made into housing.

Earlier, I asked what happened to our housing project, especially since Vice-President de Castro is here, who is in charge of our housing. They are waiting for the Memorandum of Agreement between the PNPA and AFP because officially the AFP owns the land because the PCI was formerly part of the AFP. I said, instead of waiting for the red tape of the Memorandum of Understanding, let's give in, let's make this a joint housing for the AFP and the PNP this land behind and land beside. (applause)

The 2008 budget allocates P12 billion for a 10 percent increase in the basic salary of civilian, military and uniformed personnel starting July, including our police. (applause)

For the remainder of my term until I step down in 2010, the best thing we can do is stay focused on further economic reforms while providing peace, order and stability. And that is the job of our newly graduated, PNPA “Oman-Silang” Class 2008 — peace, order and stability.

From investigating and apprehending different kinds of criminals, petty thieves as well as the most dangerous of terrorists, the work of the police is constantly increasing, especially since the police and the military are working together in the fight against insurgency due to our Executive Order. Therefore, we need to speed up the modernization of the PNP. Especially since we have set 2010 as the deadline to win the war against insurgency.

I am glad that as of last year, we had succeeded in cutting by half the number of active insurgents compared to 2001. That means the reform in the PNP has taken root.

With the development of the economy came the funds to increase the PNP by 15,000 new police officers within three years. We are now in the second year of 5,000 a year for three years of new police officers. (applause) And the savings we made from paying off the debt interest came from the first patrol cars distributed to police stations across the country.

That is part of our modernization but we are accelerating the modernization of the PNP, this includes the purchase of twenty-three helicopters and six are arriving now, this year. (applause) Including patrol craft for the Maritime Command. Including specialization in tourist areas for tourism police — like baywatch, that’s what it is. Wearing shorts, said Vice-President de Castro. That’s true, in Boracay you can’t tell who is a police officer and who is a tourist because they are wearing shorts. For instance, in Cebu the top tourist attraction for foreign tourists, the placing of close circuit TV to protect the tourists.

Also bringing your weaponry to par with the syndicated crime, like night vision equipment and intelligence. And against terrorism, increased forensics and investigative crime laboratory aids.

We will still increase the number of patrol cars, right Sonny? Even though we have already released some, we will still increase them and we will also increase the gasoline allocation, is that true? Because the price of gasoline is high so we need to increase the allocation. But we are reminding everyone that because gasoline is expensive, let’s not waste our gasoline allocation.

The main challenge facing the members of Class “Oman-Silang” 2008 as you enter as regular members of the police, jail management or fire protection along with the veteran police officers and policewomen, is to suppress crime and enforce the protection of the ordinary citizen whether from crime, from fire and ensure that criminals do not escape from our prisons. And important also is the fight against rebellion. So your job is to uphold peace and order so that our progress will continue.

You know, whenever I see members of the uniformed service, I remember the poem, ‘The Charge of the Light Brigade’ — “Theirs is not to reason why, theirs is but to do or die.” That is the price of carrying a gun. It is not those who carry the gun who philosophize, those who philosophize are the totally civilian leaders. You, your real problem — peace, order and stability.

You know, whenever you start your regular service, you will see every single day as a challenge and an opportunity. Embrace the opportunity. That is how to apply what you have learned in the Academy and to grow as a professional, as an individual — yes, as a concerned citizen of our Republic. But when I was at the PMA graduation, a speaker also reminded everyone, in return for your guns, there are certain civil rights that you have to give up and that is the right to speak politically. So, that is included in discipline.

And I am confident that you will fully fulfill your duties because as your valedictorian said, you were trained at the PNPA to lead in suppressing crime and rebellion, and although you cannot speak in politics, be a good example of a new generation of police officers who care for the safety and peace of our country.

Once more, to your parents and to you PNP “Oman-Silang” Class of 2008, Congratulations! More power!

Long live! (applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 29th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA), “Oman-Silang” Class 2008. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122509/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1058&Itemid=38