Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremonies of the Philippines Councilors League (PCL) 2007 End-Term National Assembly

[Delivered at the Cebu International Convention Center, Mandaue City, Cebu, March 8, 2007]

Thank you very much, PCL President Fortuna for your beautiful introduction, and thank you for hosting all of us in your great industrial and now convention city.

Let me also greet Governor Gwen Garcia and all the women councilors here. To all of us — Happy Women’s Day. And of course, our host mayor, Mayor Teddy Ouano, aside from our congratulations to Mandaue’s hosting this very important convention, our sympathies also to you and to the fire victims of yesterday’s accident.

I would also like to greet the different members and officers of the council, of course, from Baguio — but he had a beautiful Cebuano accent when he spoke Cebuano — National Chairman of PCL Elmer Datuin.

And we have Victor Ferrer, auditor; Joseph Ortiz, treasurer; Arecio Rendor, national executive vice president; my cabinet member from Cebu, Cerge Remonde; and our emcees, my inaanak Jack Jakosalem. You know one reason why I’m very close to the people of Cebu is that my mother spent her teenage years in Cebu. And during those days, her boyfriend was Jack’s father. He would have been brother and sister; and Shirley Belleza of Talisay City. Thank you also for emceeing this program.

And to all the participants of the councilors league this 2007, welcome to Cebu! Congratulations on your opening! I hope we will have a very good assembly.

This assembly is most timely especially to re-electionist councilors, of which there are many, and councilors vying for higher positions, of which there are many. And Councilor Fortuna told us about some of the good things happening in our economy. I hope they will serve you well as well. Because when the economy is doing well, it will be easier for you to get the continued support of the people.

Our fiscal position is stable. There’s growing confidence among businessmen that our growth will continue this year and in the coming years. And this positive perception is borne out of political will not only of me but also of you, of all of us in government, both at the local and national levels, in implementing needed fiscal and economic reforms. It took sometime for the national government to be close to wiping out its budget deficit. Before the national government could do it, which is scheduled still for next year, the local governments were already in fiscal surplus. Congratulations to you!

Surging confidence in the Philippine economy across the board rides alongside growing investments, strong remittances of our workers and peak international reserves, which is why our peso is so strong. These in turn are driving the track of excellence and productivity among the people, the people that you deal with because you are on the frontline driving the political noise to the background and increasing the flow down of economic benefits to the social level.

You know this morning, I had a meeting with 8,000 women in Manila mostly government employees. And one thing I learned one thing earlier, we’ve been spreading microfinance — I think among your communities, you’re aware of them, aren’t you? — and yet I realized that the government employees themselves do not have the benefit of microfinance. I don’t know how your employees are in your council offices, but I said today, that the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation — incidentally headed by a Cebuano, Edgar Generoso — should use as conduits also the employees cooperatives of the government agencies including government enterprises like the local government units, your units. I hope that can help you, and I hope you as councilors will be able to organize your employees in your municipal halls and your city halls so that they can have a second livelihood and that they will benefit from the microfinance that we are now able to give the people.

And I thank you also because you know when investors come to invest, they not only deal with the BOI, they deal with the local governments. And I thank you that the entire bureaucracy including the local government bureaucracy is being streamlined, cleaned up and prepped to move forward with better training and clear measurements of performance aimed at serving our people with less red tape, less corrupt practices and greater overall efficiency. After all, you the councilors are the ones who do the ordinances of your cities and municipalities. You are the ones who do the ordinances that can reduce red tape. You are the ones that can do the ordinances that entice the businessmen to invest in your localities. And because we have all worked in order to make the climate good for our fiscal position and for investment, payback time for the people is at hand. And it’s being realized through more jobs, infrastructure, better education and services.

We have laid the fundamentals of growth — a sturdy fiscal house at the national level and at your municipal and city levels; a solid performance of good governance, much of which comes from the ordinances that you enact in your councils; a robust social payback to the people, mounting gains in the security front; and a democratic system in full bloom.

For once — and I think Carlos sort of alluded to this — for the first time in our economic history as recorded, we have traveled a clean path of 24 quarters of uninterrupted growth. It’s payback time for our people, and more than ever, I will be needing the support of you, our councilors and local officials in bringing the blessings to the people in every nook and corner of the country. And I’m glad that in this hall and outside this hall watching on the big screens, we have councilors from every nook and corner of the country.

Part of the social payback from our prudent spending — as Carlo talked about our… And also Councilor Datuin about our internal revenue allotment, part of what you have said — part of our fiscal reform is now we have an additional 15 billion pesos for internal revenue allotment or IRA for all local government units. Because every time we have an increase in taxes like value-added taxes, the local governments get a share in the internal revenue allotment.

But even before this happened, as our speakers earlier also said, long time ago — no, not so long ago. Before my time — we could not release funds for the local government units if the budget was not passed. But because in my administration — we have three years of budget not being passed — we had to go through some legal procedures to make sure that you get your IRA in full even on a reenacted budget. So we got a DOJ opinion that starting from the time that the Supreme Court made a ruling that the internal revenue allotment cannot be reduced by the budget, the way it used to be done before my time, the DOJ put an additional opinion that therefore we must consider the internal revenue allotment as automatically appropriated whether we have a new budget or not.

That is why while in the last three years, it’s only now for the first time that we will have a new budget, you still got your budgetary allocations in full. And that is to me, I would like to be proud to say, one of the most important support that I could give to our councilors and our local government officials.

In the past — they used to say, a president that retains part of the IRA and then puts it into what they call the local government, ano, LGSEF? Social Equalization Fund — if a president retains 10 percent of the IRA and then redistributed 10 percent to supposedly to those who need it more, that’s additional power because that’s in the hands of the president to decide where it will go. I gave up that power from the beginning of my term and I gave it all to you. You have the full power.

Why did I do this, why do I do this? This is because I trust you, the councilors and the local officials to work with me as you do your own budgets to continue on the path to reform, social justice and economic development. You, the local officials; you, the councilors together with your mayors, your vice mayors, your governors, your vice governors, your board members form the centerpiece of Philippine democracy in our system of local economy. You are on the frontline of change.

As councilors, you meet your constituents everyday. You’re right there in town, that’s why you are the frontline, you are the grassroots. And you and I, our government, we have made tough but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. These painful steps are now paying off. We now have the money to invest in job creation, new roads especially farm-to-market roads which local governments are supposed to allocate, bridges and ports, and more for education, your school board fund, and health care. Because of your increased IRA, now you are also in a position to carry out the Philhealth law, that says that local government should allocate a part of your revenues to paying the premium of the poorest among your poor. So the more IRA you have — in other words the more taxes we collect at the national government — the more IRA you have, the more your poorest of the poor can have health care.

This year, we want to invest in our people in order to gain eight blessings by the year 2008. So we call this investing in people for 8 by 2008:

First, job creation. And that is why I said earlier, I hope that even in your own municipal halls or in your own city halls, you can organize your employees into credit cooperatives that can avail of microfinance.

Second, a stable cost of living. I hope that you will be able to work with the Department of Agriculture, for instance, to send products straight from the farm to the market with not too many middlemen in between. For instance, in Cordillera, they can send products straight to the markets of — let me say… Where have I been? — Taguig, and the price becomes much lower for the consumer and higher for the farmer.

We also want to have a strong peso. I don’t mean that the peso should go down to 44.10, but what I mean is, it’s better to have the peso where it is now than it were to go up to 56.60 or 100 because then we pay less in interest, we import cheaper oil, we import cheaper food.

We also want more investments. Of course, because they create jobs.

And we want pro-poor education. And your school board are so important here.

We want pro-poor health, hunger mitigation, and housing.

We want a green Philippines where you will beautify your communities and plant trees and flowers because the world is suffering from global warming, typhoons, floods, landslides, that’s because we are exhaling more carbon dioxide than the plants right now can inhale. So we have to have more plants and make your towns and cities more beautiful.

And finally, strong anti-terror. You know, in this very hall was presented to the world the historic, legally binding ASEAN convention against terrorism. And it is in response to that legally binding convention that we finally passed the anti-terror bill and signed it into law. And we will now need all your assistance after elections when we will implement the anti-terror law to finally drive the terrorists out of the Philippines.

This represent this year’s national agenda of our one-inch thick Medium-Term Philippine Development plan that is summarized into the ‘Beat the Odds’ that our councilor mentioned earlier.

On my part as president, I will focus on this 8 by 08 to achieve these blessings by 2008. I will leave the campaigning to the candidates among you. And that’s why because you will be campaigning, most of you will be candidates again come end of March, into your hands, I commend the fate of team unity.

You can make it clear by pointing out examples to your own constituents that the blessings that we are enjoying are the fruits of our people’s industry and sacrifices supported by our joint leadership wholly committed to their welfare. Our leadership that certainly includes in the mainstream, in the frontline, in the grassroots, the councilors and cities of our cities and towns.

Let us not allow our surging economy to be derailed. Let us all work hard until our respective terms end to make economic prosperity, social justice, and peace and security a reality for a new and modernizing Philippines as you the councilors continue for another term or move on to a new phase in your career in leadership.

Daghan salamat.

Welcome once again to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the Philippines Councilors League (PCL) 2007 End-Term National Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151226/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1982&Itemid=38