Thank you very much, Congressman Robes, for your welcome remarks as well as your suggestion that we hold our discussion with the students here.

Because I am happy to be here. I was here during the groundbreaking, and now I am here for the inauguration, so congratulations to us all!

I also congratulate Mayor Lito Sarmiento, the mayor of San Jose del Monte City, as well as the president of Bulacan Polytechnic College, President Jerry Cruz; and here in our front row are officials of our country and province, here is our new Press Secretary, Secretary Jun Icban; here is our Commissioner on Higher Education, Nenalyn Defensor; here are the congresswoman and congressman from neighboring districts, Congresswoman Marivic Alvarado and Congressman Pedro Pancho; and the Vice Governor of the Province of Bulacan, Willy Alvarado; officials of San Jose del Monte, of the barangay, of the school, teachers, students, good afternoon to all of you.

As I said, I am happy to be able to come to your school. I saw it before, we saw it after, and our visit here is part of our inspection of what we call Super Regions. If you look at the screen to my left, we have shaped the Super Regions to distribute development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila. The Super Regions are Agribusiness Mindanao, Tourism Central Philippines, North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Cyber Corridor, and the Urban Luzon Beltway, which passes through Bulacan.

These Super Regions have come a long way since we started this project. The Philippines itself has come a long way since January 2001. You students were still very young children in January 2001, so perhaps you don't remember what was happening during that time, even your parents. Thank goodness time has erased the memory of that very turbulent period, less than ten years ago. As for the 17-year-olds, the freshmen and sophomores, you were seven years old then. You were still small when the country was at the brink of extreme political turmoil and financial bankruptcy.

As an economist, I know that to recover the economy, we need to discipline the national treasury, grow the economy, and invest in people and infrastructure, such as the infrastructure in what we call the Luzon Urban Beltway. This includes the Batangas Port that we built after 2007, which we then connected to the Southern Luzon Arterial Road or STAR, also built by our administration and completed in 2008. And we are currently connecting this STAR to the expanded Southern Luzon Expressway or SLEX up to C5, which we also expanded and is being connected to the expanded North Luzon Expressway or NLEX up to the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway that we built, which reaches the Subic Port that we also constructed.

For those who don't want to pay the toll on NLEX, we also expanded and improved the MacArthur Highway and just a while ago we passed by Mozon… well, Mozon to Mangga which we made into a national road and connects Quirino Highway to the Marilao exit for the convenience of those traveling here in San Jose del Monte.

The STAR in Southern Luzon reduced the travel time from Batangas City to Lipa, from one hour to just a few minutes now. And the one we will complete… Hey, who said ten minutes? Oh, you know that. One hour before, that's true. Yeah, okay. Before… ah, you're just reading it, okay. I thought you were traveling there, okay. I was wondering, you live in Lipa, you study in Bulacan. Oh, I see, okay.

Now, the STARLEX Road that we are completing, we call it STARLEX because it connects STAR and SLEX. This will reduce travel time from Batangas Port to Alabang by one hour. The C5-Commonwealth Bypass-Luzon Avenue-Mindanao Avenue-Valenzuela-NLEX Highway will reduce travel time from North and Southern Luzon by half an hour because you won't have to pass through Edsa anymore. And because we expanded the SLEX, as well as the NLEX, and the North Road, we are fixing the traffic in Manila all the way to Calamba in the south and halving the travel time from Balintawak to Bulacan and Clark. And because of that, more people have decided to just live in suburban Laguna and suburban Bulacan or Pampanga instead of Manila. We see this, right? In San Jose del Monte, I saw so many housing projects earlier.

We ensured that more families are able to own their own homes. In our administration, almost half a million affordable housing units have been built across the country. More than 300,000 are along the Urban Luzon Beltway.

Here in the 300,000, perhaps those were formerly squatters, almost half of them were former squatters on the NLEX, on the Northrail tracks, on the Southrail tracks, and also some were relocated when the NLEX was expanded… when the C5 connection was being made, and also those affected by Ondoy and Pepeng. That’s almost 150,000 and they have been relocated to various places in Bulacan, Pampanga, Valenzuela and Laguna.

The remaining half, or more than half, that’s 150,000, are Pag-Ibig members who are buying affordable homes and because that number increased, we lowered the housing interest rate to 6%, so the interest rate is low, the price of land is also low here in the nearby provinces compared to Manila. That's why many people are now living in the suburbs in Bulacan, Laguna and Pampanga.

In the North, when the Americans left Subic and Clark, they became merely a shadow of their former glory for a long time. But now Subic and Clark are magnets of economic activity. International airlines bring half a million tourists to Clark. In fact, a new airline from Taiwan will open tomorrow to also bring tourists to Clark. In Subic, some of the largest world-class ships were built there at Hanjin in Subic. The SCTEX connects the two economic zones and has created more than 150,000 jobs.

Within Metro Manila, we completed NAIA Terminal III. And we connected the rails and the LRT and MRT will soon be connected from Monumento to North EDSA. They are just testing the train's operation to ensure a safe journey.

Then we are connecting, we are building a Northrail train from Caloocan to Malolos and then to Clark. And we are also connecting the Northrail and Southrail going to Lucena.

There is a BOT project where the private sector will build it, it's called MRT7 and it goes to San Jose del Monte. When we were in the coaster, your officials asked, how is our MRT7 going. So I called the relevant officials, what is the status of MRT 7. It has been awarded to the proponent, but the proponent returned to the government because they are changing plans, they are changing the design but the price will increase by 20%. So that's what NEDA needs to examine first, if the passengers on the train can afford this fare increase.

So that's… after I leave here, I will call NEDA to decide immediately so you will know if it will push through or not, and so we can find a way to really push it through, even if the price increases, that it is affordable for our students to travel. That's the way to make the MRT closer to San Jose del Monte.

We will continue hands-on governance until the last moment of our duty. We have made progress in many areas, but not everything… there is still a lot to be done. For example, the Northrail to Bulacan and to Clark is not yet finished. And the MRT7 is still studying the request of the contractor to increase the cost. But everything we worked hard for is to make your future brighter, you, the next generation.

Because you, the youth, are our hope and inspiration. Everything we do should build a better life for every youth in our country.

While we are proud of the achievements of our government, the past achievements are only as good as the ability of the country to continue to grow and prosper. I strongly desire that the progress we have made will not stop; that the remaining things to be done will be taken up by the next generation of leadership.

As a nation, we must be firmly focused on the future, to build on what is good. That is why I want our youth to know what we are doing because you will benefit and you will also continue these efforts so that the development of our country will be sustained.

Therefore, to all of you students, the future of our country is in your hands.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Urban Luzon Beltway Tour: inauguration of the main building of the Bulacan Polytechnic College San Jose del Monte campus. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232646/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27537&Itemid=38