Thank you very much, Ambassador Bautista.

Bishop Roche; Lord Meyers; Ecumenical guests; members of the diplomatic corps; members of parliament; NHS administrators; friends from the Philippine community here in the United Kingdom; other guests; ladies and gentlemen:

Good afternoon to all of you. And to our countrymen, good afternoon to all of you. To our Kapampangan compatriots, may you all have a good day. If there are any relatives of my mother’s side, good evening to all of you, my dear. If there are those who came from Mindanao where I grew up, good afternoon to all of you. And if there are any of my wife’s relatives, good afternoon to all of you.

Today is like no other: we have all found the time and the reason to gather together under one roof and marshal the power of our faith toward the dream of peace for all.

Maybe there’s some of you who came because you were curious about the person of the Philippine president. I hope I have not disappointed any one among the curious.

But I think most of you came with a higher degree of curiosity: wondering whether we, coming from diverse backgrounds and faiths, can come together in common prayer.

In responding to the call to be part of today’s service, we have enhanced our faiths by displaying our capability to build lasting channels of friendship, understanding and respect for one another. And I consider myself blessed and honored to be part of this unique celebration and service.

And of course, a big reason why I attended this celebration is the wonderful opportunity to join our countrymen who make up the Filipino community of the United Kingdom. Many of you are from London, but there are also those who came from Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, and I want to tell you all that Filipinos in the Philippines are proud of the Filipinos here in the U.K.

About four years ago, a census was conducted: it showed that there are 50,000 Filipinos here, and that Filipinos here are in critical human resources areas of Britain, in the health sector, transportation, information technology, education and other sectors where the exceptional skill and intelligence of Filipinos are recognized. And now you are even more recognized: over the past four years, the Filipino community has grown from 50,000 to 90,000.

Recently, our Senate President, Franklin Drilon, and our Speaker, Joe de Venecia, along with other Senators and Congressmen, visited here, invited by the British Interparliamentary Union, and they went to Kingston Hospital and met more than 120 Filipino nurses and they told me how the hospital administrations respect our Filipino colleagues there.

At Royal Free Hospital, as far as I understand, there are more than 2,000 Filipinos there and you are also recognized and admired.

I also learned that there are 2,000 Filipinos at Royal Mail, I even passed by them earlier in uniform, congratulations to you all.

We also have Filipino seafarers among us. Our Filipino seafarers are part of the 200,000 Filipino seafarers around the world, in fact, as far as I understand, we are number one in seafarers worldwide. There is hardly a ship in the world today that does not have a Filipino crew member.

Therefore, these examples show no doubt how important the role of the great Filipino worker is in British society.

And yet, even though most of you have chosen to live here, I know that you are still Filipinos. Because a Filipino, no matter where he lives, remains Filipino in heart and mind. I also know that you want to hear news about what is happening in the Philippines, especially the changes that are happening in our country today.

A number of you have become very successful and have brought pride and honor to your adopted country, but at the same time you also bring pride and honor to our country because wherever the Filipino goes the Filipino worker is known for industry and the ability to do a good job. Wherever the Filipino worker goes, the Filipino worker shows extraordinary skill in the workplace and a resilience that makes the Filipino adopt to the culture of the new country.

Therefore, the Philippines is truly proud of you, and even we, as government officials, for example, when we offer investments in our country, we always say to go to the Philippines because the labor force, the human resources of the Philippines, are excellent, and they easily believe because they have already met many Filipinos in their countries. And we tell them that the great Filipinos you see in your countries came from the Philippines. The Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker. That’s what we use to offer to our other friends.

So, I salute, together with our countrymen in the Philippines, the Filipinos residing here in the U.K., for all that you do to help our motherland and to let it, and the whole world, know the greatness of the Filipino. You are truly admired, you are very good, and not only that, you are not just ambassadors of the Philippines in various countries like here in England, the image you give is how good you are about the Philippines. Not only that, you are now giving our country a good face abroad, like here you are still sending aid to our country. We have seven million Filipinos all over the world and you send our country seven billion dollars every year, so the Philippines thanks you.

Seven billion dollars a year. You know that Shell, their investment in Malampaya, was five billion dollars and that’s what we consider the largest investment, single investment—five billion dollars—in the year 2000—but you, seven billion dollars every year. So, every year you create a Malampaya in our country.

Therefore, the Filipinos who come from various countries, working in various countries, we should not only consider them Overseas Filipino Workers but also designate them as Overseas Filipino Investors because of the seven billion you invest in our country annually. And your investment, wherever it goes when you send it to your communities, allows some children to study there, builds schools, health centers, provides capital for those in your areas and they start their businesses. So, you are really sending capital—the money you send is capital, the money you send is investments for the betterment of your communities.

So, as your president, as president of the places you help, thank you very much for your investments in our country. The great Filipino worker, the great Filipino investor.

So, when we look for how we can rise in the world now, now that we have competition in the 21st century and now that the whole world is facing difficulties since September 11, and even before that, since the slowdown in America and Japan. How do we rise, how do we continue our stability? What we really expect is the greatness of the Filipino worker. That’s why we are promoting in our Philippines industries in the service sector that utilize the skills of the Filipino. Human resource-intensive, skills-intensive service sectors, that is our competitive advantage—like information and communication technology, along with tourism—because those are the industries that rise quickly, those are the industries that utilize the skills of the great Filipino worker.

So, friends here in England, thank you for what you are doing for our country. Thank you for the good image you give about our country. Thank you for the help you give that lifts our economy.

In the first quarter of the year 2001, our GDP growth rate was 3.1 percent, that’s if we don’t include the contribution of overseas Filipinos. If we include the contribution of overseas Filipinos, that’s already the GNP, it became 3.7 percent. So, your seven billion dollars contributes 0.6 percent to our 3.7 percent growth rate. So, your role in our economic rise in the Philippines is very large even though you are here.

So because even though you are here helping our country, our economy, you truly deserve to be given the proper attention and power. That's why I am striving for the Overseas Filipino Voters’ Rights bill to pass soon. This has already been completed at the committee level of the House of Representatives and they are now debating it in the Plenary session. So let's pray for this as well so that the help you send to the Philippines will return to you in the power of voting for our country's officials.

And another important issue that your Congressmen and Senators are fighting for is Dual Citizenship because we know that even though you are here, many of you have already acquired citizenship here because that is the way to maintain your various privileges, your heart is still in the Philippines.

Let us pray that these two proposed laws that are now being debated in Congress and the Senate will pass as soon as possible.

I went here to England to see you and also to meet with Prime Minister Tony Blair because the Philippines and England are allies in the fight against terrorism in our world. They say in Europe, the most stable country is England and in Asia, the most stable is the Philippines. One reason is because of our remote island, Basilan, we already know what terrorism means; and because we know terrorism in Basilan, we also know that terrorism and poverty are twins, so when we fight terrorism we must also fight poverty and that is what we are striving to do.

And also, this problem of terrorism, at the beginning the terrorists tried to make it a war of religions, but we say that it is not a war of religion so we should have more extensive talks with different religions.

The terrorists wish to make us believe that what is happening is a religious war. It is not a religious war, and what we must do is to turn the events of today and the response to those events into an opportunity for greater religious understanding and broader interfaith dialogue.

We are doing this in the Philippines. In the Philippines, Christians and Muslims, especially after September 11, have intensified and worked harder at talking to each other; and intensified efforts to understand each other.

And when I came here and visited Prime Minister Blair earlier, I was surprised but happy that alongside the fight against terrorism and poverty, Prime Minister Blair also gave the same importance to interfaith dialogue. A few days ago Prime Minister Blair told me about the interfaith dialogue that was just concluded here in London. And so that is another commonality that the U.K. and the Philippines have — it is our devotion to the importance of interfaith dialogue.

So today in this church, this Catholic church which represents the majority of the Filipinos, we are here not in a Catholic mass but rather in an interfaith service because, as I said, during these times, these times of great challenge to peace, the more we understand the different faiths, the more we understand the different cultures, the more we will have universal understanding, the sooner we will have peace.

So my Filipino friends, fellow Filipinos here, thank you for attending this interfaith dialogue and more than that, thank you for attending because you are praying for peace in the Philippines, you are praying for the good of the Philippines. But above all, thank you because you are not only praying, you are striving, working, sending investments, sending help to our country, truly whether you are in the Philippines or in England, your greatness gives blessings to your motherland.

Once again, fellow Filipinos, thank you for being here in this church with us today. Thank you for being wherever you are doing your work for the country you live in and for the country you come from.

And let me say once again, you are loved by your fellow Filipinos, you are the pride of your fellow Filipinos. And therefore, may I pray also that you will have success always in your lives, in your careers for your good, the good of your family and the good of the Philippines.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during an Ecumenical Service. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231042/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7592&Itemid=38