Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Coral Triangle Initiative Summit

[Delivered at the Grand Kawanua Convention Center, Manado, North Sulawesi, Indonesia, May 15, 2009]

Thank you, Mr. President.

President Ramos Horta, Prime Minister Somare, Prime Minister Sikua, Prime Minister Najib, development partners, ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you President Yudhoyono for making this Summit happen. At a time when the world seems mired in bad news, the Coral Triangle Initiative is genuine good news. Here, we have nations coming together in common purpose to protect a vital segment of our common global environment.

During times of economic hardship, the pressures are greatest to abandon our obligation to the environment or to loosen the rules. That is precisely why now, we must be even more vigilant in advancing the CTI Program.

To a world struggling with global warming, we are showing the way toward a united front to keep our biodiversity intact, our food resources strong, and our environment pristine.

The Coral Triangle is potentially the world’s most important refuge for marine life. But only if we do our part to keep it in good health. For too long, we have let our environment become degraded; our natural resources diminished; our social contract with nature destroyed. It is time to rebalance our approach, develop a strong economy, provide full employment and maintain the sacred relationship of human beings to mother earth.

This is not an either/or proposition. This must be a win-win solution to not just stopping the degradation but also improving, restoring and enhancing our ecology. We rely on the sea for food, jobs and pleasure. Let us not destroy this resource.

President Yudhoyono’s CTI proposal was welcomed at the 2007 APEC, ASEAN and BIMP-EAGA Summits. CTI Ministerial and senior officials developed a joint action plan, a regional plan of action which we are slated to adapt today.

We in BIMP-EAGA reinforce the synergies with the CTI. We are pursuing the establishment of a joint fisheries consortium among our private sectors. We are pursuing the adaption of policies that call on the tuna industry to share the costs of caring for tuna spawning grounds in the Coral Triangle.

As acknowledged earlier by His Excellency President Yudhoyono funding and assistance has been provided by the multilaterals present here today and the Australian and United governments among others. International nongovernmental organizations such as Conservation International, the Nature Conservancy and the Worldwide Fund for Nature are also joining forces to work with the Coral Triangle governments in pursuing the Regional Plan of Action as well as National Action Plans.

I have just signed Executive Order 797 mandating the Philippine National Plan of Action that follows the general outline of the CTI Regional Plan and adapts the guiding principles enunciated by our six Coral Triangle countries in 2007. My earlier Executive Order 533 adapting Integrated Coastal Management as a national strategy to ensure the sustainable development of our nation’s coasts, oceans and marine resources is further adherence to the CTI. We have taken decisive action of the community, local government, provincial, district and national levels on coastal resource management and multisectoral climate change adaptation planning with national budget funding.

I thank President Yudyohono for showing the way for the rest of us on how much Indonesia will be allocating to this effort and the Philippines will do the same, Mr. President. (applause)

As part of these funds, we have allocated funds this year in our national government appropriations to support the conservation of important species and management of several protected areas including the Apo Reef Natural Park. The Turtle Islands Wildlife Sanctuary and the renowned Tubbataha Reefs Natural Park, a UNESCO World Natural Heritage site.

If we are going to impact the climate change dialogue we must strive to carry the message of Manado into the ongoing meetings of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. We must call on all countries, but most importantly the major industrialized nations and the rest of the developed world, to live up to the UNFCC obligations particularly those related to access to affordable and appropriate technology and the provision of funding for climate change management programs.

Going back to the Philippines, we are also carrying out a joint effort of our government, conservation international and WWF to identify a new priority seascape in line with the regional plan of action and our own national plan. This is a true government-NGO partnership that is successfully working to protect our marine resources.

We hope to continue our collaboration with our development partners, particularly in expanding opportunities for private sector participation in the CTI. We have initiated constructive dialogues with global players in the tuna and tourism industries at an event we co-hosted with our international NGO partners.

Our national plan uses the Sulu-Sulawesi Marine-Eco Region program, the SSME, as its platform in such areas as the management of marine protected areas and networks, and the use of an ecosystem approach to sustainable fisheries management.

Our current SSME efforts include the development and planned implementation this year, with Malaysia and Indonesia of the Trinational Sulu-Celebes Seas Small Pelagic Fisheries Management Project. This project with funding support from the Global Environment Facility through the U.N. supports the goal of the CTI Regional Plan of Action on Sustainable Fisheries Management.

The Philippines is honored to take the lead in its implementation. We are also working to strengthen our bilateral relations with CT countries. We signed separate MOUs on Fisheries Cooperation with Timor Leste and Papua New Guinea as part of our commitment to the sustainable development of the fishing industry. These exchanges will contribute to capacity building in each of our nations. We are interested in Papua New Guinea’s leadership in innovative and effective tuna fisheries management as we look at ways to effectively protect the juvenile and spawning grounds of tuna in our own part of the Coral Triangle.

In the next few years, we will work to improve practices and policies towards achieving sustainability of the live reef fish trade in Palawan, a major source of live reef fish for restaurants all over Asia. We have made great strides in engaging the traders and industry players active in Palawan with the help of WWF. We look forward to the day when Palawan seafood will be recognized as sustainable seafood.

The Filipino people love the environment. They embrace the need to invest in keeping our environment clean, our seas full of fish and our coral free from exploitation and degradation. That is why we have the Green Philippines Initiative. This includes a national commitment to clean air, clean water, and clean land. We are also working to find harmony between jobs and the environment and to find new ways to provide clean energy.

We have a moral obligation to ensure that the beauty and bounty of the land, air and sea remain for the rest of time.

So colleagues, I join our Chairman in calling on everyone to continue our efforts towards sustainable development of our shared coastal and marine resources. There is no higher calling than the protection of our environment. The CTI is central to our individual sense of self-worth, the prosperity of our nations and our commitment to a sustainable globe. Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Coral Triangle Initiative Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412103047/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25089&Itemid=38