Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the 3rd National Congress of the Caucus of Development-NGO Networks (CODE-NGO)

[Delivered in U.P. Diliman, Quezon City, November 30, 2001]

CIVIL SOCIETY AND GOVERNMENT: PARTNERS IN NATION-BUILDING

I am glad to be with you today in solidarity, it’s such a good day to have this CODE-NGO affair. Because today is a day of heroism, the day of Andres Bonifacio.

Andres Bonifacio started the Revolution of 1896. The revolution started was not just a revolution against the Spanish colonizer, it was also a revolution against poverty. And that is what you’re doing, continuing the revolution against poverty so you are the heroes of the new millennium, the Andres Bonifacio of the new millennium.

We learned from the awards today — we didn’t know it before — that CODE-NGO was founded in the early days after EDSA 2. And for these past many years, CODE-NGO has been a vanguard of civil society. CODE-NGO has fought for democracy and good government. CODE-NGO helped restore dignity to our nation in EDSA. CODE-NGO has led the way in EDSA 1 individually and in EDSA 2 as a group together with other groups that led to People Power 2. You led the way and we, the politicians, followed.

CODE-NGO played a crucial role as the Secretariat of KOMPIL II, which was the spearhead of our struggle. That was the time when the NGOs and the political opposition got together. So in our unity, we gained strength and after several months, EDSA 2 occurred.

I want to extend my apologies if you feel that I stole your Chairperson Dinky Soliman from you when I appointed her as Secretary of Social Welfare and Development; only to realize now that even your founding chairperson has been taken away from you, she is now Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission, that’s Karina David. And even your current chairperson is not very far away from government.

This is perhaps the price we have to pay, and the price of Dinky and Karina have to pay for being leaders for change. And as you can see, Dinky and Karina are doing excellent jobs in government.

Not to forget other leaders of CODE-NGO like Danny himself and Ging Deles. I remember about this time last year, I had a dialogue with basic sector organizations in the University of the Philippines. And it was organized by CODE-NGO. That was not the first time that I had such a dialogue, I had been having that as senator and vice-president in my own venues. But that particular time was a special moment because it led to a coalition, a grand coalition, that led to where we are all today.

Indeed, it is important that in our work, you and I, even prior to your and my getting together that time last year, we had been consulting and listening to the concerns of people and groups that felt aggrieved and unheard.

Political leaders must have their ears close to the ground. Good governance is often a matter of listening well and responding with a clear mind, a stout heart, and a steady hand.

My dialogue with basic sector organizations at the U.P. together with you, organized by you, by CODE-NGO, was truly a comprehensive orientation on your work. It contributed in a substantive way to the shaping of this administration’s national agenda. Because I remember that I found out from there that the Social Reform Agenda of President Ramos was indeed contributed by the leaders of CODE-NGO. And all we really had to do was to look at the work that had been done and the work still left undone. And the work left undone is now our Anti-Poverty Agenda.

These agenda straddle the full range of nation-building. Stretching across the affairs of the state and the affairs of the private sector. It is the agenda of civil society. It was the incident of May 1. Though well into our administration, that opened our eyes to a much larger segment of the poor, the unorganized poor, but are there in the underbelly of the metropolis.

We had a sense presence of this group. But May 1 showed us that we had not reached it as effectively as the others. Unlike organized people’s organizations, the concerns of this group are more basic. It does not bask in sophisticated policy pronouncement or reform. Its constituents do not ask for direct participation in government programs and decision-making processes. What they want are jobs, education, homes, and food on the table.

May 1 was a call for attention and action, I think not just from the government but also from NGOs. The urgency was explicitly stated. There was a spate of violence, but beneath that anger, we saw frustration and extreme desperation.

During my State of the Nation Address, my mind kept leaping back to that event in May. And I asked myself, what were the roots of such explosive anger and indignation. I called for a moratorium on politicking to clear the landscape for reforms. But we do not only have to clear the landscape of excessive partisan politics; we also have to plant the seeds, more seeds of solidarity and social participation.

It is in this spirit that I commend CODE-NGO for spearheading this very successful celebration of Social Development Week and for spearheading what so far has been a very successful launching of the peace bonds.

It is only fitting that your sector undertakes this celebration every so often. And it is only fitting that your sector undertakes the bonds to empower our constituents — yours and mine — in doing what they would have long ago been doing had they been so empowered.

Each one of the CODE-NGO leaders and members are the prime movers of equity-based development in our country. We need to reenergize and we focus our concerns occasionally and this is one good day to do it. We need to reinvigorate the spirit of volunteerism and active citizenship as our country goes through one of the most difficult periods in the history of the world at least the recent history of the world. Because right now the global economy is in grave uncertainty. The most powerful economy in the world is in recession. There is an attrition in investments, consumption and jobs. The war against terrorism is unabated and citizens are challenged to look not upon the government but upon the collective resources of the community to sustain the path of positive change, reform and transformation.

In the past months that you and I have been in government or at least many of you and I have been in government, what we have done together is unrelentingly to address poverty and uphold good governance. I have committed to work, with your support, for one million new jobs in agriculture within the next three years.

As of October 15, agriculture had generated over 136,000 jobs since the day of that commitment. We committed to distribute 200,000 hectares of private and public land for agricultural land reform within the next 12 months. As of October 15, the Department of Agrarian Reform has been struggling with the distribution of over 17,000 hectares.

The problem is our budget deficit that we have kept down to Php145 billion so that Lito Camacho will not have to suffer high inflation rates, high interest rates, and a lower credit risk rating. And because of this, therefore, DAR is struggling to look for the funds to pay for the lands that they want to distribute over these next few months.

Yesterday, Ging Deles told me about a DPWH project whose social acceptance seems to be very low. And so I asked the DBM if it’s still possible to cancel that project and realign the funds to land reform instead. So this is what we are trying to do.

She said it depends on how far the contractors have started working on the project. I likewise committed to ensure that every barangay will have a school building. Survey and construction planning is now ongoing for 1,590 that do not have a school building.

We committed to provide funds for a hundred thousand affordable mass housing units. PAG-IBIG has allocated Php10 billion per year. The other GFIs committed a total of Php15 billion but they’re having a great difficulty of coming up with their commitments. And, first of all, because GSIS is sticking to individual financing for pre-designed housing. But yesterday I asked Secretary Lito Camacho to tell GSIS that they can’t do it like this. They have to open up to all kinds of designs as long as the price is right. And therefore, they have to tie up with other agencies, LGUs, maybe even POs or NGOs so that we can have truly mass housing and not funding individual low-cost housing.

The General Appropriations Bill for 2002 provides for another Php3.7 billion for socialized housing. But if we are going to look at CISFA, the law that provided for socialized housing, even that is not enough. It should really be Php5 billion. So this is the work that we have to do, that Lito Camacho has to do – look for the money to make up for these deficiencies.

In the meantime, I issued Executive Order No. 45 last October 25 prescribing the issuance of housing-related certifications, clearances and permits. This aims to drastically reduce red tape in securing housing permits, so that now housing permits can be gotten in a period of three months rather than two and a half years.

Two weeks ago, together with Vicky Garchitorena, another CODE-NGO alumnae, I met with Hernando de Soto. We discussed how to spur our land to the landless programs and our small enterprise programs.

Starting January next year, Vicky will reduce her load in government, she will relinquish her PMS to another technocrat in government. And she will take on a number of special projects that are directly related to the work that she had been doing in CODE-NGO. And one of them will be working with de Soto, not only to cut red tape and providing land to the landless, but also how to use sub rosa documents to bring the disadvantaged sectors out in the open and make them eligible for legal transactions.

This is a revolutionary concept that has been working in Latin America. And given that our country, our social structure is very Latin American, and with Vicky as in-charge, I am confident that this will also click in the Philippines.

We must set our mind in winning the war against poverty within this decade, and not some nebulous period in the far future. This has also something to do with the war against terrorism now because extreme poverty fuels the willingness of people to support terrorist activities.

We will accomplish the goal of fighting poverty and fighting terrorism while governing without fear or favor. I know that CODE-NGO feels partly responsible for making me President of the Philippines. But I know that you will agree with me when I say that in my heart of hearts and in my conscience, I feel that I am beholden to no one except to God and to the people as a whole.

Even my husband, the favorite whipping boy of my political opponents, is not above the law. Any charge they hurl against him no matter how personally I think is ridiculous, I still pass on to another body that is not within my constitutional control even if I consider the issues against him as an occupational hazard of politics.

We have agreed, between him and me, to have any issues against him investigated by, as I said, a constitutionally independent body where the evidence, if any, can be examined with objectivity and transparency. Perhaps because in the course of examination, the charges against him are turning out to be made-up after all, now the target is no longer my husband, it is now me, myself. But I can tell you with a clear conscience that what I was before when you knew me, and that’s why you decided that I’m just as good as anybody that you can work for to try to lead the country in a new era, that’s still the way I am. I am still as honest and a person of integrity as my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal was, and raised me to be.

I became President on the shoulders of People Power. And so, as I said, my loyalty is not to any one group, but to the entire citizenry. I am not making decisions to gain votes in the year 2004. I believe that the presidency is a matter of destiny. How can I not believe that? Was it not destiny that made me president on January 20. And so therefore my agenda is to ensure that we will end this administration with major accomplishments of fundamental and historic value in terms of nation-building, in terms of the welfare of the people.

All I wish, as I said, on my first working day in Malacañang, is to be a good public servant and a good president. I know you will continue to help me be a good president. Civil society is the conscience of society. And I know that you will continue to point out what is wrong, and call attention to unfulfilled promises. We are counting on you to perform these tasks because we can never truly achieve good governance without being partners in quest of truth and right. However, government needs responsible fiscalizers. Without objective and accurate data, and solid alternatives to policy, advocacy at times becomes cheap sloganeering and faultfinding. But that is what’s good about CODE-NGO. You go beyond that. In fact, you don’t indulge in that. Instead of demagoguery, partisan sales talk, or trumped up charges, what you work on are facts, proposals, programs, new ideas forged in the crucible of enlightened debate. We do not need wild accusations that serve to demoralize the civil service rather than clean up the bureaucracy. In fact, now with the peace bonds, as Father Vasquez said, the controversial peace bonds, now the shoe is on the other foot. You know what it’s like to be at the receiving end of wild accusations.

I therefore ask you to lead in raising the standard of advocacy once again to the point that we can make government intently listen and become engaged in constructive policy discourse. I also ask you, as the largest network of NGOs in the country, to continue to help forge greater unity within civil society.

You’ve survived more than a decade of maintaining a diverse coalition of non-government organizations. You have served as a model of coalition-building in our country. I ask you to use this experience to continue and expand building bridges among civil society groups whose differences have once again become more and more pronounced. While I understand that the power of civil society lies in diversity, we know that too much diversity can result in a din of incoherence, in a Tower of Babel. Our country does not need that. Our country needs unity. And CODE-NGO, as it has led in the past, as it leads in the present, can now lead the way in bringing about unity once again in civil society. We must enhance our social capital as a nation. The foundation of our democracy is strong. Ultimately, it is our collective sense of values — courage, honesty, perseverance — that will fuel our productivity and bring us to prosperity.

You have helped bring this government to power. You have helped achieve this goal. Our administration shares your fight. So many of you are in the administration to begin with. So we share a common vision. We share a common aspiration for the poor. Because this vision and aspiration have, in fact, been shaped, in large degree, by CODE-NGO.

Your colleagues who have joined us in government, your rich experience in development work, helped us to craft policies that will heighten the impact and spread the value of your work to other parts of the nation. Help us transfer lands to the tiller, respect the ancestral domain of indigenous peoples, protect the fishing ground of our fisherfolk. Share with us your experiences in giving dignity to persons with disabilities and fighting for equal opportunities that women deserve.

But most of all, help create more jobs, build homes, and make food available at the table of our most depressed brethren.

In the end, our success will be measured by the number of people whose lives we have uplifted to whom we have brought back the power to determine their future and destiny.

I am confident that as you have done in the past, rising to all your challenges, you will rise to the new challenge of having the opportunity to share power with an administration. Let us all shape a sustainable future for all.

Congratulations to CODE-NGO. And on this day of heroes for the poor, may CODE-NGO continue to be a hero for all, a hero of civil society in the Philippines.

Congratulations and thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library