Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Gonzales for your introduction of me.

Grandfather Governor Antonio, you are our host governor. Please sit down.

Amin nga opisyales ti Region II; members of the National Security Council; I see here Congressman Junie Cua, he’s here a while ago? Yes, and the other congressmen, the other local officials who are here; I see Governor Castillejos, I see Governor Cua and Apo Bishop Villena; Father Rani and other leaders of the religious sector; our leaders of the military and the police; mga leaders ti NGO, naimbag a bigat yo amin apo.

Ah, adda diay ni Governor. Sorry, Governor. Okay. They cut off your name. (laughter) O siguro, they didn’t know that the governor of Nueva Vizcaya was so young and beautiful.

Well, anyway, thank you very much for the resolutions you gave me. These new challenges in the country today, we should not forget the initial dreams for the continued dialogue. Especially here, for the peace and order of the entire country. So let us continue these Regional Peace and Security Assemblies, is this the eighth? The ninth, after the eighth, to address and respond to the issues that threaten permanent peace and order. And I would like to congratulate you for the improvement of the crime rate here, according to the inputs from PMS. Congratulations to the PNP! General Damian. (applause)

But they say, there are still areas where the crime rate is rising, and according to them, these crimes are related to politics, hopefully not. So this is my first request to you. To the local leaders, even if there is a high crime rate, set aside the conflicts, because the elections are still far away. Let us discuss the root causes of the problems in a peaceful and civilized way. That is the way we can discuss our differences now. And also for the decline in the number of armed rebels. Congratulations to NOLCOM! (applause)

There are only a few non-combatants left, they say, less than 500, there are no longer 500 remaining NPA in the entire region, but I believe that they can also be guided towards the path of transformation and peace. And that is what we want to do in this Regional Peace and Order Assembly.

Order has been restored through the Convergence used by NOLCOM to reduce the number of armed rebels. But what the people want—from what I hear, what I understand from your inputs—and what I also want is a comprehensive peace in your region, so that it does not disturb progress. I instruct NOLCOM to defeat the rebels that are still there in the hinterlands of Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya and Quirino.

It is also concerning that the report states that the rebels have changed their tactics, they are just increasing recruitment, and they constantly carry out harassment and extortion to increase their funds. We do not want the rebellion to intensify again if the number of recruits increases. And that’s why among the resolutions is to spread the culture of peace, let us talk to the people to help so that the extortionists cannot continue to harm businesses.

Even if hardship is the reason for rebellion, it is rebellion that brings greater hardship to the people.

The Communists have spent years as a low-level threat. It is time for their disruption and violation of human rights to be put to rest so that the nation can move ahead. They impede the progress and development of many rural areas. They are responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses. So if we are to become a first world country, as you say in the resolution in 20 years, we have to put a stop to their ideological nonsense and their criminal acts once and for all. And our instruction is, our goal is — they must be stopped by 2020. That is what we want to do.

Iso nga idi rabii, when I had coffee with the media, they were asking me, “So, what is the insurgency situation now?” So I asked Bert Gonzales to answer that. Sure, it is going down but the reason why we are having this Regional Peace and Order Assembly is that — yes, it’s going down, and it’s always there, low-level threat so we have to finish it once and for all so that our country can have a decade of total peace which will bring us to the first world in 20 years. And that is not a pipe dream, because there’s a Goldman Sachs analysis that indeed in 20 years it is possible for us to become first world but we have to do what we must to do. Maysa dagiti ket ti peace and order and political stability toy pagilian tayo.

But to the rebels who genuinely and sincerely speak peace, we will respond in kind. And I hope that the congressmen who are here today will help us pass the amnesty resolution soon. The most important part of our counter-strategy is the soft power of economic progress, dialogue and continuing efforts to arrive at mutual understanding. We continue to devise programs as fruits from these assemblies that will advance peace and development for the benefit of our country, especially the poor. It should no longer be necessary to lose lives on both side of the conflict, when so many opportunities are now available to improve the people’s welfare.

Itattay napanak diay Apayao, and Governor Bulut was telling me, so many new programs, we never saw these programs before. And I said, well, that’s because of the fiscal reforms that we have made, Congress acting on new taxes, and now improvements in tax administration.

Going back to Region II, the origin of the insurgency in this region can be traced to the problems that stood in the way of regional development. And you, in your assembly have analyzed what are the roots of insurgency that you share with other regions and what are the roots that are unique to this region.

And in our administration, we are resolving many of these. For instance, maysa dagiti prominent nga recommendations yo ket ti Cagayan Economic Zone wenno Port Irene. Yesterday, I went to the Cagayan Economic Zone, went to Sta. Ana and I saw there thousands of jobs have been created in that Cagayan Economic Zone that I visited yesterday. The airport, as I said in my previous SONA, before in my previous SONA, I said we will build a new airport in Lal-lo but the next year I said, upon further assessment, because the Navy, the CEZA and the private sector are willing to put up the international airport in Port Irene, we will just transfer our ambitions there. And sure enough, di napanak diay Port Irene, I saw the new expanded airport. Before the expansion, only six passenger planes could go there. Now the airport is bigger than the airport in Caticlan. But many of the international tourists land in Manila and then land there in a 20-seater plane. Or they land in Tuguegarao and ride two and a half hours to go there, so they complain. So the investors, the joint venture with CEZA and the investors from Macau wanted to expand that airport to an international airport but if they lengthen it some more, they will come across communities which we relocated and they don’t want social problems. So because of that, they look for an entirely new area without any communities and they will build a brand new international airport. (applause)

Gapo ti helicopter, I also saw the beautiful beaches of the Eastern Pacific Coast of Cagayan. And I was told in the briefing yesterday, that no less than three developers are interested in putting up resorts there just waiting for that new international airport to start being built because when it starts being built, they can start building because they know that by the time they finished, the airport will also be finished.

So iso ti maysa nga importante nga proyekto tayo para ti progreso ti Cagayan Valley. Maysa met nga ado nga indigenous peoples toy region yo, it is also important that we have Ancestral Domain Reform. And I am happy that one of the heroes I praised in my SONA last Monday is here but not wearing his fashionable outfit, si Chieftain Rosario Camma. (laughter/applause) He was on the frontpage of the newspapers outshining all those beautiful gowns of the ladies who were there but highlighting also, highlighting also how the Bugkalots of the Quirino-Vizcaya-Aurora tri-boundary after the Ancestral Domain Reform have been able to improve a thousand hectares of ancestral land returned to them by the government to his tribe and how they have built small irrigation facilities, increased planting activity and improved their incomes. Congratulations manen kada kayo, Apo Chieftain! (applause)

The FIELDS program is especially important in your region. Because you are number one in corn production and number two in rice production. So FIELDS is very important ken dagidiay probinsiya, as far as provinces are concerned, in the self-sufficiency program that were done together by IRRI and DA, uray number one it Nueva Ecija iti rice production, because the government has poured so much already there, which is why they are number one to begin with. Kuna ti self-sufficiency program, the number one that must receive now the most assistance from FIELDS is the province of Isabela. (applause) So that will be the part of the… Oh! our new cabinet secretary’s smiling from ear to ear, Secretary Bebot Bello. But of course, that doesn’t mean that we are not talking about the other parts of Region II. Because of the fertile soil of the Cagayan River Valley, the mightiest river in the country, and the hardworking farmers as I said, you’ll be number one and number two.

Diay State of the Nation Address ko idi kunak nga ti Pilipinas gapo pay ti tiyempo dagidiay it Kastila, Español, we’ve already been importing rice. In fact, during that three years that we exported rice, we were also importing rice. So we’ve always been importing rice. Why? Because we have an archipelago with rocky, rough-laden and sparse soil and we don’t have a mighty Mekong and vast fertile plains like Thailand and Vietnam. The closes thing we have to a Mekong in the Philippines is none other than the Cagayan River that is why it is the fertile plains of Cagayan Valley that will be the secret to our success of self-sufficiency in the future. (applause)

So, it is important to maintain your progress in agriculture, not only because you will feed the country but because so many of your communities depend on it. And in turn, your communities provide food for so many of our countrymen.

So we talked about the inputs to agriculture, talk about what we have to spend, and precisely because in our country, we don’t have natural, great natural sources of irrigation, we have to build irrigation systems unlike in Thailand and Vietnam where the Great Mekong has so many tributaries that is natural irrigation.

So, this morning I visited the Abulog-Apayao Irrigation Project, which I started in 2001. It is very important both to the Cagayanons and to your neighbors in Apayao who share your water resources. It provides irrigation to three towns in… or four in Apayao : Sta. Marcela, Pudtol, Flora and Luna, and four towns in Cagayan province : Aparri, Allacapan, Ballesteros and Abulog — of course, that’s the name of the project. And so we hope that with this new irrigation project and the new irrigation canals, there will be more and more lands available.

Panawen daytoy iti panagtitinulong ken damayan. Agkakadua tayo nga agbirok ti pamuspusan tapno: una, ma-conserve iti energy because we are now in the midst of a world energy and food crisis. Ken kayat ko nga Dios ti agngina ken ag-congratulate kenni Governor Antonio ta kunana next month, there will be a windmill project that will begin in Northern Cagayan province. (applause) And that will provide for the investment needs of the northern part where a lot of investors seem to want to go because of the beauty of Angid, etc. and the facilities of the airport. And also, maysa pay, because the gateway, the information technology gateway of the telecoms, the redundancy so that it does not… tsunami in Taiwan or something continued pay ti call center services tayo. The Globe put its redundancy gateway in Aparri and the expectation is that it will be cheaper to have telecoms in Northern Cagayan and that will bring call centers here. So I was telling the TESDA Director yesterday that she should start working with the good schools here like, for instance, St. Paul and… you have many good schools here in Cagayan and to put up already the Business Process Association accredited curriculum for call center training so that tapno by the time that the call centers are put up there and they start hiring, they will not have a difficult time rejecting so many applicants.

So there are so many things that can happen to Cagayan Valley — tourism, exemplified by the beaches of the Pacific Coast, and then even industry and services like possibly the call centers. Energy, kasla dagidiay windmill projects ken umay pay nga hydro project, but the most basic where the people count on you is really agriculture, agri-business. And with agri-business, we talk about countryside development. And with countryside development, we need peace and order in the countryside.

Indeed, we should also work together to continue the progress that began in the past seven years. But let us make sure that the people will feel the benefits of development, and one key to that is that Cagayan Valley will continue to be a food basket for the rest of the Filipinos.

Dios ti agngina kada kayo amin, apo. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly of Region II. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115656/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1583&Itemid=38