DEAREST friends and countrymen.

First of all, congratulations to the biggest graduating class in the history of the Philippine Military Academy and special mention to the female graduates because there were only 77 female graduates before this class and now you will add 37 to the 77, a 30 percent increase in the female graduates in the history of the Philippine Military Academy. I had a wonderful time with you and your parents last night.

When I came home after that, I was reflecting that regardless of our rank, our origin or economic circumstance, as your valedictorian alluded to in his very touching personal valedictory, we are all equal under God and we all call ourselves Filipinos. This great institution, the Philippine Military Academy does the Lord’s work and the nation’s work. It produces leaders who hold God and country sacred and to fulfill your obligations to God and country, academy soldiers live by a simple but a powerful creed – Courage, Integrity, and Loyalty. I had the chance to speak with your parents and siblings last night, I can see that every parent, friend, and neighbor who is here today sharing this moment with you feels as I do, proud to know you, proud of what you are doing, proud that you will be contributing to the future strength and glory of our nation. You represent the future and we must ever be moving forward and never retreat.

The nation is once again at a crossroads and there are many forces that wish to drag us back and stop our forward progress. Some of you know that personally. Some of you have been the objects of attempts at recruitment. There are the communist thugs who still live by an outmoded godless ideology devoid of the values you live and die for every day. You are in the frontlines of crushing an ideology that wishes to tear down everything you believe in – God, country, and the fight against poverty. And as if the communists were not enough of a threat to our way of life, there are terrorist extremists who have so perverted religion as to make it unrecognizable to peace-loving Muslims and Christians alike. Against the backdrop of the threat posed by these extremists and faithless thugs, you our military compatriots, are a vital part of bringing us to the brink of peace in Mindanao. The combined political will of our government, of which you are a part, and our international friends and neighbors will make a lasting peace in Mindanao that will make us proud.

While you wage war against enemies of the state, I am also waging war against poverty and its destructive power. Just as peace in Mindanao will alleviate many burdens for our fighting men and women, so too will the alleviation of poverty across our nation allow you to defend our nation from enemies outside our borders or from transnational global enemies rather than having to contend with enemies from within.

Our great nation puts its faith in God, draws inspiration from people, and draws strength from the Constitution and I was so gratified to hear about the Constitution. However, we recognize that many aspects of our society must be fixed and transformed if our nation is to join the First World within the next 20 years, the years of your leadership in the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We must have the courage to change our economic system and to overhaul the policies and institutions of government so that our economy works for the poor not just the rich. In this struggle, I have made tough decisions. My economic journey has not been easy and my popularity has suffered but it is a cause worth fighting for. To drive down the road ahead, we must look forward not through the rear view mirror. Political reforms won’t be any easier and my popularity may suffer again but it is an another cause worth fighting for.

An essential part of building a modern nation in these trying times is not only to have a modern Constitution but also have a military as strong and modern as the nation it serves. And this administration, your administration, has put money where our rhetoric is. We are investing heavily, unprecedentedly in new and better equipment, more training, and more cooperation with our allies to professionalize our military and reform our defense capability. You, our new officers, deserve the embrace of nation and I also embrace you today. But you need more than just an embrace, you need guns that work, shelter for your families, and undivided focus on security concerns not political intrigues. To that end, I have tasked the Secretary of Defense to follow a roadmap called the Philippine Defense Reforms for reforming our military into a world-class fighting force.

As your commander in chief, I will not tolerate any diversion from the path we are on. We have a plan to modernize our economy and we will fulfill it. We have a plan to modernize our system of government and we will fulfill it. And we have a plan to reform our military to protect and strengthen our nation and we will fulfill it. The people want progress, not a rerun of the past. We cannot keep sweeping disloyalty under the rug. We cannot even allow disloyalty to face the rug with a few push-ups. We must sweep disloyalty out of our house once for all and let the sunshine in. We owe it to you to keep the temptation of politics out of your reach. I expect you to be loyal to your values, to your nation, and to your Constitution. In return, I will remain steadfast in my loyalty to you and to the cause we all share, the fight for a just, fair, and stable democracy.

Today before God and country, we celebrate together the virtues of courage, integrity, and loyalty. We celebrate together the future, your future, and what it means to the nation. You are a role model for the next generation. I am proud to be your commander in chief. Congratulations to each and everyone of you and in your honor, I am very happy that on this occasion of your graduation as commander in chief of the Armed Forces, I am very glad to be able to hereby pardon all outstanding punishments of the cadet corps as may be prescribed by the Superintendent of Philippine Military Academy effective today.

To all of you, our new young officers of the AFP, congratulations and welcome aboard the great service to our nation. Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Graduation rites of the Philippine Military Academy, “Mandirigma ng Dangal ng Lahi” (Mandala) Class of 2006. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214411/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2417&Itemid=38