Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Business Forum

[Delivered at the Brocade City Room, Jinjiang Hotel,  Chengdu, Sichuan Province, People’s Republic of China, June 6, 2007]

Good morning to all of you. Thank you for your warm welcome.

Open dialogue and trust between peoples and nations have never been more important than in today’s world. We welcome this opportunity to communicate with the people of Chengdu and Sichuan in order to help forge stronger ties.

China is the fastest growing developing country in the world, also the most populous. China has unleashed the human potential of your vast citizenry by effective use of technology, science and engineering.

Your remarkable rise reflects the promise and challenge of the world in which we live. We see your dramatic growth lifting millions out of poverty and shaping the nation squarely onto the world stage as a new global power.

From the Philippine point of view, we welcome the surge in economic growth and development as a healthy development for our nation. The internal market demand and domestic consumption of China has a direct and positive impact on the Philippines in terms of job creation and balance of trade. Because of your consumption and your market demand, growth in Asia is transitioning from being export-driven to domestically-driven. And we hope it continues.

As China becomes a true political and economic giant, your obligations to your neighbors also increase, separate from your obligations to your own citizens. China has an important and strategic role to play in the economic development and security situation of the Asian region. We are hopeful that China will continue to pursue your foreign policy based on maintaining world peace and promoting common development. We also look towards China to lead in promoting good neighborly relations and regional cooperation.

In the Philippines, as I said, we benefit from the growth of China. China is now one of our top three trading partners. Our relationship with China is among the most important ties of our country. It can only lift up our nation as it lifts up other nations, too.

Philippines-China relations are at an all-time high, as President Hu Jintao called it, “A Golden Age.” Philippine relations with China are now more confident, mature, comprehensive, punctuated with substantial and important projects aimed at deepening exchanges in many areas including economics, trade and investment, and even defense. Our relations are based on mutual respect.

Major landmarks of our relations include the Philippines-China Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Partnership framework, also the Northrail from Manila to my home province of Pampanga, the national broadband network projects in the Philippines, and continued regular exchanges of high-level visits between our two countries. We are happy with China financing our Northrail and our national broadband network because transport and communication infrastructure development is crucial to our economic development plan for our nation.

We have visited many parts of China. We come here very frequently. And now we are honored to visit Chengdu, the capital of Sichuan province, China’s biggest province, the heartland of China and gateway to Western China.

When I was young, I used to hear of Chengdu from those who are visiting Tibet. This was the gateway to Tibet. But now Chengdu is known for itself. It has attracted investment from many leading multinational firms. You’re successful in consumer electronics, steel, alcohol, animal feeds, hydropower, metallurgy, machinery, information technology, tourism, pharmaceuticals and chemicals, to name a few. And the country’s largest color TV producer Changhong Electric sells a lot of its products to the Philippines.

So today, we have high-powered Filipino businessmen joining us because here in Chengdu, Filipino businessmen have joined the others in appreciating what Chengdu has to offer. Shoemart, the icon of Philippine retailing, has opened an 80 million-dollar mall in Chengdu, its third mall in China. One of our leading banks, Metro Bank, is hopefully establishing a presence in Chengdu, also the third in China. And Oishi, represented here by one of our special envoy, Mr. Carlos Chan is also contemplating an investment here in Chengdu.

Going in the other direction, the Sichuan new hope group has invested so far 11 million dollars in the Philippines to build feed factories, both have been coming in during my administration. And I’m happy to tell the president of new hope that the two places where you have put your feedmill are both in my home province of Pampanga. And the seven million dollars next coming up will be in San Simon, which is also in my home province of Pampanga. In fact, my great grandfather comes from that town.

But we all are here, the businessmen of the Philippines and the officials of the Philippines, to cooperate in various aspects – trade, investment, tourism and people-to-people exchanges.

We welcome the signing of the sister-province agreement between Sichuan and Cebu, which is one of our main tourist destinations in the Philippines.

Last year, one thousand tourists from Chengdu visited the Philippines. We invite more tourists from Chengdu. As an archipelago with beautiful beaches, the Philippines presents an attractive destination to the people of landlocked Chengdu and Sichuan, particularly during the summer and winter months. And we look forward to the day when Sichuan and Chengdu will substantially raise the level of investments in the Philippines.

The Philippines is the perfect regional partner to aid as a logistics partner. We have heard that Chengdu is a logistics center of central and western China. Third country logistics services are important for China because you need to source and import many of your raw materials and intermediate inputs from other countries.

The Philippines could help enhance the competitiveness of Chinese inland industries by doing procurement and pre-processing of the low value-to-weight product components in the Philippines. The Philippines could provide logistics services to Chengdu in terms of forwarding networks and procedures, supply chain services, and even local warehousing. It is especially positioned to be a supplier of logistics services to China because of its strategic position in ASEAN; because of its high-value skilled labor well-versed in international logistics; because of its existing economic zones; because of its ready supply of raw materials and intermediate products especially semi-conductors, agricultural products and mineral resources. In fact, the Philippines is already a major semi-conductor supplier to China.

Chengdu is also an important market for fresh fruit such as the famous Philippine mangoes but also bananas, pineapples, young coconut. Also for processed food such as dried nuts, dried fruits, I mean, nuts, fruit juices and puree, coconut products, canned fruits and frozen seafood like abalone.

And so to push the bilateral economic and trade relations to a higher stage, we hope that both the Philippines and Chengdu and Sichuan should push to further deepen existing cooperation between our two economies. We envision a day when the businessmen from Chengdu, when the Sichuanese and the Filipinos are trading more with each other, investing more in each other, and visiting each other more.

The Philippines offers one of the best values for China investors in Southeast Asia. As I said earlier, we offer a strategic location in a fast growing region. Our workforce is well-educated, productive, English-speaking. And we are cutting red tape to simplify the requirements for investing in the Philippines.

The Philippines is in a fight to turn around the economy to lift up its poor. You know what that fight is like because you have succeeded here in China. You have succeeded here in central and western China. And the Philippipnes is winning the fight. Slowly but surely, we’re investing in our people and creating new hope and opportunities.

Our administration has succeeded in breaking the back of our lethargic economic legacy by a combination of tough fiscal measures and equally politically difficult decisions to raise more revenue. In one legislative stroke – and I thank our congressmen here for helping us do the important legislation – we were able to stop the backsliding and move forward to drastically reduce our budget deficit and more importantly make long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure.

The biggest single act I was talking about, mainly responsible for the good performance of the Philippine economy, was the passage of our value-added tax which in one bold stroke raised serious revenue to send an unmistakable signal that we’re serious about moving the nation forward.

New revenues, better collection, a crackdown on tax cheats, prosecution of corrupt officials along with fiscal discipline has put the Philippines on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. New taxes are not easy, they are not pretty, they are not politically popular, but they have broken the cynical cycle of our political and economic life.

That’s not all, though. Our complete focus on the economy, on fiscal discipline, on balancing the budget and the need for long overdue human and physical infrastructure requirements help round out the economic surge.

And it is paying off in a strong peso, low inflation, low budget deficits, low interest rates, a robust stock market – in fact, the highest index in our country’s entire history is what we’re enjoying today – rapid inflows of foreign investment, tripling of investments in economic zones and priority sectors, and we created almost six million new jobs in the last six years. Our unemployment rate – well, not as low as Chengdu – is the lowest in a long time. Our poverty rate is the lowest as well in a long time.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity with some of these strongest fundamentals, I was mentioning, and we have strong growth. Of course, we cannot compare to China’s growth rates. No other country can compare to China’s growth rates. But at least to comparing to other countries in our region or even in the world outside of China’s phenomenal growth, our economy in this first quarter of 2007 expanded at the rate of 6.9 percent

We’re proud of the fact that our external debt is being prepaid. But we are not resting, rather we’re forging ahead to sustain the momentum.

We’re committed to consolidating our gains in new revenue, as I said earlier, by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training, we thank China for participating in our distance learning project along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines. And we thank China for participating in these infrastructure projects.

Because of these investments and our strategic location, your companies from Chengdu will also become more competitive if you do business in the Philippines. By investing in one another, trading with one another, and visiting one another, we show that we have confidence in a shared future together.

And so in conclusion, we hope that the friendship we will forge here today will bring our lands and our peoples ever nearer to each other in the days to come.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].