Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the overnight celebration of the 21st anniversary of El Shaddai – DWXI Prayer Partnerships Foundation International, Inc.

Thank you very much, Brother Mike. And happy, happy birthday! From the millions of Filipinos who admire you.

Reverend VICS, reverend fathers, officials of our country, here is Vice President De Castro, Speaker De Venecia, Senator Mar Roxas, Congressman Bacani, Mayor Atienza, Mayor Sonny Belmonte, various other mayors, and brothers and sisters, children of Yahweh El Shaddai, happy anniversary to all of us!

One of the greatest honors of my life is that in the 21 years of the prayer partners of Yahweh El Shaddai, I have been with you for the past 14 years. Thank you for our companionship with one another.

I remember when I was not yet Vice President, protocol and security were needed, and we would gather four times a year for overnight stays. And when the Senate moved here to the PICC, I was still able to join even in regular activities. So I got used to listening to the advice of our servant leader, Brother Mike Velarde.

The prayer partnership of Yahweh El Shaddai is 21 years old. It started in 1984, when the political situation was very severe, which worsened the state of our economy. And Brother Mike was one of those… Because of his deep faith, he was able to overcome his own economic hardships. And he began to share the Lord’s blessing upon him on DWXI, and in doing so, many also had great faith and hope in the Lord because the message that Brother Mike conveyed to us was that if we have faith, the Lord will bless us, not only in heaven but also here in our world, in our lives now.

That's why I remembered there was a cover story about Brother Mike. He was called “The Prophet of Profit” because now it is being taught that if we have faith, God will bless our needs here in this life, and of course especially there in the afterlife in heaven afterwards.

From those times onward, as Brother Mike said, there have been many experiences that shaped the partnership of Yahweh El Shaddai and also Brother Mike’s leadership within the community and in our society.

In the past, during severe economic times, Brother Mike became the “Prophet of Profit” so we would not lose hope. Now, the Lord has molded him into a “Prophet of Reconciliation.”

In his statement earlier as his birthday message, he did not talk about himself; he talked about prayers for the peace and stability of our politics and our economy. Praise Brother Mike! Praise the Lord for giving us Brother Mike!

That is how it is… Serious… Political life is not serious. In our 21 years of experience in prayer partnership, we have seen the politics of our country, instead of helping our economy rise… it is sinking it further. We have had three Edsa revolutions, we have had nine coup attempts, it is truly time to listen to the call of the Lord that Brother Mike is conveying to us – the call for peace and reconciliation.

For me, Brother Mike had been advising me on that for a long time. So on June 30, 2004, when I took my oath as president, I stood right here in this very place, and I gave my 10-point agenda that I wanted to be my legacy to our country. And that tenth point, I said, I wanted to heal the divisions of Edsa 1, 2 and 3.

Now, Brother Mike is repeating the call for reconciliation, the call for unity. And I, as president – and thank you to Brother Mike for the great support he gave me in the 2004 election, I became president. Thank you for the advice and the call – and as president of the Philippines, I am ready to take steps to call on my opponents, let us unite so that politics does not ruin what should be the take off of our economy.

As Brother Mike says, let us find a formula that works, one that is acceptable in the soonest possible time to unite. This is also what I am looking for. This is also my prayer. And tonight, on Brother Mike’s birthday, my birthday wishes are of course number one, his continued success in his endeavors. But number two, above all, his desire for our country to unite.

What is this formula that can be done and, God willing, this is what we will look for. Our thinking is already underway, Brother Mike’s thinking about formulas, but above all, the thinking and the great will of our Lord—that is the method we will seek.

How we will unite, my prayer is to find it as president through divine will. What I pray for in divine will is this: “I am nothing, God is all. Father, I love you. Come, divine will, to think in my mind, to speak in my mouth, to see with my eyes, to listen in my ears, to breathe in my breathing, to move in my motion, to suffer in my suffering.” So that the will of the Lord will be my will and all of our wills. I know His desire is for our country to unite. I know the way He wants us to seek it through prayer to Him. Let us all be humble and not think that we know all the answers. The answer is with Yahweh El Shaddai.

Therefore, if in the past, during the severity of the economy, we relied on the Lord that if we trust in Him, He will give us comfort in our lives even now in this world. Now too, let us pray, let us hope that if we turn to Him and seek His will, He will give us a way on how to unite our country. And I know very well, one of those He will use for unity is none other than the servant leader, Brother Mike Velarde.

Happy birthday, Brother Mike! And happy anniversary once again to all of us!

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Happy birthday, Brother Mike! At happy anniversary muli sa ating lahat!

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). GMA’s Speech during the 21st Anniversary Overnight Celebration of El Shaddai – DWXI Prayer Partnerships Foundation International, Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412062926/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5106&Itemid=38