PRAYING FOR OUR DREAMS

It was made, I think, this day instead of November 30 because we also have a policy that when a holiday falls in the middle of Sunday, it is moved to Monday so that our families can also have a long weekend, have a chance to be together. And on these days, it is more important to be humble, to repent, to fast and to pray. We pray, first of all, to worship the Lord. We pray, secondly, to thank the Lord for all the blessings He has given us. And on these days, there are so many things we should be thankful to the Lord for. First of all, I know many are thanking the Lord for the Filipino athletes who are winning so many. We already have twelve gold medalists. Someone also broke the record in High Jump. And. I share the joy and pride of our athletes and the Filipino people for our strong start in the SouthEast Asian Games. We can also consider this as a good example for the talent, skill and fighting spirit of the Filipino people. In the venues of our games, let us cheer our athletes on. Let us show to the world that with the good blessings and favor of the Lord upon us, our spirits will never be broken amid political storms and economic constraints, and that we are willing to endure the tough national training for a better future, Just as the hard training of our athletes are now starting to payoff in victory. We pray for more gold medals to come.

But even more than that, we pray to thank the Lord for the good blessing He gives to our economy.

Earlier, Bishop Tendero showed you Korea before and after. And with the blessing of the Lord, we too can shape an environment that is suitable for the goal of becoming a first world country within twenty years. But we need to start by returning, returning, bringing our country back to the Lord.

So we are also praying, praying not only to worship, not only to thank, but also we are praying so that our country may be reconciled with the Lord. That's why last year I declared a Day of Prayer. Now, our purpose, ambition is getting stronger so it is no longer just one day that should be declared but a whole week for reconciliation.

So I am ready to make a declaration that from November thirty to December seven this should be A Time of Prayer. My lawyer is preparing this declaration. And in this Time of Prayer, what I ask of all members of our society, including myself, first of all, is to seek… seek guidance and direction and really build all efforts to dedicate to the Lord.

We pray not only to worship, to thank, to reconcile but of course because the Lord is a kind Father, to also ask for His blessings because He is kind and generous Lord.

We pray for more gold medals not only for our athletes but for our economy and all the people.

We pray for the colleagues of Bishop Bengi in Congress that they will formulate a good way to pass the 2006 budget, because the budget is important to sustain our economic progress and deliver basic services to the people.

You know why I thank the Lord for our economy? Because our savings in our budget, which we thought would result in a loss for our budget, amounted to 40 million pesos due to new taxes such as alcohol and cigarette tax, as well as more effective tax collection and the austerity of government spending. With almost 40 billion, we couldn't immediately realign it to infrastructure and basic social services because this saving is in debt service. The debt service item cannot be realigned to other things. And why did we have large savings in debt service? First of all, the peso is strengthening. And our debt service payments are in dollars, so it's getting smaller. Secondly, because of our political will, together with Bishop Benny, in passing important taxes, the world's confidence in us has expanded, so the interest we pay now is lower. That's why our payment of interest and principal on our debt has decreased, but it can't just be realigned unless I submit the budget again to Congress requesting permission for our savings to be spent on the infrastructure and basic social services that we need. So I pray that Congress will grant this request of ours for a budget realignment.

Let us also pray to the Lord to guide our path towards the most effective and easiest way on how to amend our Constitution. Because amending our Constitution, our fundamental law, is about our future. It is about the Filipino's dream of having a strong, adaptable, good decision-making, honest, and responsive government to the needs and demands. That kind of government that will elevate the economy to the rank of countries like Korea, which Bishop Tendero showed you earlier.

Worship, thanksgiving, change and blessings, for all of these we pray in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Thank you all very much.

Source: Adamson University Library