Thank you very much, Secretary Cito Lorenzo, fellow child of Mindanao as well. Because while I am from Iligan, Cito is from Bukidnon, Davao and Zamboanga.

I would like to greet also the other Cabinet members who are here — oh, not to greet them but to just introduce them to those who might not have seen them previously or not seen them enough — my fellow Cabinet members who have joined me today: Secretary Dick Gordon of Tourism; Secretary Marita Jimenez of special projects and ODA, where’s Mai? And Secretary Jess Dureza, P.A. for Mindanao.

I would like to greet Joji Ilagan Bian — although you saw me talking to her animatedly because I was already answering point by point the different resolutions to her — chairperson of the Mindanao Business Council. I thank Governor Calingin for his welcome and his expression of support. My response is: “I need your support not necessarily in the May elections. I need your support for my work for Mindanao today.”

Mayor Bambi Emano, thank you very much for hosting us in this beautiful terminal port in your beautiful town, and I join you in welcoming everybody here. I think I have the right to welcome you to this Mindanao container port, because as Governor Calingin said, while this loan was made available long ago, the loan proceeds and the local counterpart was only made available in my administration.

Mrs. Noemi Saludo, Vice President of PCCI, incidentally, mother of my Cabinet secretary, Ric Saludo. And Tony Santos, Vice President of PCCI for Mindanao. As I said, thank you for reading the resolutions, and I’ve already answered many of them to Joji so that my speech will not be so long. So, some of them I will answer in my speech, the others I already told Joji about especially the ones that are not so Mindanao wide in their application.

I would like to greet the chairman of the board, Boy Abadia of PHIVIDEC. I’m sorry that Gabby Evangelista is not well. So, as I was saying to Chairman Abadia, “maybe until Gabby gets well, we’ll have to delegate his work upward.” You will handle it for now. After all, Boy Abadia is also a son of Misamis Oriental.

And I see here the mayor of my childhood city, Mayor Franklin Emano, ay, Quijano; and the vice mayor of my childhood city, Lawrence Cruz; and the businessmen of my childhood city, sila Benny Badilles, I’m glad to see all of you here.

And, of course — no, I don’t want to start mentioning all the names of the businessmen I know here because there’s so many of you — but I’d like to greet all of you, especially the PCCI Mindanao regional governors, and to welcome our foreign visitors headed by Ambassador Lim Cheng Hua of Singapore. Ambassador Lim Cheng Hua is one of the many lady ambassadors in our country today because I am very happy that the sending government has taken into account that we have a woman president and a lot of them have gone out of their way to send a woman ambassador, whom Dick Gordon likes to call “Women of Wonder.” thank you ambassador for being part of our “Women of Wonder.” other members of the… Yeah, “Women of Wonder” is part of WOW (W-O-W), “WOW Philippines!” and we are here in “WOW Mindanao,” “WOW Misamis Oriental.” Welcome to all the members of the diplomatic corps as well, ug kaninyong tanan, maayong buntag gihapon. Murag ingon ni Tony Santos, sa sunod sa halos sa duha ug tunga nga tuig sa akon pagka-presidente, wala akong mupakyas sa pagtambong nining Mindanao Business Conference ug ang mga uban pa nga sectoral conferences dinhi sama sa food congress, shippers congress, tuna congress.

And indeed, I greet the businessmen of Mindanao, led by this conference’s host, the ORO chamber, the Mindanao Business Council. You have been our proven allies for peace and development.

Our unity has stood the test of time. And more than ever, we need that unity when the strength and resilience of our democratic institutions are being tested.

I’m hopeful that the leaders of Congress and the judiciary will soon move towards healing their rift, exercising the highest degree of statesmanship untainted by personal or partisan concerns and with the supreme interest of the republic in mind. The executive shall firmly hold the middle ground in this controversy.

But let this never be interpreted as weakness. To be drawn want only to either side of this dispute will derail the chances of a principled compromise and further erode national stability. I shall not overreact to events as I call upon our people not to be unduly alarmed.

I asked Jess Dureza, “what’s the mood of the business sector here?” he said his mood is, “life goes on.” And that is the way it should be.

The presidency has the will, the authority and the resources to quell any disorder or attempts at destabilization. And we shall not hesitate to move decisively against those who will exploit this inter-branch impasse to foment violence. No one is above the law. Our crisis mechanisms are in place even if we have not reached a point of crisis. Part of that crisis mechanism being in place is an instruction I’m giving to General Balaoing: “account for all the men in the 4th division.” this is also my instruction to all the division commanders all over the country.

There is hope in dialogue, and we shall continue to pursue it while keeping our options open. We have the flexibility to change track if called for by the imperatives of national security. We shall not be rushed into impulsive action by the agenda of others. The situation is not spinning out of control as projected by doomsayers. Those doomsayers should come here to this conference to see that they are wrong or that they are misleading the people. In fact, the situation has strengthened the presidency as a middle force rather than weakened it.

There are those who believe that the presidency must step in and take sides to resolve the looming crisis, but this will only aggravate it at this point. I am taking the middle ground because as president and commander in chief, I must keep the powers of government at an even keel. I shall keep the peace and protect the people, whatever happens in the midst of this transient clash of powerful institutions. And no quarters can force me to take sides. A principled solution is in sight that will serve the nation’s peace of mind, and I shall continue to pursue it.

That’s why I commend the Mindanao businessmen. You continue to pursue peace, you continue to pursue business. You seek peace of mind, you seek national unity, but you go about your business of increasing incomes and creating jobs. I can perceive this in your theme, “one global Mindanao.” your collective drive for global engagement falls in line with the aspirations of other nations in this part of the world.

This was expressed in a covenant we released in the recent ASEAN Summit, the Bali Concord 2, where some of you in fact were attending. The BIMP-EAGA has returned to the limelight of ASEAN. And I am very, very happy that today we have an Indonesian delegation, which will open the General Santos-Bitong, Indonesia cargo vessel route in February 2004. This is a BIMP-EAGA project assisted by USAID gem.

I’m also happy that Merpati airlines will mount its first flight to General Santos on November 4. These are big ticket transport items under the BIMP-EAGA. But the BIMP-EAGA has also identified SMEs as the most vigorous driving force in the sub-region, followed by other rising stars like other industry, fisheries and tourism.

The Asian Development Bank, following a recommendation I made in ASEAN way back in 2001, is currently undertaking a study to accelerate SME financing for BIMP-EAGA.

On the security side, the Philippines is preparing to host a number of major meetings on cross border concerns which are crucial points of focus in the drive against roving terrorist cells.

I am giving an instruction to the Bureau of Immigration that they should make their main immigration office located in Glan, in Sarangani. And the Davao Immigration Office, where only a few travellers go, should be a sub-office, not the other way around.

We know the growing risk of terrorism, and we’re continuously sharpening our diplomatic, organizational, operational and intelligence resources to confront it. We are acting domestically, regionally and globally to meet the threat, and we have a strategic partnership with Washington for long-term political and economic security. Both the U.S.A. and the OIC countries are watching our peace process unfold with keen interest and commitments of assistance. Gem, aside from the assistance to projects like the BHE cargo vessel route, is already deep into its computer literacy program, particularly for the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.

During the week of President Bush’s state visit to the Philippines, the U.S. committed a new 33 million dollars over the next six years to broaden access to education, again, primarily in Mindanao.

I would also like to thank Gem and USAID for the assistance provided for 500 community infrastructure projects. Gem has also contributed to capacity-building efforts to achieve transparency in governance.

The World Bank has agreed to sponsor a multi-donor Mindanao reconstruction and development fund to support the peace process, including activities for confidence-building, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and reconstruction, and development. This was one of the major outputs of the World Bank conference in Dubai. And now, donor meetings are ongoing.

On my part, I shall continue to act on your concerns with deserved focus, the concerns that Tony Santos expressed earlier in his reading of your resolution.

I remember an earlier concern in previous Mindanao business conference meetings. Remember your concerns over transportation, over bringing down the rates in the ports? Well, we found a solution out of the box. Your concerns over transportation resulted in the Strong Republic Nautical Highway that now interconnects Mindanao through the major islands of the Visayas to Luzon through a system of road networks and Roll-On/Roll-Off ferries. There is that old ferry service from Surigao to Luzon, but that’s a very, very long route.

Then we opened after this conference, after working on the results of the last conference, we opened the Zamboanga del Norte route that goes through Negros island, Panay island, Mindoro island, and Luzon. And then, we opened the Cagayan de Oro-Dumaguete-Manila Roll-On/Roll-Off route. And together with the roads we have improved in this administration — Cotabato-Cagayan De Oro, Cavao-Cagayan De Oro — you can bring your fruits or your other products from anywhere, load them on one truck, and that one same truck can travel all the way from Davao, through cotabato, through Cagayan, through the roll-on/roll-off all the way to any market in the Visayas and in Luzon. Just one truck travelling at one time, without having all these expensive port fees that you have been complaining about.

You know, that old, old route that Surigao through Leyte, Samar, Bicol took five years to break even. That route from Zamboanga del Norte, through Negros island, Panay island, Mindoro island, and Luzon took one trip to break even. Now, the market is providing for more boats, Roll-On/Roll-Off ferry boats. But the businessmen tell me it’s the Cagayan de Oro route to Manila that will really make cargo rates go down for the Mindanao businessmen. And so, as a result of your interest in pushing forward this out of the box solution, we are giving a check of 6,850,000 pesos for the Mindanao Business Council for further studies to make this roll-on/roll-off system even more effective.

We continue to push hard for our products in the global markets. We’ve gained preferential status for our tuna in the E.U. market. Our friendship with Thailand helped us in this diplomatic initiative.

I appreciate your foresight about Mindanao power demands. Southern Mindanao especially has a dynamic and industrial manufacturing potential. The last two days I was in Davao, and I learned that Davao’s power consumption has gone up by 8 percent this year, representing the big increase in business activity. But southern Mindanao does not produce its own power, and this should be an attractive site for new IPPS.

Earlier, you talked about power and therefore… And earlier you talked about asking the senate to ratify some agreements. Since you’re gonna go to the Senate, anyway, I ask you to join me in reiterating my call for the senate to pass the Transco Franchise Bill to make it more attractive for privatization.

Your concerns about the quality of basic education are being dealt with through curriculum improvement, particularly in our English language, science and math proficiency. And I invite the businessmen of Mindanao to expand your corporate responsibility programs by helping us build classrooms in those schools whose student-classroom ratios are more than 100 to 1.

I’d like to take this opportunity to commend Cagayan de Oro – your father, Bambi — because in Cagayan de Oro, there is no school that has a classroom-student ratio of more than 100 to 1. So Cagayan de Oro has been taking care of its classroom needs. But that’s not the same for the rest of the island.

In the autonomous region of Muslim Mindanao, I counted the schools whose classroom-student ratio… No, student-classroom ratio exceeds 100 and multiplied it by the amount of pesos that we have to build for every classroom, we need 40 million pesos worth of additional classrooms in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao alone. So, not to mention the other places where you work and live.

I will push on with our reforms for transparency, accountability and good governance. And we have never lost sight of our main goal — winning the fight against poverty and against terrorism and crime.

In the two-and-a-half years of my presidency — where we were able to do this port, we were able to do the Roll-On/Roll-Off system, we were able to make the roads from Cotabato to Cagayan de Oro and from Davao to Cagayan de Oro much, much shorter in travel time — I’ve gained the experience necessary to understand what must be done to reform society so that we may move forward and finally break the chains of poverty on our way to building the strong republic that we deserve.

We dream of a future of equitable prosperity where our people enjoy through equity and justice. You, the Mindanao business community, have stayed with me in all these years. In fact, you were with me when I was vice-president, when I was in the Senate as chairman of trade and commerce, and chairman of economic affairs. You were even with me when I was Undersecretary of Trade and Industry.

We need to be stronger now. DTI, yeah. When I was in the DTI, that was when we also started the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan corridor. And I’m very happy this project is one of the flagships of that Cagayan de Oro Iligan corridor. And later on, I will go to the Cagayan de Oro port as well. From conceptualization to actual operation, which is gonna be in January of 2004. I remember the Cagayan de Oro-Iligan corridor. I remember our culminating presentation of the master plan was in 1989. It takes a long time to plan, to do the detailed studies, to do the paper work, to do the implementation.

And that is why as now, we are beginning to bear the fruits of the more than one decade of work. We need to stay even closer together to realize our vision for Mindanao and for the whole nation.

We hope that we do not abandon our unity until we reach the dreamed-of peace and progress.

Mabuhi kita tanan.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 12th Mindanao Business Conference Closing Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409200008/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7164&Itemid=38