Thank you. Maraming salamat.

Maraming salamat. Thank you.

Thank you Secretary Romulo for your introduction.

Thank you Ambassador Mindy Cruz for your very, very eloquent warm words of welcome and tribute to our quality Pinoys here in Singapore.

I’d like to introduce also the members of our delegation who are here on the head table. If I may go from my left to my right: Our Press Secretary is Cerge Remonde, gikan sa Cebu; our congresswoman from the BUHAY Partylist, Iyay Coscolluela; our Secretary of Finance, Secretary Gary Teves; our congresswoman from Pangasinan, Congresswoman Rachel Arenas; and then next to Secretary Romulo, our Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, Girlie Villarosa; ing congresswoman kong kabalen, si Congresswoman Anna Bondoc; our congresswoman from Manila, Naida Angping; and our Secretary of Trade and Industry, Peter Favila.

And to all of you, good evening, a good night to my Kapampangan compatriots. To my relatives on my mother's side, good evening to all of you. To the people of Ilocos, may you have a peaceful evening. To those from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening to all of you.

Thank you very much for your warm welcome once again, as warm as your greetings in 2007.

I am happy that we have had another opportunity to be together again, that I have had the opportunity to visit you again and to visit here. Actually, Dr. Reyes mentioned the times that I have visited, I visited one or two more times but I come here for lunch, for a business lunch and then I leave, so I don't see you during those times. But now, it's nice and we're together and I'm very happy here at our “Salute to the Filipinos in Singapore.” Thank you for giving me the opportunity to join in this Salute.

And truly, the good deeds of Filipinos here are well-known, and your contribution to the Singaporean economy is large, as is your contribution to your families and to our fellow Filipinos in the Philippines. So all that you do is commendable.

What you have shown here is true. People here are well-known. You are hardworking, you are talented, you are truly quality Filipinos. We saw in Mindy's speech, Dr. Reyes', and in our video the different kinds of Filipino workers working here. Of course, the first Filipinos who came here in the earlier — maybe like ten, fifteen years ago — were domestic helpers. Now, we see that there are Filipinos in the transportation industry because I heard from Mindy that Filipinos are part of those building your train system that Singaporeans are proud of.

In IT, that was one of the agreements we had when I made a state visit in 2001, and I remember when I came here on one of my visits and we had a chance to meet with a smaller group of the Filipino Community — one table only — the IT talents here were amazing, so young. When I returned to the Philippines, I told our ICT, at that time, Private-Public Sector Task Force, we are so old! The IT geniuses of the Philippines, who are earning so well, they’re all so young, they are all young enough to be our children, truly a new generation, quality Filipinos and I’m sure that there’s more of you in the generations to come.

The banks, Lito Camacho and Ding de Guzman were mentioned. The hospitals, oh my! Not just nurses and doctors, when there was SARS here in Singapore, the nurses were among the heroes of Singapore that Filipinos were proud of.

And even the domestic helpers, are better now, carefully selected and most undergo training. And I’m so happy that that Bayanihan Center that we worked hard for — I remember even when I was still Vice President asking the Singapore government to hopefully donate the land then built by the Filipino community here, Ding de Guzman was very active there — I’m so happy to see in the video that its service to our Filipinos here is still very symbolic.

And as we have seen our OFWs in Singapore have moved up the value chain to higher-paying jobs that require more complex skills. We have seen that Filipinos here excel in various fields, that's what I mean, Rico Hizon is one of them, Vice President Bonilla of Citibank.

The OFW community over the years has experienced such a significant improvement in your quality of life as well. Even the once who used to earn less are earning more because they are more skilled, and of course, first and foremost in importance, you continue to uphold the reputation of Filipinos as excellent and dedicated workers. Congratulations!

I am also happy that Filipino culture is now being recognized here in Singapore because of your efforts, because you are known, because you are successful here, you help bring and show the culture of the Philippines. On this 40th Anniversary of our Diplomatic Relations, one of the… no! not one but three or even four of the exhibits are happening right now about Philippine Culture in three different places because we came from the other two exhibits and it’s so good to know that the Singaporeans are getting to know more about our culture. One of the exhibits is dedicated to the fiesta, so the fiesta and the different cultures and traditions of the different regions of the Philippines are well-known and recognized.

Early this evening, we were with Lito Camacho, one of the sponsors of the exhibit of Philippine Art at the Singapore Art Museum. And I am so happy and I encourage everyone to support these events. Maybe you can invite your Singaporean and other friends to see and experience the wealth of our culture.

As you know, I will attend the APEC Leaders’ Economic Meeting here in Singapore starting tomorrow. The theme of APEC 2009 is “Sustaining Growth, Connecting the Region.” We will discuss four priority areas:

First, addressing the crisis and preparing for recovery; Second, supporting the multilateral trading system; Third, accelerating regional integration; and Fourth, strengthening APEC.

That first thing, the discussion, addressing the crisis, preparing for the recovery, that is really a very important discussion that should be had.

When the global economic crisis first hit, many economists feared that we in the Philippines would also fall. And one reason they said we might fall is that OFW remittances might decrease because many OFWs work in countries affected by the crisis. For example, here in Singapore, but despite the fact that many Filipinos work in many countries hit by the crisis, you showed that you do not neglect, Filipinos do not neglect their family and their country, even if they experience many hardships. So instead of remittances decreasing, they actually increased. And now, as of the month of August, remittances in fact reached already $11 billion dollars.

And I know that this also comes from the sacrifices you make abroad to work and bring to your family. I’m glad that there are several of you, especially the expat executives who can have your families here, but many also cannot bring their families. That is a sad job and I know the hardship and sadness experienced by this kind of work where you cannot bring your family here.

And so my vision is to help make our economy competitive enough, and I’ve said this to you before, so that one day going abroad will just be a career choice, not the only option for our hardworking Filipino workers. And how to do that in this ever interconnected world? Well, the world is safer, more secure and more vibrant when leaders from so many nations come together to solve problems and look to the future together. That is the strength and the hope of the APEC meeting that will start tomorrow: to work hand in hand with our Pacific neighbors to forge a more perfect world.

Here, I know that every person has felt the devastation of the setback in the global economy that affected even such a strong economy as Singapore. And especially those whose jobs are not executive or do not have IT expertise and come from poor families in the Philippines, the relatives of those who work who come from poor families in the Philippines, their relatives back home are the most vulnerable to the global shocks; their relatives are the most price sensitive. They feel the real pain when prices surge, when jobs are lost, when food prices are out of reach.

But one of the things we can say in APEC is that at least here in Asia, we are on a solid comeback; we have weathered the storm better than other regions and with greater resilience. Even the Philippines, with the challenges of a developing nation was prepared for the global shocks. It could have been worse if we had not taken the hard and unpopular but necessary economic and fiscal reforms several years ago. Kasama nga doon si Lito Camacho when he was still Secretary of Finance at kasama rin doon yung isang dating Singapore expat din, si Vince Perez who was BOI Managing Head for a while and move to other Economic Ministries like the Department of Energy later on. These reforms have what we could say, have kept the wolf away from the door. But the wolf is still out there. Isa nga sabi nung nag-meet yung mga nagsalubong sa akin na Singaporean officials — because they had meetings of the finance ministers, isn’t it, Gary? the trade ministers — pinag-uusapan on when the fiscal stimulus should start to be taken but because all the countries did fiscal stimulus including us. And I said: no, it’s too early for an exit plan. But then yes, they all agree. Sabi ko, actually, ang isang malaking problema kasi lahat naman tayo I think agreed that it’s too early for an exit plan. It’s too early to stop the fiscal stimulus, ang problema, how do you finance the stimulus? Yun ang problema at at least masasabi ko sa Pilipinas, we can still finance the fiscal stimulus, our bonds are still very, very marketable. So, yun ang dahilan kung bakit among many other things, I believe we are resilient and we will bounce back to that growth that Dr. Reyes has talked about, was talking about when I came here in 2007 that rapid growth that we achieved before it slowed down somewhat but at least never turned negative during the global economic crisis.

Our trip to attend the APEC Summit reflects the commitment of our administration to active engagement in trade, commerce and economic cooperation among nations. This energetic engagement, for instance, my many visits to Singapore has helped us in the country lift up the poor and feed the hungry. And so, it is important that we continue to engage globally.

Now, one of the things that I would like to point out tomorrow in the Summit is that one of the major dynamics of the 21st century is likely to be not just the flow of financial capital, not just the flow of goods and services but human capital, and I say that from experience. Tignan niyo, yung ating quality Pinoys na narito. You are just the pioneers of what will become, I believe in this coming century, a real global phenomenon.

The flow of labor will determine much about how the world grows and works together. So we have had a lot of trade now in goods, we’re having a lot of trade in services like air services, for instance, telecommunications. We are also now about to enter a great age of global labor.

Today, it is the Filipinos among the leaders but tomorrow it will be many, many countries doing this. But we are pioneers here and we can tell the world that we have the chance to make sure we tap the possibilities. It is very important I believe that as we must recognize that as trade has expanded in goods, as trade has expanded in services, trade will expand as far as labor mobility is concerned. And the world might as well recognize it for one thing to make it orderly and the other one also, the more you recognize it, the more orderly you make it, the more you stop the abuse that sometimes preys on global laborers of all walks of life in economic strata.

Here in Singapore in recent years, we hear about the experiences of our workers, domestic helpers, right? there is abuse against them but as the market becomes more sophisticated with the entry of the professionals, the CEOs, the COOs, our workers are more protected, especially the workers in the more manual kinds of work that are more vulnerable to abuse. So we need to put order there, the way that WTO was intended to put order in trade, and we need to put order also in the flow of human capital. Because, that's it, because we are pioneers in this new age of global labor, it is our obligation to make sure that we protect our workers wherever they may be.

I really want to thank the Filipinos working here in Singapore. First of all, you have raised the level of Filipinos here, helping to protect your fellow Filipinos here. And continuously, as you told me earlier, the care you show for our country. You are truly partners, allies, and kindred spirits in achieving our goals for a good future.

I thank those who sent aid to our fellowmen affected by the typhoons that happened last September and October. And that again shows how you Filipinos here in Singapore never forget the folks back home no matter how successful you are here. And so I am very grateful that our global Filipino, our quality Filipino — global, quality, Filipino pa rin. And you love your country and I really thank you very much and appreciate you for that.

May we continue our cooperation and faith in our development programs, and together let us achieve a good future for all.

I thank you very much for your words of appreciation, Dr. Reyes in behalf of the whole Filipino Community, and may I tell you that you are also very, very much appreciated not only by me but all the folks back home.

Thank you very much. Long live the quality Filipinos of Singapore!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a Meeting with the Filipino community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133854/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26860&Itemid=38