Thank you very much, Mayor Sonny Belmonte, and thank you very much for using the funds of Quezon City to help build the roads needed by the national government. Thank you for that.

Chairman Bayani Fernando, thank you also for your concern for the situation of commuters from the provinces and going to the provinces. I would also like to greet our congresspersons from Quezon City: Mat Defensor, Annie Susano, Nanette Daza; our governors from Central and Southern Luzon: Governor Tet Garcia, Governor Mendoza, Governor Umali, Governor Lazaro and Governor Yap. And here are also the mayors of Metro Manila, Mayor Fernando and Mayor Ureta, Vice Mayor Bautista, our officials of the DOTC and the MMDA, our members of the transport sector, congratulations to all of us!

The world is experiencing an economic crisis that has caused the increase in the price of food, oil and rice here in the Philippines and around the world. Here in the Philippines we do not have a crisis, but we are facing strong challenges. In times like these, it is the duty of the government to help provide protection to the Filipino people against the surprising increase in prices and burdens.

The government is doing everything it can to put food on every table and to protect your income against high prices and inflation. That is why, yesterday, the LTFRB under the chairmanship of Tom Lantion approved the rollback of transport fares. Is that right Tom, correct me, raise your hand if I'm wrong?

– For taxis, it removed the 10 pesos add-on rate.

– For jeeps, it further reduced the fare by 50 centavos for the first four kilometers and 10 centavos for succeeding kilometers. So, the new rate is P7.50 for the first four kilometers and P1.40 for the succeeding kilometers.

– Metro Manila ordinary buses have a reduction of 50 centavos for the first five kilometers and 10 centavos for succeeding kilometers. The new rate is 9 pesos for the first five kilometers and P1.85 for the succeeding kilometers.

– For airconditioned Metro Manila buses, the fare reduction is 15 centavos for the succeeding kilometers. So, the new rate is 11 pesos for the first five kilometers and P2.20 for the succeeding kilometers for the airconditioned buses.

– The reduction for provincial buses is 5 centavos per kilometer for both ordinary and airconditioned buses. For ordinary buses, it used to be P1.40 per kilometer, now it’s P1.35. For airconditioned buses, it used to be P1.60, now it’s P1.55.

The effectivity is December 15. Congratulations to DOTC and LTFRB! But many, many thanks to our transport sector for your concern.

The modernization of our roads has created a new type of commuters — people who travel daily through Metro Manila and the provinces of Central Luzon and through Metro Manila and the province of Southern Luzon.

The provinces of Central and Southern Luzon that are close to Metro Manila can now be called exurbs instead of new satellite areas that are flourishing due to the fast and convenient travel caused by our modern road network — our expressways.

These students studying in various universities and colleges; businessmen, job applicants abroad who bring documents to POEA or employment agencies; employees of BPOs in various cities of Metro Manila, and even the citizens of my province who travel to Metro Manila daily to bring various goods for sale.

A great benefit has been brought to Metro Manila by daily commuting. It reduces the basic amenities that need to be provided if they only visit. These commuters also stimulate the transport and service business in Metro Manila and their province.

But without bus stops, imagine that a senior citizen from Zambales who wants to go to Megamall will have to stop at the Victory terminal in Pasay, then take a Metro Manila bus or MRT to reach Megamall. So Bayani made a bus stop at Megamall, right Bayani? It's done. Thank you very much.

An employee from Rustan’s, from say, San Fernando will have to disembark either at Pasay or Cubao provincial bus stations, then take the MRT or Metro Manila bus again to Makati. This is an additional expense. So to help this army of commuters, we are increasing the number of provincial bus stops on EDSA. And that was the presentation Bayani gave earlier.

We expect that the methods have been arranged for the quick boarding and disembarking of passengers in the designated safe areas. Hero, isn't it, a penalty shall be imposed on buses that stray off from these bus stops.

The designation of the bus stops will end the “guerrilla” practice of picking up and unloading passengers along EDSA. And it will address the legitimate economic and safety imperatives that have been raised by provincial commuters and by the governors who have told us that their constituents were having a hard time. That is why we invited them today so they can tell their commuters that they saw the bus stops.

We will make sure our government is vigilant in bringing government services to the people. May this project bring economic opportunity and humane dignity to our fellow Filipinos, especially this Christmas season.

That is why to our transport sector, thank you for your Christmas gift to the people. And to the MMDA, thank you also for your Christmas gift to those from Central Luzon and Southern Luzon.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the walk-through of EDSA-Quezon Avenue loading and unloading provincial stations and connecting footbridges. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609071541/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=13708&Itemid=38