Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, on the Offering of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo for Economically-Displaced Overseas Filipino Workers

Thank you very much, Secretary Nitoy Roque, for your introduction.

Our various government officials who are helping our returning expatriate Filipino workers; our workers who are returning.

Providing assistance to Filipino workers abroad who need government support is a policy that our government will not violate. At any time, we will not turn our backs on doing everything we can to help expatriate Filipino workers who are suffering.

In these trying times for the expatriate Filipino worker, the government should not be negligent. We must reciprocate the heroism shown by our expatriate Filipino workers. It is the moral duty of the government and a policy initiative to quickly respond to their immediate needs.

Currently, it is only a trickle of our overseas Filipino workers or expatriate Filipino workers that have lost their jobs because of the world financial crisis. In fact, some of these have already found new jobs. We have 200 Filipino workers on shipping companies coming back but they have left again or are leaving again because they have found new employment.

We are currently cooperating with some, 100 plus, who lost their jobs in Taiwan to provide them with the following assistance. Our president of PhilHealth is here because they are being given PhilHealth cards for medical insurance. Our vice president of SSS is here because we are also providing SSS cards. And here is our chairman and director general of TESDA, Buboy Syjuco, who has a very high approval rating, second to the highest, only a few points behind the highest in TESDA. Congratulations, Buboy! And what he brought, which is in your baskets, are scholarships from TESDA so that you can acquire new skills and hone your abilities, and so that you can compete anywhere in the world.

Now, the checks we gave are only for paying for the materials of TRC — our head of TRC is here to provide you with training. This is not yet the livelihood [assistance], the livelihood check is separate, and that will be followed by an assessment of what you plan to do so that you can be helped with your new livelihood. And that check, the next check, is what will be used to start those who want to start a business under our Emergency Livelihood Program.

These serve as programs that provide temporary assistance to expatriate Filipino workers who have lost their jobs. Your contributions to our country are invaluable, so it is only right that you receive the full and unwavering support of the government. While we are undertaking a rapid response to your immediate needs, we are working on policies that are broader in scope to help our modern-day heroes.

We will implement a full program of gratitude towards expatriate Filipino workers to help those who are forced to return home because the countries where they work are currently being hit by an economic crisis whose intensity and scope are still unknown.

The Department of Labor and Employment and OWWA will lead the implementation of this payback program of the government for expatriate Filipino workers. The first phase of this repayment program is the establishment of the Filipino Expatriate Livelihood Support Fund in the amount of 250 million pesos from OWWA and, if necessary, supported by government agencies that will lend money. Expatriate Filipino workers who have lost their jobs will be able to access this fund – loans to help start a business, continue their studies or acquire skills, or for initial capital in any livelihood undertaking.

DOLE should immediately create the Implementing Guidelines.

The guidelines should be simple so that one can borrow quickly. Returning expatriate workers should not be subjected to complex and irrelevant regulations or red tape.

I have instructed DOLE and OWWA to coordinate with government agencies, which is why they have coordinated with TRC for economy and investment to identify businesses that returning expatriates can enter.

The second phase of this reciprocity program is the full support of the government, to be given in its entirety, to help returning Filipino workers find well-paying jobs. Two policies are included in this part:

First, the creation of jobs here in our country that can provide good income. Some of you, you said, are looking for jobs here.

Secondly, the vigorous search for new markets abroad for our workers, including those working on ships.

And earlier, Secretary Nitoy Roque happily reported to me that over 100 lost their jobs at this… this factory in Taiwan, but Secretary Nitoy Roque said there are 1,000 jobs available in the hotel and restaurant industry of Bulgaria, so immediately four times the jobs are available compared to those you lost.

So, in order to avail of these services, I am directing the DOLE and OWWA to establish offices in all provinces or desks, which will match jobs to the skills, abilities, and experience of returning workers. There should also be constant online information about vacant jobs, and this information should be free to returning expatriates.

And for our returning expatriate Filipino workers who want to move to other countries where your knowledge and skills are needed, I am directing – in addition to this Bulgaria with 1,000 jobs immediately available in the hotel and restaurant industry – I directed, I created an Administrative Order that the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration should implement a marketing blitz to expand the market for Filipino expatriates.

So again, the government, even if it’s only a trickle of our workforce that’s coming back, the government will not sit idly and do nothing for our modern-day heroes in this time of great economic uncertainty.

The government will not abandon our new heroes in this time of economic uncertainty.

We assure you of full and unequivocal support.

To all of you, our returning expatriate Filipino workers, good luck with your new step in your career path!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Handog ni Pangulong Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo Para sa Economically-Displaced Overseas Filipino Workers. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134612/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=13697&Itemid=38