Governor Dodo Mandanas, happy birthday to you and thank you for giving me the birthday gift instead of me giving it to you – you endorsed me to the people of Batangas as your candidate for president of the Republic of the Philippines.

And I know the people of Batangas keep their word. Let us prove this productivity livelihood center of the province of Batangas and the Philippine Ports Authority. You see, this international port of Batangas is part of the Calabarzon project, because Calabarzon started when I was still Undersecretary of Trade and Industry and I was the one making the Calabarzon plan. During that time, when I was still with the DTI, I already knew, I already understood that there were people living in Santa Clara who were afraid of – that’s you – who were in danger of losing their homes if this port were to become an international port. An international port was really needed in Calabarzon and this small port, which has many memories of Kabayan Noli de Castro from Mindoro when he was taking the ferry to Batangas Port, was very small, very ugly, and the road was full of potholes. Now, our plan is to make it an international port.

When I was a senator, Dodo Mandanas was a leader of an NGO, he was already bringing me here to Batangas. And one of the things we were talking about was how to take care of those who would lose their homes here in Barangay Santa Clara.

When I became president, I saw that the Batangas port had not yet been built. So when I became president, I expedited the papers, I expedited the bidding, I expedited the right-of-way, one year after Edsa 2 started, January 16, 2002, we inaugurated the International Batangas Port. On that day, I asked Dodo Mandanas, Dodo, what about those who might lose their livelihoods and homes? He said, the province will take care of them. And this, this productivity livelihood center of the province and the PPA is Dodo Mandanas’ answer to his promise to me that he would take care of the people of Barangay Santa Clara and your livelihood, you. That’s why Dodo will manage this so that those in danger of being left behind by the development of Batangas will have a good livelihood.

The Batangas Port and the road leading to Batangas from Manila are very important if we want many jobs in Batangas and Calabarzon, if we want a lot of trade, if we want the prices of goods to improve.

That’s why I’m happy that Dodo Mandanas is running unopposed, because that means he has something to offer, a full opportunity to continue his work as governor even though he is running for congressman because he still has a lot to do for the province of Batangas before he steps down on June 30th to become a congressman.

First of all, he will finish providing livelihoods for our brothers and sisters in Barangay Santa Clara.

Secondly, I asked him, I am asking him to be the project manager of our road, the expressway from Manila to the Batangas International Port so that we have a good road that will make travel easier.

Thirdly, the Board of Liquidators, because this is property, across from the Batangas port, the Board of Liquidators also has property, the national government also owns it, like this one, the government owns it but it is being turned over to the provincial government so that Dodo Mandanas can also build a project there across from it, providing jobs for the ordinary Batangueño.

So another thing, Dodo Mandanas in Lipa will bring in a private investor to our air base to make it a commercial and military airport and industrial complex. Dodo Mandanas has a lot more to do before he steps down as governor on the thirtieth and before he starts working as a congressman.

So I am grateful for his belief in order to continue these good things he has started, the things we have started, what he needs is a president who understands the needs for the development of Batangas, those who understand the feelings of the ordinary Batangueño, and that is why I am grateful that on his birthday he told you, his beloved Batangueños, there are so many breakfasts inside the building, that his candidate for president is Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.

To all of you, my friends, I am grateful and I hope that after June thirtieth, these strong beginnings we have made – productivity center, Batangas port, B-O-L property and the expressway to the south – we can accomplish them, together, governor today, congressman tomorrow, you, the people of Batangas, are with us in what we are doing and I hope we are together in the development of Batangas and the entire Philippines.

Thank you very much, happy birthday governor and future Congressman Dodo Mandanas.

Thank you very much for your support.

Let's sing, happy birthday. Sing, sing.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). GMA’s Speech during the Ceremony for the Commencement of the Topping Works of the P300-million Batangas Port Livelihood Center. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090207/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5655&Itemid=38