Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin D’Honneur

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, January 31, 2007]

Happy New Year to all of you!

There’s no better audience than this distinguished group to recount the extraordinary run of international events that have transpired the last few months that I hope will change the face of Asia and the Philippines in the years to come. I’m referring to the series of Asian leader events that began in Nanning in November with a celebration of China’s 15th anniversary as a partner with ASEAN.

As chair of ASEAN this year, I am perhaps not surprisingly bullish about the advances we have made as an organization. That includes our pride at having played a role in helping to spur China to new heights as an economic force.

After a successful APEC meeting in Hanoi where Vietnam took the spot and rightfully received praise for its economic advances, the momentum carried us to Cebu for the ASEAN and East Asian summits. India, China, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Australia and East Timor joined the ASEAN 10 to celebrate the beginning of a new day in Asia.

The most notable achievement was the united ASEAN vote to move forward our goal for an ASEAN trading zone by 2015, and our bold step forward to embrace a blueprint for establishing an ASEAN charter. At a time when the WTO is buckling under the strain of discontent, ASEAN is standing tall in its common embrace of open markets, social justice and security.

And having just come from Davos, I can tell you that the world is taking notice of an invigorated ASEAN.

I can also attest to another idea whose time has come: the model for peace and stability we have achieved thus far in Mindanao. The arc of progress is discernable, the hope palpable. Most importantly, we have a new paradigm for peace that’s built on interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness, investments in economic development and basic infrastructure, and mutual security cooperation.

These measures have allowed us to expand the territory of peace and narrow the lair of the terrorists. That is precisely how we closed in and eliminated key members of the Abu Sayyaf and J.I. just a few weeks ago. Our fight against terrorism remains unabated and our resolve has been strengthened with new binding treaties in ASEAN and on a bilateral basis with our key allies.

And it has all been made possible by standing by strong principles that embrace soft power at the center, hard power at the edge. And most importantly, it’s our alliance of domestic and international partners who have kept the Mindanao peace process so vital.

In Davos, I shared the stage with Prime Minister Badawi and praised his leadership in forging a peace that includes partners such as Sweden, Japan, the E.U., the U.S., Libya, the ASEAN nations, the OIC nations.

Peace in Mindanao is every bit as important to our economic security as our physical security. If we can cut off the flow of money for arms and defense and turn on the spigot of development for peace, the nation will make a major leap forward.

And closer to home, I’m once again in the proud position this year to announce strong economic numbers: our stock market has never been higher in a decade nor delivered better return for investors; the peso is at the highest point in recent years; exports have grown by double digit; direct foreign investment has soared to two billion u.s. dollars; almost one million jobs were created; and our credit outlook has come up.

Our national budget is being passed and we are now investing for the second complete year in a row of long overdue infrastructure investments. This includes billions for education, health care and start up capital for social infrastructure. Billions more for new roads, bridges, ports and physical infrastructure.

And let me be clear: we continue to pay down our deficit. And our economic managers are determined to meet their goal of balancing our budget in 2008. And lest anyone falsely declare that we will spend beyond our means before the upcoming election, I’ve something to say – no way. We have a budget in place and the discipline and political will to stick to it.

I see 2007 as the year we start to bring home the fruits of reform to those who need the nourishment the most – the poor here in the Philippines. Through the painful but necessary battles to raise new revenue, crackdown on tax cheats and prosecute corrupt government officials, we are now finally a nation ready to do right by our poorest citizens.

We want to create high-paying jobs here at home so that Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job. We want overseas work to be a career choice, not the only option for a talented man or woman in search of a better life. Our overseas workers are heroes who contribute much to our nation. But it is time to plan for the day when our heroes can come home, be with family, buy a home and live in comfort and dignity right here in the Philippines.

And part of a bright new future for our nation is to take control over our reliance on energy, to become free from dependence on foreign oil and become self-sufficient through the use of sustainable, alternative forms of energy. This will enhance our national security, lift up our economy and preserve our environment.

To that end, no nation can aspire to become modern without thinking of our environment. I want to press ahead with a massive green Philippines environmental plan that is comprehensive in scope and thorough in execution. A plan that includes reforestation, preservation of our reefs and waterways and scrubs the land and air of pollutants that endangered the health of our citizens.

Yet with all of our dreams come to day-to-day realities that change and reform never move fast enough. Disparities exist that are hard to witness; there are too many poor, too many sick, too many without a job. I wish I could just make the process move forward to slow down and eventually halt the inequalities.

And one reality that must be resolved is our sad history of political violence. We have just received the first Melo report on the assassination of political activists and journalists. I has asked justice Melo last August to take a hard look at what’s behind our nation’s dangerous predilection to want to subvert democracy through the barrel of a gun.

I have reached out to those who share my deep concern for the victims in order to press them into service to help solve this never-ending pattern of violence. I met with amnesty international in London over the summer, with friends from the European union, local religious and civic leaders and our enforcement community to try and get to the bottom of these killings once and for all.

Investigations suggest links to both right and left – to communists, communist rebels as well as possibly elements of our own military. The investigations of the national police’s Task Force “Usig” have unearthed some interesting facts such as 23 cases of killings perpetrated by the NPA against their own men, the discrepancy between the number of cases reported by the front organizations of the communists and the numbers in the police files, and two cases where the supposed victims were confirmed to be alive. It’s disheartening to contemplate that anyone upholding people’s rights could engage in such deeds. I need to absorb fully what it means.

Yesterday, we came out with a response to the first Melo report. There is much to ponder and much to be done. We are not stopping in our crusade for human rights. We want a wider, deeper understanding that will involve more cooperation from all concerned parties and sectors. We’re calling on the relatives, the witnesses and even the militant groups to speak out, lay the evidence and serve the high cause of justice. The government shall consolidate its agencies and resources for this effort, invite international cooperation, protect witnesses, field special prosecutors and ask for the installation of special courts to move forward. The AFP itself is deeply involved in this effort to check its ranks and protect the name and prestige of the military organization and the majority of our soldiers from the stigma of this issue.

I do know this: I believe 99.9 percent of our military are good, hard working and patriotic Filipinos. They do heroic things, like killing terrorists in battle, putting their lives on the line every day to protect the nation and make our homeland safer.

In order to address the recommendations of the Melo Commission, we will work with the church, activists, the journalist community, government officials, the international community and justice Melo to strengthen any findings and put teeth in the recommendations.

But I can tell you today that we will not stand for a one particular thing – we will not stand for an election in may disrupted by violence or political intimidation. We will do everything in our power to crackdown on political violence leading up to this may election so that our citizens can vote free from fear. So that our candidates can campaign without the shadow of assassination. And so that our journalist comrades can cover the election, not their head, in pursuit of press freedom.

So to move beyond the imponderable to the hopeful, let me say to everyone in this room and everyone in this nation: I welcome you to 2007 with a keen sense of hope and optimism about the future. I do so fully aware of the challenges that beset the nation. We have it in our power to stop complaining and finger pointing and just get the job done.

Let’s move this nation forward through collective action. Yes, let’s debate our differences, but let us do so in peace and respect. We have much to be thankful for. I know I do. And much is a result of the people in this room and outside who care about the Philippines and the world.

On this note, please join me in a toast to the hope that 2007 will be the year it will all come together for the Philippines and the world.

Mabuhay!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].