Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the celebration of the 10th anniversary of the Busig-On Festival

Thank you very much Secretary Andaya, our Cabinet Officer for Regional Development, for your introduction of me. Although I have already visited here before so we already know each other, right?

Mayor Winnie Oco, thank you for inviting me to your fiesta today. The last time you invited me, you were still Vice Mayor. (applause) I’m very happy to be here again. Congresswoman Chato, Governor Typoco, all the officials of the province and the different towns of Camarines Norte, friends, Happy Busig-on Festival to all of you! (applause)

And this is my opportunity to thank you for your help to me, because since I started running in 1992, I win in Labo in every election. Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Earlier, as we flew here in the helicopter, we passed over the large Busig-on River and I read the summary of the epic of Busig-on, and what we can say is that the town of Labo is like Busig-on — strong, brave, resilient. (applause) You are a worthy lineage of your epic hero. And leading the struggle is your hardworking local leader, Mayor Winnie Oco, Outstanding Mayor of 2006. (applause) Because since I came here and visited you, right here in this plaza, the market has been renovated, commercial buildings and roads have been added. The municipality has become more beautiful. You have a new local government site. So, congratulations to the people of Labo! (applause)

And your Mayor, Winnie, is president of the Mayors’ League of Camarines Norte and of all of Luzon. (applause) And Vice Mayor Pardo is president of the Vice Mayors’ League. (applause) Even the president of the Municipal Councilors’ League of Camarines Norte is from you. So, congratulations to the people of Labo! (applause)

And one more thing, your official in Malacañang is not staying long because you are in the National Gawad Kalasag Hall of Fame (applause) for being the Best Municipal Disaster Coordinating Council in the entire Philippines because for three consecutive years you have already won as Best Municipal Coordinating Council so you are now in the Hall of Fame. (applause) I hope you continue your good disaster coordination, especially now that you have been given two rubber boats for your rescue operations.

And to add to that, your municipal defense coordinator, Dr. Carlos Galvez, also received the 2008 National Gawad Kalasag Individual Citation Award. (applause) Isn't it you, Dr. Galvez, who wrote the epic of Busig-on? (applause) So, congratulations!

When I assumed the presidency in 2001, Bicol was the second poorest region in the entire country. But not anymore. Bicol has surpassed two regions in the fight against poverty. Congratulations on your progress! (applause) The readiness and work ethic of the people of Bicol, and the government's spending of a large amount of funds in your region, greatly helped with this. Even our Secretary of the Budget is a son of Bicol, Nonoy Andaya. (applause) There is strong political will from the local and national government for Bicol.

And for Bicol and the entire country, we have been working tirelessly to address challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with the spike in high oil and food prices. But the fact is this is a global phenomenon. These global forces are causing real difficulties for our people.

So, we have been working very hard to make sure that our country’s food supply remain stable and we put food on the table for every Bicolano and every Filipino. This Camarines Norte, you are not a net producer of rice. You buy rice from other provinces. The IRRI, the International Rice Research Institute, their recommendation is that if we want to immediately increase rice yields, we should pour money into provinces that already produce a lot of rice. So if we follow that guideline, what will be done in Camarines Norte will be transportation, not production.

But Governor Typoco said that you need three million pesos to conduct a feasibility study to have irrigation for the Busig-on River, which Congresswoman Chato said will cost a total of 360 million. To start your feasibility study, I have a check for 1.5 million pesos as a counterpart, (applause) to start the feasibility study of the Busig-on Irrigation System. But as I said, until the irrigation system is built, the answer for Camarines Norte to prevent the price of food you buy, especially rice, from becoming expensive, is we are cutting costs through more efficient transport.

And it is important that your Maharlika Highway is good, especially from Camarines Sur because that is where your rice comes from. So you may have noticed that several bridges are being built almost simultaneously here from Labo to Daet, and the one in Barangay Malangkaw to Basud has been completed. This is to make travel fast and inexpensive.

I also heard that the farm-to-market road network of this town is nearing completion. I even gave a little to Winnie, but the good thing is you bought heavy equipment and the different barangays and even the provincial governments are helping each other to increase your farm-to-market roads and barangay roads. So, congratulations! (applause)

Earlier, while we were flying, I noticed not only the Busig-on River but also the vast coconut plantations and I remember during my last visit here you also had a lot of pineapple plantations. There is a lot of coconut, but it is still not enough.

In 2005, I came here, the Birla Group started there in Jose Panganiban. The Birla Group is one of the largest conglomerates in India, and they established a company, Pan Century Surfactants, to produce fatty alcohol from coco feedstock. When they learned that I was going to Labo, they said if they could pass by there afterwards. We will break ground on one of their expansions, but I heard that one of their complaints to me is that they lack coconut raw materials. That is really happening now in Southern Luzon. There in Quezon, Franklin Baker, a large factory, moved to Mindanao because they are now buying their coconuts from Mindanao, there is a shortage in Quezon. So we don't want factories to move from Camarines Norte, so I also brought a check for one million pesos to grow your coconuts that can be sold to Birla. (applause)

Regarding pineapples, Camarines Norte is very well-known for the queen pineapple. And Governor Typoco told me that in Basud, there is a Chinese Corporation that will buy one million boxes of queen pineapple, so it is very important that we grow more pineapples, the queen pineapple. And perhaps you've heard of the brand Libby’s, the canned good, Libby’s. The owners tasted our queen pineapple here in CamNorte. So they came here to look for queen pineapple and if necessary, establish a joint venture to create a plantation and make canning for the pineapple.

But one of the big pineapple producers here, a planter, is Flora, Aling Flora, Liway said, her sales are already big—raw, raw pineapple to other countries. Well, fresh has a better price than canned, so we shouldn't remove the fresh to make canned, we should add more pineapple, queen pineapple because the current production of queen pineapple in Camarines Norte, even in Basud, even in Daet is already fully booked with orders. So it would be an opportunity for Labo to enter into this. The cost to expand the pineapple plantation and to build a canning factory and to have testing by the DOST on the shelf life of the pineapple, queen pineapple, is 10 million U.S. dollars. Well, I don't have a check for 10 million U.S. dollars. But the Department of Agriculture and the Development Bank of the Philippines are ready to fund the farm development and canning plant if Labo agrees to plant and build a factory. Do you agree with that? (applause) Yes.

In the meantime, we have also been introducing measures to lift the burden of high oil prices on our people. However, no matter what actions we take, this is a global problem. We must work together to resolve these issues if we are to see any significant recovery in the global economy. So earlier, we gave piglets and corn and vegetable seeds to add to the income of the different towns of Camarines Norte. And I hope the Bicol CARE Fund that Nonoy Andaya put in the budget last year after four strong typhoons hit Bicol also helped.

The determination or political willpower of the Bicolanos and the resilience of your character have been tested many times. Even just surviving the storm, your determination to persevere can be seen on your faces.

So my fellow citizens of Labo, with your beautiful qualities, the qualities of Busig-on, your lives in the town of Labo will continue to improve. (applause)

So to all of you, for what you have achieved and will continue to achieve, as we celebrate the epic of Busig-on for the next ten years, congratulations on your success. And for your support, thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 10th anniversary celebration of the Busig-On Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412111951/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1710&Itemid=38