Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Philippine Development Forum

[Delivered in Clark, Pampanga, March 26, 2008]

It is my pleasure to join you in our constantly productive and insightful dialogue on Philippine development.

2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in over 30 years. Economic growth was 7.3 percent; a million new jobs were created; and foreign investments have been strong. We have been cited by London as the “offshore destination of the year” and by the International Data Corporation as the top global outsourcing destination after India.

Our billion-dollar investment club includes Texas Instruments with its 1.6 billion dollar wafer fabrication facility under construction; Hanjin with two shipyards. One up and one coming costing $3.7 billion total, which makes us the fourth biggest shipyard in the world; Marubeni, Tokyo Electric and AEA which have invested billions of dollars in our power sector. They join the ranks of Intel and Proctor and Gamble, to name but a few of our major investors.

Just this month the IMF lauded our economic growth, the substantial reduction in our budget deficit, low inflation and the improvement in consumer confidence.

The IMF highlighted in particular our fine central bank for smoothening foreign exchange fluctuations as the peso touched an eight-year high against the dollar in recent months. During this time, the country has built its foreign exchange reserves to a record high.

2008 holds real promise for a different reason. Not only do we expect to sustain our growth, but as a result of our total economic overhaul, we are well-positioned to weather a global economic slowdown which, unfortunately, will affect all of us – something which I will discuss in greater detail in a few moments.

The real story for 2008 is that our macroeconomic fundamentals are stronger than ever due to tough choices we have made on boosting revenues, cracking down on tax cheats, bringing reform to our revenue collection and modernizing our banking and financial sector. We have reformed our budget to be in balance way ahead of the medium-term plan schedule of 2010.

Last year, our deficit was only P12 billion the lowest in a decade and far below the ceiling of P63 billion. Revenues were up 16 percent from 206. Seven years ago, no one thought we could do it, but we have. There will be no rest. We are continuing the pace of progress that has succeeded in strengthening our economy.

The maturity in our economy has brought with it a new confidence that forms the foundation of sustained economic growth moving forward. We are at a tipping point. I’m confident that the Philippines will tip forward in pursuit of reaching the status of first-world within a generation.

Our strengthened economic fortunes come none too soon. As we are all aware, there are clouds on the economic horizon that we must guard against. The global economy is facing significant challenges. The slowing of the economies in North America and Europe is top of mind in our calculations to protect our own economy. To that end, we have developed a program that includes: first, to ensure a surge in investments in people and infrastructure; second, to ensure that we continue to pursue anti-corruption initiatives and to cut red tape; and third, to blunt the global rise in the cost of energy by providing targeted relief to the poorest among us who suffer the most from the high global price of energy.

These global forces are putting more strain on our working poor as prices for commodities like rice and fuel increase. We are a price-sensitive nation. So while our macroeconomics are strong, the benefits are still working their way down more slowly than we would want to lift up our citizens who live and work pay day to pay day.

We need a strong middle class to become a strong modern nation. We are working to soften the blow from the current global economic challenges to those working hardest to make it to the middle class.

The best thing we can do in the short term is to provide responsible, targeted relieve to those most in need. The best thing we can do for the remainder of my term until I step down n 2010 is to stay focused on further economic reforms while providing peace, order and stability. Our last two years will be dedicated to one main objective: invest, invest and invest some more in the nation.

The national budget which I signed a few weeks ago provides a roadmap for realizing our priorities in 2008 and for the remainder of my term. It should provide you with a sense of our priorities and our thinking about the future of our nation.

First, the budget reflects our values and policy priorities for investing in our people. This budget invests in what we call the three ‘E’s.’ They’re the essential building blocks of a nation, namely, the economy, education and the environment. Every Filipino wants a good job, food on the table, sound education for their children and a healthy environment with clean air, clean water and clean land

Second, this budget represents another important step in the economic development of the Philippines – namely, fiscal discipline. We have the strongest economy in over thirty years as a result of the tough reforms we have made to break the cycle of despair which has held our nation back for so many years. Part of the plan includes a march toward a balanced budget for the first time in many years.

Lastly, this budget proves once again that members of Congress from both the House and the Senate and all parties can come together to work with the executive branch to get things done for the nation. Political noise need not interfere with economic progress and reform. This budget helps make that point. The people are tired of partisan wrangling and want all of us to do our job – which is to work for the interest of the people, keeping the nation strong and stable, and always moving forward.

Overall, the budget provides a buffer to mitigate the pain of a deteriorating global economy and the accompanying rise in prices which affects food and transportation the most. Most importantly, it is a budget dedicated to investing in the vital physical and human infrastructure to continue to modernize our nation. Roads, bridges and ports along with education and healthcare build up the foundation of the nation and make us more competitive.

The issue of corruption that has plagued our nation for several generations is an issue we take seriously. As an economist, I know that first and foremost, a strong economy is an economy that is transparent and free from corruption. This budget invests more and more to clean up the culture of corruption that has plagued this nation for generations.

To fix the corruption that still plagues our nation, I have called on Congress to pass a comprehensive anti-corruption reform act in 2008. On our part, we will hold officials accountable if they are found to be corrupt after due process. Let the chips fall where they may as investigations are concluded and friend and foe alike are brought to account for their actions in the proper courts.

With its budget doubled since 2002, the country’s primary anti-corruption body, the Office of the Ombudsman, has hired several dozen prosecutors and investigators, and trained them better. As a result, the Ombudsman’s conviction rate has hit nearly 60%, from just 6% historically.

We have undertaken an effort to curb graft through criminal justice, administrative controls and procedural reforms. Just to name an example, we established the Procurement Transparency Group the Procurement Transparency Group to make sure that biddings for projects will be above board. The group is partnership between the government and civil society. At present, this independent group is monitoring 40 priority projects.

To apply the same government-civil society synergy to revenue generation, yesterday I instructed the DOF to form watchdog bodies for the BIR and BOC with private sector and civil society participation to monitor tax collection and big BIR and Customs cases.

While we have accomplished much, more remains to be done. We plan to work hard the next two years until the day our term ends in 2010 to fulfill our Philippine reform agenda. This includes legislative efforts to improve our banking and finance system; to strengthen our tax collection and continue to broaden our tax payer base; and crack down on corruption and red tape.

We will fight for the economy, education and the environment, to feed the poor, improve job creation and do everything in our power to mitigate the global forces increasing the price of commodities like oil and rice.

Our use of official development assistance will necessarily be guided by the three E’s of our priority thrusts, as well as our need to adjust foreign exchange flows to avoid excessive upward pressure on the peso. We ask our creditor community to work with us on standardizing ODA loan conditionalities. We will likewise apply the targeted spending of ODA. For health related projects, foreign borrowings shall focus on upgrading primary hospitals to secondary, half-priced medicines and health insurance. I have recommended to particular ODA lenders that loans for environmental protection be assigned to reforestation. For education, we prioritize early childhood education, grade school classrooms, vocational education, high school and college scholarships, teacher training in English, and graduate courses in science, technology and engineering.

We are bullish on our economy, optimistic about our future and committed to being a force for good for our nation.

Thank you all for your commitment to the Philippines.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Philippine Development Forum. Retrieved https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123139/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1059&Itemid=38