Thank you very much, Dean Pangalanga.

I just like to take this opportunity to tell you in public. Dean, you’re still young and I think in the fullness of God’s time, you’re going to become a justice of the Supreme Court.

Chancellor Roman, thank you for the very kind words that you said of welcome and I am indeed grateful to have a chance to be here again in my old haunts in U.P.

Former Senate President Jovito Salonga, a leader we respect in our country and our society. In the past, whenever I went to Kilosbayan, I would tell the story that before I became the topnotcher in the Senate, he was the first topnotcher. I also once told this story during a visit to Kilosbayan that Senate President Salonga, although he did not become President, his destiny was to free our country from the last vestiges of colonization, and those were the American military bases. And now, I also want to recognize a good contribution. At least one, that Senate President Salonga gave to my administration. He was the one who proposed that I appoint Haydee Yorac as PCGG Chairman.

Executive Secretary Bert Romulo whom I always like to call the conscience of the Cabinet. Professor Malaya Ronas, Director Merly Tan, Attorney Capulong, and Justice Ordoñez is also on our list here. There! So I said, where is the name of Justice Ordoñez who led the commission that investigated Al-Ghozi's escape? And good proposals were made and they are being implemented. After that, I asked him to expand the role of the Al-Ghozi investigative commission and make it a PNP Reform Commission which he is currently working on the proposals for.

There are really many changes that are needed, like the PNP reform. The people really want change. From what I understand from talking to ordinary Filipinos all over the Philippines. All over Metro Manila, what I understand from them is that the change they want is about a better life. Especially things related to livelihood such as jobs, prices, income, food on every table, health, education, a secure home, clean water. Among the candidates, I can say that I am in the best position to bring about these changes because I already have the power and experience to steer the economy and create jobs that raise salaries.

Indeed, while historically our economic development has been slow compared to that of our neighbors. This once basket case of Asia posted this past year that just finished. A growth that is number five or number six among the 21 economies of Asia Pacific. It is also the highest growth since the Asian crunch of 1997.

As they say, many, but it's not enough. So a question that could be asked is: ‘could anyone have done better considering the world crisis, the regional crisis and also the chaotic situation that I inherited?’

In the short time that I was President, I stabilized the chaos we inherited. Unparalleled progress was achieved in land and housing, health care, and the fight against corruption. In Land, it is only now that almost three hundred thousand squatters are no longer squatters because they were given the right to buy the land they are occupying. Housing for the poor has not been built for a long time because it is too difficult to run. We changed that. We reformed it and now we see so many housing projects again. More than four hundred thousand poor and working families have housing.

In terms of health, when I was a Senator, Senator Bert Romulo and I passed the Health Insurance Law. But it almost became a Dead Letter Law because only a few were enrolled. Now, I gave it a lot of attention during my presidency, now many of our families are covered by Health insurance. And I started the program that expanded the medicine that the poor usually buy, which was sold at half the price.

We were able to finance these and many other unprecedented scales of basic services for the ordinary Filipino by our successes on the Macroeconomic front, Our growth rate is steady, our inflation has been kept under control, so the food that the poor usually eat, their regular milled rice, the fish that the poor usually eat, especially we expanded tilapia, the price and supply are stable during the duration of my administration.

The budget has been kept within manageable levels, fiscal performance has improved, so the interest rate is low compared to history and many small enterprises, worth about 20 billion pesos, can borrow in a year. Bandwidth has become cheaper and more accessible during my administration. This has accelerated our competitiveness in information technology, the international community recognize our vigilant advances in fighting corruption especially through our innovative but meaningful lifestyle checks and the procurement reforms that we were able to legislate after many, many years.

The evidence that came from the lifestyle checks helped in the cases against many officials at the Presidential appointee level.

Cases were filed against judges, prosecutors, officials, for example, more than a hundred BIR officials, and more than seven hundred Presidential Appointees were prosecuted under the administration, many due to the evidence obtained from the lifestyle check.

This E-Procurement law that was passed after many years of waiting reduced corruption in the purchase of government supplies.

The people’s dissatisfaction about frontline government services are being address, too, there had been dramatic changes in the land transportation office, for instance,

And last year, at this time, when I went around, I learned —I went around on the anniversary of EDSA—I learned that many barangays had no water, and in our study over this past year, we identified 300 waterless communities in Metro Manila. Now more than half of this 300 have been addressed either through connection, water tank, mobile tank of public faucets and other means. And we are striving to complete it again on the EDSA anniversary.

These are down payments, I am not content: more needs to be done, additional installments are needed, but what I can offer you here is “Nothing beats experience” That’s what we need.

Our historic economic problems cannot be blamed on my single President, because the problem is fundamental. They are caused by the economic and political systems.

Senate President Salonga, during his senate Presidency, he addressed some of the basic problems of our system, but there is so much more that we still have to still have to change in the system.

We must change the system and usher in deep and far reaching reforms that will lead to political and social stability, and sustained economic development including constitutional reforms leading to a parliamentary and federal form of government.

I will fight for the unprecedented change that will make us safer, strengthen our families, and eliminate corruption, let me talk about these three.

First, the changes that will make us safer, I will fight to stop the drug epidemic and eradicate terrorism. Even now, the shabu factories we've apprehended are unprecedented, the shabu we've confiscated is being burned every week, and the drug lords, also unprecedentedly many have been arrested, even the number one drug lord who the government has been chasing for a long time has been caught, but that's just a down payment.

We need to reform our protective institutions because of the imperative of peace and order, that’s why I asked Justice Ordoñez. Secretary Ordoñezto help out there.

Yes, we increased the salaries of policemen and military personnel to make them equal to the salaries of teachers, Yes we increased the salaries of the judges but we need to increase the salaries of the prosecutors as well and we need to support the judicial reforms being done by Chief Justice Davide, and we need to reform the military and the police towards graft-free and dedicated organization with the tools to enforce peace and order throughout the land to be true protector of the people.

Details of the reform in the PNP, “that's what we expect from the leader of Kilosbayan, Secretary Ordoñez as I said earlier, we increased the salaries of the judges, now we need to increase the salaries of the prosecutors because there is a serious shortage in the Prosecution Service. That is the most important sign that salaries are insufficient because even the market shows that there is a disparity between demand and supply at the present salary levels of prosecutors.

Now let's move on to the changes that will strengthen the family. Of course, what does the family desire? Jobs, food, education, health, a home. We have created more than three million jobs under my presidency. And in the last three years, before I became president, only one million were created, so I created three times as many jobs. Look at it, I took the text message from Pat Sto. Tomas to confirm the statistics.

But we need to create enough jobs for the average Filipino. Marami pa irn na sinasabing wala silang trabaho, and to do this, we must build the long-term underpinnings of infrastructure, telecommunications, electric power, expanded credit. We must broaden education to sharpen the intellectual competitiveness of our country. I believe in investing in education because I believe that the Philippines’ greatest resource is the Filipino skill and the Filipino mind.

But to afford this infrastructure, to afford these telecommunications, to afford this investment in education. We need structural reforms for the government to broaden its fiscal controls and capabilities. And as I said, therefore, to provide the infrastructure needed to leverage the country’s competitive advantages and promote in investment-friendly environment based on good governance and a strong, deep financial and banking system.

We must strengthen the average Filipino with reforms in agriculture where the keenest struggle for survival takes place – pagkain sa bawat mesa. No Filipino who works hard for family and country be deprived of a decent meal, and therefore, we must modernize agriculture, which we have been doing in my administration by spending at least 20 billion pesos a year. Again, an unprecendented amount inspite of our budget challenges, and because we have been spending on productivity and modernization, rice productivity has reached a new bounty with the biggest irrigation program in the history of our country and also with the propagation of a rice hybrid that doubles or even triples the harvest of the farmers who use it and use it properly. We have found new markets for tuna, carrageenan, tropical fruits. And as a boost to agriculture, the Roll-on/Roll-Off highway system, the ferry and highway system, is now reducing the cost of food transport from Mindanao, which is our food basket, to Luzon where most of our consumers reside.

Food on every table, a duty to every Filipino, a commitment that cannot be compromised no matter what.

In my administration this year, we were able to…because we obtained this hybrid rice during my state visit to China in November of 2001. Then we improved the technology, developed by Philrice to be suitable for our land in the Philippines, this past year, we were able to plant 100,000 hectares with hybrid rice, and as I said, the yield is double and triple for farmers who used it, but we must plant 500,000 hectares more to make it 800,00 to be able to be self-sufficient in rice. And we must put real wealth in the hands of our farmers by legislating the acceptability of their farm land as collateral.

Because now, land reform is okay. Before, farmers could borrow from landlords. Now, with reform, of course, the landlord will no longer lend. They can't borrow from banks because their land cannot be used as collateral. So we need to fix the law so that they have their own source of capital.

Yes, speaking of land reform, we must do not just land reform but asset reform. Our assets are land, credit, minumim basic needs.

Earlier, I mentioned that in my administration, we have achieved that a majority of families are now covered by health insurance. We will make health insurance universal because that was the law when Bert Romulo and I were senators – universal health insurance. And the medicines that are sold at half price in national and regional government hospitals, we will expand the reach of these half-price medicines to municipalities and, if possible, to barangays.

And while we have given an unprecedented number of the poor the right to buy the land they occupy, there is still a lot that can be expanded in land rights. Perhaps we will strive to reach twelve million people and build three million housing units. To do this, I want to bring to the Philippines effective reforms based on the ideas of Hernando de Soto, who is one of our important thinkers in this new century who transforms land into capital. Thailand, Haiti, Mexico, El Salvador, many in South America are already implementing his system and empowering the urban poor.

Microcredit is another major reform that the Philippines has become exemplary for during our administration. We’ve been able to provide not directly by the government but by working through NGO conduits, private conduits – microcredit to one million assetless rural women. Were being praised for this system by no less than the author of the Grameen Bank model himself, Dr. Yunos. But I would like to see at least one million pesos worth of microfinance in every barangay as proven successful again in countries like Thailand.

When we talk about asset reform, we also talk about stable prices for food for the poor. That's why I always focus on affordable food, ordinary rice and fish. We have expanded tilapia production. We have achieved this, this is also asset reform. We will have this for the strength of the family. These are basic services, affordable food and clean water. We will have clean water and a clean government. Two symbols of basic services are moral reforms or change, changes that will eliminate corruption.

As an economist, you know that when I was at the U.P. School of Economics, the government of various agencies had a high regard for the economists of U.P. I was a consultant for PIDS, NEDA, and also a consultant for the Tariff Commission. So from the time as an economist, as a professional economist, as a trade official afterwards, as a senator, as vice-president and now as president. I’ve learned the complexities of the bureaucracy. I’ve learned too that fighting corruption is not like Saint Michael slaying the dragon with one swoop of his sword.

They tried to do that when I fully supported BIR Commissioner Rene Bañez, but it doesn't work that way when we need to face the bureaucracy in the fight against corruption.

Fighting corruption is like healing an infected wound that must be constantly cleansed and disinfected. So the lifestyle check, really needs homework there. The procurement reforms, need homework there. And not only that, the culture itself, I will fight to change the culture of corruption so that it disappears.

The down payment that we have made on anti-corruption – those hundreds or maybe almost a thousand presidential appointees prosecuted. The E-Procurement and other systemic reforms can graduate into fundamental reforms if we work hard enough on governance reform. We must use our fiscal reforms at the same time. As we are doing governance reforms to have a better compensated civil service. In Hong Kong, they established this Independent Commission Against Corruption. You know, Hong Kong is just one city and they have a large budget. A wealthy country, a city-state but it took them seven years before they said they had suppressed corruption. The very person who started the ICAC in Hong Kong is now my consultant here in our fight against corruption. And he believes in our sincerity. And maybe it won't take seven years because we have learned from the experiences of other countries. And we have also learned from our own experiences. Once and for all, we must end graft with a mighty hand of political will and a change of values among our citizenry.

We are making progress but I need the mandate of the people for fundamental changes in the system of our politics. And above all…I went to church earlier – I go to church every day – I went to church earlier at the Nazareno because it's a fiesta today, as the priest said in his sermon, “we may change people that we vote for or we may not change people we vote for, but we have to change our own moral values.” And that is one reason why the leaders of Kilosbayan, although I know that when you invite me, one room is our audience, not thousands of listeners, I respect Kilosbayan because I know that the purpose of Kilosbayan is to do what it can to further the morals, the values of our country and our society.

That's why I am happy, and pleased and grateful that in the new year you have invited me to share my vision and program and platform of government. And I expect that this vision is also in line with the visions of Kilosbayan. And I expect that Kilosbayan will be a guide for the changes in moral values that we need in our society itself and in the people themselves.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 2004 Forum with the President of Kilosbayan with the U.P. College of Law and the U.P. Department of Political Science. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091140/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5504&Itemid=38