Thank you. Thank you.

Many thanks to all of you and many thanks also Jane for your introduction of me. And congratulations to all of you because attendance is double this year compared to last year, congratulations!

And here are the high-ranking officials of your host jurisdictions to greet you all: from Bataan, Governor Tet Garcia; from Zambales, but look at her youth, beauty, black t-shirt and jeans, you would think she's an SK official, no, she is Congresswoman Mitos Magsaysay; Congressman Tony Diaz, from Zambales; from Bataan, Congresswoman Hermie Roman, Herminia Roman and Congressman Abet Garcia.

I am also with Secretary Gabby Claudio who takes care of our SK and also Chairman Salonga and Administrator Arreza, your host here in Subic, they’re all here to welcome you. So, all our SK leaders here on stage and those in front wearing your black, green, and our student leaders over there in Luzon, congratulations to all of you for being here!

You always hear from the elders, youth development is vital to nation building. And I think you have heard from me that we are in fact a young nation: our people are young; you are young and you make up 65% of the population. So, we are a young nation: even our democracy is young, 60 years old and the growing pains are still with us. We are young because of our character — we love life, we sing, we dance, we love sports; and even in science we love innovation, creativity, technology. We are young because we are true citizens of the world, part of the rapid changes that is taking place around the globe. That is why we are on the cutting edge of the global workforce.

And as I said before, it is you the youth of this nation who have the energy to make your dreams come true. That it is now time for you, the next generation, to get involved in civic life, whether in the SK or in student leadership to speak up, to take action, to take responsibility for your own fortunes. To work to make a better world. And of course to use the tools afforded you by government, your family, your country, to become doctors, lawyers, farmers, healthcare workers, and many other noble professions and also to become leaders in high technology and green technology and many other noble professions.

If you remember last year, when half of you were present — now, double the presence today — in Bohol, or in Cebu? I gave ten million pesos for your ‘Together for Nature.’ So last year, we launched a Green Philippines campaign and I’m so happy that your teacher says, “think green because together we have been taking back our forests, we have been replenishing fallen trees with new protected forests to protect our land and our people.”

Together we have been reforesting the land and bringing back the beauty of the Philippines we all love and want. And because I heard that the SK is very active in using this fund for your reforestation and tree planting, this year… no, last year I gave it from the PSF because there was no budget for reforestation, but this year there is a budget for reforestation in our GAA so last night I told the DBM and the DENR to release another P10 million pesos for the SK for your reforestation.

But this year, I think that's not the only possible source of your projects because when I became president… in the past, the national government provided insufficient IRA (Internal Revenue Allotment) but when I became president, I released your IRAs in full. And we all know that the SK (Sangguniang Kabataan) has a share in the IRA, but on top of that, in 2006, with the help of the congressmen here with us now, we made a tax reform, the Value Added Tax. So, aside from paying your IRA in full, we had a reform of the Value Added Tax, and when the government's income increased due to the Value Added Tax, with the three-year lag, the IRA also increased, so we implemented the Value Added Tax in 2006.

So in 2009, the IRA of the LGUs (Local Government Units) increased by P40 billion pesos and the SK has a share in that IRA. So I hope you felt that your SK budget increased this year, that is because of the Value Added Tax three years ago. So you had a much larger fund this year, and I expect that you will use this additional fund to help us shoulder the programs not only for the environment but also for the fight against poverty.

For example, in microfinance. During my administration, P150 billion pesos has been unleashed for microcredit, a large part of which comes from the government reaching microentrepreneurs in your barangays through cooperatives, NGOs and rural banks. Something the SK can do, you can also make it a project to help young, would-be microentrepreneurs create proposals to borrow from microfinance institutions. That is something the SK can do to fight poverty.

Another way to fight poverty is the conditional cash transfer, the Pantawid Pamilya, which provides assistance, a small allowance to the poorest families in our country. Right now, 700,000 are those beneficiaries. They are given a small allowance but with the condition that their children must always attend school and must always have check-ups at the Rural Health Unit. We will make these 700,000 into one million families, the poorest of the poor, by the end of the year. I hope the SK can help monitor the families receiving assistance to ensure that they are fulfilling the conditions, to ensure that their children are really going to school and that the children go to the Rural Health Unit for check-ups. In other words, become part of the community monitoring team.

Another important way to fight poverty is land reform. In the distribution of millions of hectares of land reform, more than a million beneficiaries of CARP (Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program) and 700,000 indigenous people are now proud owners of their own land. The SK can help in their communities, especially in a project that I expect from you and I also mentioned last year, solid waste management where organic waste can be turned into organic fertilizer. That is also a good project for the youth and that is also thinking green.

And also, because of Philhealth, 86% of our population is now covered by Philhealth health insurance. But I would like to remind you that according to the law, the local government should pay the premium for the poorest for Philhealth. The national government started paying the premium to demonstrate how helpful Philhealth is to the cardholders. But I hope that since the SK is seated in the Sanggunian (council), the SK will remind your Sanggunian that the local government has a duty to pay the premium of your poorest citizens so that they can remain members of Philhealth. So those are the different things that the SK can still do in our fight against poverty.

For the youth, we have created the National Youth Service Corps and the Youth Conservation Corps coordinated by the National Youth Commission, some of whom are present here today, to provide jobs and livelihood opportunities for those aged 18-24. Isn't that age group within the jurisdiction of the SK? And right now, more than 15,000 young individuals are working under both programs. I hope the Youth Commission and the SK will coordinate so that this program will continue to be successful.

So, we have a lot of things we can do together, and the reforestation you started, I hope it will continue this year.

I thank you for your continuing support. When I look at you I see not only that you are thinking green, I see determination and enthusiasm in your faces. I see sound leadership, I see hope, I see a brighter future for your generation.

You are the faces of the future. And as a grandmother who is honored to stand with you, members of the SK. So again… again, thank you very much for our being together, for our reforms.

Long live the Youth!

Long live Nature!

Long live the Fight against Poverty!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech 2009 Sangguniang Kabataan National Congress. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134012/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26662&Itemid=38