Thank you very much Secretary Syjuco, our outgoing Chairman and Head of TESDA. Outgoing because he is running for Congress in his district.  But I’m glad that you’re here for one of your last acts as head of TESDA because Secretary Syjuco when he was still a congressman was the father of the concept of Ladderized Education.

Chairperson Tita Helen Benitez, I’m always so happy to see such elegant and venerable lady at the helm of PWU. CEO Freddie Reyes, new generation; past president Amelou, thank you very much for your ideas about the 12 years.  I hope that we can… I will ask my PA Mona Valisno of Education to take up your solution with the Presidential Task Force on Education. I think we’re going to have a luncheon meeting one of these days.  Maybe we can have Amelou join us in that meeting.

Our different CHED Commissioner Defensor, our different officials, our faculty and staff of PWU, our students of PWU and guest students from other schools, I’m so glad to be here with all of you.

And I am so glad to be here again in PWU. Again, because I’ve come here very often.  And every time I come here I feel very, very happy. I feel happy because I remember my mother. PWU is my mother’s high school alma mater. And the friends she met in high school — it was PWC at that time — her seatmates to the left and to the right for four years became her lifelong best friends.

And then when I was a teenager, she sent me to study folk dancing here, under the great Mommy Urtula of the great Bayanihan. So I am happy to be here with you, with the young CEO of PWU, with the young students of PWU, and the young scholars from the other schools. Because you, the young of our nation, are the bridge between the past and the future. It is for you that we right the wrongs, fight for change and seek to make a better day.

Our nation has come far, but it still has far to go. So we will continue hands-on governance until the day I leave office. Just like Buboy Syjuco working until the judicial notice from the Supreme Court comes here. To that end, we will promote the key initiatives our government has advanced since we took office.  We will focus on three areas:

One, bringing more power and growth to each region and decongesting Manila.

Two, continuing to promote the importance of the three E’s: education, economy and environment, to our efforts to create sustainable and equitable development.

Three, a focus on you, the youth of our nation as the best hope for a brighter, better Philippines.

We have made progress in many areas. When we took office in 2001, our plan to promote growth and equity centered around four components that I pointed out in my first State of the Nation Address:

First, an economic philosophy of private enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. For example, private enterprise in education. We don’t want state universities and colleges to kill private universities. We don’t want public high schools to kill private high schools.  That is why we invested very heavily in scholarships because we know that state universities and colleges are very highly subsidized.  Private universities and colleges have a lower cost per student, meaning, more efficient than state universities and colleges.  But since you had no subsidies, you have to have charged a higher price because the state universities and colleges charged a much lower price because the tuition is not the one paying for their operations, it’s the government allocation.  So to equalize that we have spent a lot on scholarships and I hope that many of the students in PWU are either CHED or TESDA scholars, part of our promoting private enterprise.

Because under this philosophy, the way to fight poverty is to create jobs.  And to create jobs, we attract investments.  And to attract investments, we have to attend to macro measures and concerns.  For instance, to be able to fund all these scholarships government revenues have to be raised and government expenditures have to move from profligate to prudent without compromising such priorities as education, also health, agricultural modernization and our technological progress.

Our investments in the sectors that have the potential to make significant contributions to our nation’s drive for job creation and investment attraction have strengthened our ICT sector. So I’m glad that you’re offering IT courses and Call Center Ladderized courses here.  And these efforts have modernized our tourism and agricultural sectors.  So, I’m glad that your ladderized education began with HRM.

Our BPO sector was employing 4,000 people when we took office in 2001.  Today that number has increased to more than 400,000, and counting.  So, I’m sure that our graduating students from their call centers or IT from PWU will have jobs waiting for you in the BPO sector.

The second component of our development plan announced in 2001 was a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity.  And I am glad that we have created almost two million new jobs in agriculture during our administration.  To achieve this, we invested no less than P20 billion pesos a year in agriculture and fisheries modernization including promoting organic fertilizer, irrigating over a million hectares, agricultural education, Land Bank loans to farmers and fishermen of over a P160 billion pesos, dryers and other post-harvest facilities including more than 10,000 kilometers of farm-to-market roads, and seed support that have increased average yield per hectare.

We distributed millions of hectares to almost a million indigenous people and more than a million Agrarian Reform beneficiaries.

A third component of our plan is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. We expanded healthcare, adding 50 million beneficiaries to Philhealth care, upgrading primary health centers and clinics into secondary and tertiary hospitals, and selling medicines commonly used by the poor at half price even before the Cheaper Medicines Act was passed.

We built 100,000 classrooms, mostly grade school.  Because I don’t want to build many new high schools ‘cause we don’t wanna compete with the private high schools. And we built many of these classrooms in barangays that had no schools at all before.

You know one time I was in a remote barangay, mountain barangay in the Zambales mountains, to look at their electricity projects, barangay electrification.  But there I met a group of young teenage Aetas and they were telling me their story. One of them was… named Joan was telling me their story.  They don’t come from that barangay.  They come from another barangay where they have to walk  2 or 3 hours over rugged mountain trails and crossing rivers and creeks to be able to go to school to the barangay where we went. And she was already 16 years old but still in grade school, because when she was 5 or 6 her parents wouldn’t make her do that travel to go to another barangay to go to school.  And even at her age, she didn’t travel everyday three hours, she had to board with some other Aeta family in that barangay where we were and they had to pay them with vegetables and other produce.

So, she was telling me I wish we could have our own school.  I said, “yeah, it will come,” because we have a program to build schools classrooms in all barangays especially grade 1 and 2 so that the 6 year-olds will go to school when they’re already 8 years old they can go with their classmates to another barangay.  But 6 to 7, their parents will not make them go to another barangay.

Then time passed, a few months later, I went to another remote barangay, far…  even more remote than the first one to celebrate our 100,000th classroom, and there she was, the girl I had been talking to three walking hours away that 100,000th classroom was her barangay and now her younger cousins don’t have to walk 3 hours anymore to go to another school.

Education must be at the center of any government’s economic development platform.

And to be able to do all of the things we’re doing — scholarships, building classrooms and so on — we have invested an education budget that is more than 200 billion pesos this year compared to less than 100 billion pesos before my administration.  As a result, national achievement test scores went up from 44% to 65 in grade school and 36% to 47 in high school.  A long way to go but a long way has also happened.

We have also provided, as I said, college and post-graduate education for 600,000 scholars, some of them are here in PWU.

And Buboy Syjuco has talked about what we have invested in technical education and skills development. Is it correct Buboy, P36 billion pesos in the last nine years? To provide technical education and skills training to 11.5 million graduates, some of them are here with us today – you.

And as Dr. Amelou Benitez Reyes said, there are students who by choice or circumstance do not immediately go to college but instead finish a shorter term technical or vocational course and get their job before deciding to return to university. Ladderized education allows you the students who take that choice to obtain a college degree later and have most of your previous vocational courses given the equivalent credits.

And I congratulate PWU, you’re a pioneer in many educational and, I must say, cultural endeavors, after all Bayanihan was born here in PWU.  And among your being pioneer in education is that you’re among the first of the higher education institutions accredited to offer ladderized education.  Congratulations!

A fourth component of our plan is effective governance.  The fight against corruption has been going on for years.  It must continue.  But we have achieved significant success.  This success has resulted in higher levels of tax revenue for the Bureau of Internal Revenue as well as enhancement in governance in many government departments. But more needs to be done in this and in many other aspects of governance.

Everything our government has done, has worked hard to achieve has been to make the future brighter for you, our next generation of Filipinos. You, the youth of our nation, are our hope and inspiration.  Everything we must do must be to build a better life for each and every young person in this nation.

While I am proud of what our government has achieved, past achievement is only as good as the ability of the nation to continue to grow and prosper.  I fervently desire that the progress we have made will not stop; that what remains to be done will be picked up by you, the next generation of leadership.

As a nation, we must keep our sights set firmly on the future, to build on what is good and work even harder to meet the challenges of what remain to be done. And you, the youth represent the aspirations of our nation.  It is to you that we dedicate the efforts of our government to lift up the Philippines.

And the foundation of opportunity is education.  That’s why you’re here, that’s why you’re studying.  Your parents know and I think you know it is the key to a better life. It opens minds, it opens doors. And in today’s world, a strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology.

To build the mind and connect to the world.  Education and technology are the twin pillars upon which the future of the nation rests.  That is why we remain dedicated in our last months in office to promoting, advancing, pushing for more and better education like the education you receive in PWU and better technological infrastructure.

We have come far in both. But we still have far to go. We must not rest.

I have a deep desire to see a brighter future for the hardworking men and women of this nation.  And most importantly, I have an abiding interest in seeing that you, the young people of today, come into your own, seize the value of education — as we have done with PWU education — and seize the value of modernity and use these tools to advance yourselves and the nation.

So for all the students of PWU, and all the students who are not from PWU but who are in technical education and skills development and ladderized education, good luck to you!  And may you have a great future.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during an Anchor Education Event: Visit to the Philippine Women’s University (PWU) offering Ladderized Education Program. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080504/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27673&Itemid=38