Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Cyber Corridor Mindanao Tour: Visit to Concentrix

[Delivered at the Concentrix, Damosa IT Park, J.P. Laurel Ave. Davao City, Davao del Sur, February 3, 2010]

Good evening everyone. Please sit down.

I am very happy to be here. Davao is known for many things but tonight I want to stress Davao as an important part of actually two of our Super Regions, one is the Agribusiness Mindanao and the other is the Cyber Corridor. So I am here as part of a tour of the Super Regions. As I said, Agribusiness Mindanao is one of the regions. Tourism Central Philippines is another, the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Urban Luzon Beltway and the Cyber Corridor. These Super Regions were designed to spread development away from an inequitable concentration in Manila.

The Cyber Corridor was identified by the private sector, the academe and government comprising the strongest potential locations for ICT investments like call centers, back office, software development, medical transcription–what is medical transcription? Well, of course, our agents here know what it is but for purposes of the media and for purposes of the general public who will listen to the media and read the media, an example of this would be an American doctor talking into a microphone and discussing the diagnosis of the patient and that has to be digitized, his voice tape is sent to the Philippines and the Filipino transcriber puts it together. Of course, that means that you cannot have just anybody coming from the street, it’s somebody who has to know medical terms and understands something about medicine. So, that’s one example.

Engineering design, I think you’re all aware of that. Animation, Pixar uses animation services from the Philippines, and game development. The IT Corridor or the Cyber Corridor includes the two original ICT Centers of Excellence, Metro Manila and Metro Cebu, and 10 so-called ‘next wave cities’ being promoted as the best new destinations for ICT: Metro Laguna, Metro Cavite, Iloilo, Bacolod, Metro Pampanga, Metro and Central Bulacan, Cagayan de Oro, Lipa and Davao. That’s why I’m here tonight, to announce that Davao is an important part of our Cyber Corridor. It is one of what we call the next wave cities for ICT investment.

Some of the reasons given for putting Davao in the Top 10 next wave cities is that Davao has nearly 500,000 high quality workers. You know that’s the largest talent pool among all the next wave cities. You will not find another city in the Philippines or even a group of Metropolis cities in the next wave cities having that number.

So no wonder there are three PEZA IT parks, including this one plus facilities in Ayala Land, Robinsons Land and SM, and six more applying. And I understand there are 18 call centers in Davao City with almost 7,000 employees, including major players like Call Box, Cyber City, Global Connect, Sutherland, Western Wats, and our host, Concentrix. (applause) Indeed, Davao has come a long way as far as ICT is concerned.

Actually, the Philippines itself has come a long way since January 2001. Many have forgotten much about that tumultuous time almost ten years ago. But at that time, the nation was on the brink of political chaos and financial bankruptcy.

The economy was jammed in reverse. Few investments were being made, few jobs were being created. The debt of the government and its corporations of 3.6 trillion pesos was bigger than our GDP of 3.3 trillion pesos. There were almost no foreign reserves.

It was a time of lower salaries and higher prices. Tax revenues were so low that we could hardly invest in expanding healthcare, improving education, and providing clean water and needed electricity to remote barangays.

Into this dismal picture we stepped. I did not seek the Office of the President in 2001; it was thrust upon me. But rather than shirk from this onerous task, we rolled up our sleeves, determined to turn the Philippines around.

We were focused like a laser beam on delivering better real results to better the lives of ordinary Filipinos. But as an economist, I knew that to reverse years of economic decline we had to instill fiscal discipline, grow the economy, and invest in human and physical infrastructure like the completion of the modern Davao International Airport.

These actions would form the building blocks of a turnaround that would deliver an unprecedented 36 quarters of uninterrupted growth, create 9 million new jobs, add 53 million people to healthcare, with government coffers that helped us withstand the global economic crisis.

In my first State of the Nation Address in 2001, I said that we would create wealth by developing the labor-intensive, skills-intensive services such as ICT. From scratch with only 2,000 workers in year 2000, we created what is today a global powerhouse: the Philippine BPO industry. We achieved this by promoting strategic investments in three areas:

First, digital infrastructure. We encouraged more broadband services in cities and identified growth areas. Thus the cost of international calls went down from 40 cents to 2 cents a minute for those using VOiP. The number of internet users jumped from 2 million in year 2000 to more than 24 million today.

And so that no Taiwan tremor or tsunami can cut off our cyber services from their global clients, we encouraged PLDT and Globe to invest billions in having more than one international telecommunications gateway into the country. Here in Davao all BPO facilities are supported by Bayantel, PLDT and Smart which offer broadband connection with resiliency and redundancy. So if one system fails the others are still there. In fact in 2008, PLDT upgraded its network facilities for several IT-BPO locations in Mindanao.

The second area of investments was an appropriate legal and policy environment. We created the Commission on ICT headed now by Chairman Rey Chua, over here. Are you the youngest Cabinet member or is Durano younger than you? You’re the youngest. But that’s the reason why because ICT is an industry of the young people. So CICT was guided by the policy that the ICT sector should be guided by the market, not by government interference. Maybe by government support but not interference.

For example, if the market calls for call centers, then we should not force the investors to specialize in programming. So instead of regulating, we gave incentives to developers of IT parks like this one. We assisted investors in identifying promising provincial sites, ergo the Cyber Corridor and as part of what I’m doing now is to let the people know, the investment community know that there is Davao part of the Cyber Corridor. And we built more transport facilities to those sites where Davao International Airport is crucial, was crucial in the choice of Davao as part of the Cyber Corridor.

So this philosophy of encouraging rather than regulating drove the fast growth of call centers. But now the market is also leading to the growth of higher value added segments of the offshoring and outsourcing industries, like accounting, legal services. Legal services like a lawyer, a law firm in America will send to somebody here assignments for legal research, for example, so that is certainly higher value added because you are a researcher but you are not doing this for someone in Davao City, you are doing this for somebody in Dallas, Texas or something like that. The same thing with medical and personnel and administrative services. And of course engineering design, we are such creative people, we don’t have to travel abroad and get a job, working in an architecture office in another country because we can do that right here or somebody else in another country.

And IT services software development that is a growing area for the Philippines. Just the other day we inaugurated the IT Center of one of the Top 21 in the world, UST Global. And the Chairman of the Board said in his speech that he had met me in 2007 in one of my trips to the United States. I mean, it was actually… it was in fact part of my trip which as always an investment promotion meeting and he was one of them. And what he really liked about the Philippines among many others that I mentioned earlier, one very important factor was we have a good Intellectual Property Protection regime. So that’s a policy environment that promotes investments.

Third, the development of human capital. To increase the country’s share in the global market for offshoring and outsourcing services, the government intensified the implementation of various programs that will train its workforce to enable them to find jobs in the BPO sector, and to educate the young on the use of computers and internet for the next generation of IT/BPO workers. So more than 4,000 public schools are now connected to the internet, including 57 schools in Davao City. In technical education and skills training, we have invested three times as much as the combined budgets of three previous administrations. A very large portion of this investment goes to scholarships for the BPO industry, including more than 4,000 in Region IX.

The other day, Secretary Buboy Syjuco of TESDA, forwarded to me a text message from one of those 4,000 saying, “Thanks, Secretary Syjuco because I was one of the scholars and now I’m in Concentrix.” There you are, that’s Sarah Genial. That’s why we decided to have this event here in Concentrix so we could see where Sarah is now training. So thanks to these strategic investments, billions in private investments poured into the country, creating half a million new jobs in BPO alone.

Today, the Philippines with 90 million people has challenged India’s one billion population for BPO supremacy. Compared to almost nothing in 2001, 0.02 billion dollars, our BPO industry now earns more than 7 billion dollars, not far behind India’s 9 billion dollars for call centers.

And the 500,000 jobs that we’re creating in ICT are to me part of the legacy that I will leave. And this is a legacy I’d like to think of hard work, a strong and stable economy, renewed global engagement, major investment in healthcare and education, and dramatic improvements in human and physical infrastructure.

Much work remains to be done, but I’m determined to turn over to a new government a new Philippines ready for the challenge of bringing the nation to the verge of first world in 20 years.

And how do we do that? You know 200 years ago there was the… or more than that the Agriculture Revolution, then there was the Industrial Revolution. Now we have the Knowledge Revolution and that’s the way to bring us to the first world. And I’m glad that Davao is part of that corridor that will lead us to the first world.

Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Cyber Corridor Mindanao Tour: Visit to Concentrix. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100407235053/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27449&Itemid=38