Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Romulo.

Thank you very much to all of you who attended here. It means you are ready to fight SARS. So please sit down so we can be strong in fighting SARS.

Distinguished Secretary Joey Lina and all his companions from the DILG; including those who organized this because the DILG organized it so that local governments are really on-board with our fight against SARS; Secretary Manolet Dayrit, our anti-SARS Czar; the presidents of the leagues, the President of the League of Leagues, Governor Dolfo del Rosario; president of the League of Cities, Francis Tolentino – I thought Francis informed me yesterday that he couldn't attend. Anyway, Francis is here, thankfully; Mayor Monching Guico, President of the League of Municipalities; James Marty Lim, this is the second time we will be talking about SARS. Because I was with him in the leagues of barangays when we met; also here are the various members of the SARS Management Committee: Secretary Roilo Holez, is he there? There he is! Secretary DJ De Jesus; he isn't at the head table but we should also greet the youth, SK President Ariel Arcillas; the one adding blessings for our health workers, president of PhilHealth, Pinkoy Duque; and of course our host mayors, mayor of Pasay City, Peewee Trinidad. Oh! Our host mayor is gone. Anyway, this place is on the border of Pasay City and Manila and Lito Atienza is still here; where is Peewee? There you are. Thank you, Peewee; we have many Metro Manila Mayors here, many city mayors, many provincial governors. I won't name them all individually. Thank you to our local government officials who attended here. And of course our heroic health workers.

I would also like to greet Dr. John Olive, our who representative to the Philippines. We thank who for all of its support, all of its sober evaluation of SARS in the Philippines. We thank who even as we congratulate Vietnam for graduating from the list of SARS countries. We thank who that in recognition of our efforts we were never listed as a SARS country in the first place.

Nonetheless, we must face the threat of SARS with audacity and solidarity. It’s becoming obvious that the SARS has and is already causing tremendous effects on local and international economies. The fear of SARS is actually what is bringing down the economies of the region. During the 'pista'y dayat', there used to be so many people in San Fabian. When I went, there were only a few. But there was no SARS in San Fabian. San Fabian is far from Alcala, and there is no SARS in Alcala either. So what that means is, the truth will liberate our country from SARS. And you, local government executives, are needed to spread the truth.

We need an action plan. Our main maneuver for alertness is the local governments, including the barangays. But of course, the barangay won't be enough here, so James Marty Lim and I had a separate meeting.

It is at the level of implementation in the community that will show our people that we mean business in containing SARS.

Let’s together appeal to the public to remain calm and to seek information from credible sources as we also encourage again the media to be responsible sources of verified information. And as government, let us do our share in obtaining the necessary information on developments on SARS as well as in coordinating with the international community on holistic and best practices to deal with SARS.

In the global realm, we have the World Health Organization as the supreme commander of our efforts. The who lays down the standards of compliance and action, and coordinates the strategic points of scientific research and containment.

At the regional level, at the SARS summit in Bangkok last week, we set forth specific action points for the containment of SARS:

First, ensure proper departure health screening for travelers at the point of origin. That is very important. Because if all countries are strict with departure and do not accept a country even if someone slips through, we can be confident. That's why when I left the Philippines, I had my temperature checked. When I returned, I didn't need to quarantine because Thailand wasn't a SARS country either. So the truth is important, sufficient care is also needed;

Second, establish standardized measures for proper health screening;

Third, cooperate in providing public information and education to promote awareness;

And fourth, establish and strengthen an early warning system on emerging infectious diseases.

Regarding the level of our country, I issued an Executive Order giving the power to the Secretary of Health and his group — those listed by Joey earlier — to manage SARS.

I also tasked Secretary Joey Lina to mobilize the PNP. And, I also instructed him in that Executive Order to exercise supervision over local governments with regard to and for the duration of this crisis. I know that you, local government officials, are directly elected by the people. Therefore, the DILG cannot control and supervise you on a daily basis. But during the SARS period, he has the power to supervise you on matters concerning SARS. This is applicable in the following:

First, isolation and control of quarantine areas;

Second, maintenance of peace and order in local communities;

And third, providing the necessary assistance in the conduct of and transport of SARS cases and/or SARS suspects.

We have already identified San Lazaro hospital and the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine as the primary hospitals to care for SARS patients. And the government will also identify hospitals to manage SARS in all regions of the country.

I think this is a necessary detail for Manolet Dayrit to explain. Where will the designated SARS hospitals be located in the different areas of our regions.

For the one billion peso allocation for SARS, 500 million pesos is allocated to enhance the infrastructure, equipment, and facilities of these hospitals that will be designated as SARS hospitals.

As for our heroic health workers. All health workers on the front lines of the anti-SARS campaign will be provided with complete protective gear. We will not gamble with the safety and welfare of those who bear the burden of sacrifice, and those are our health workers.

These things we are doing, these things I am declaring to you, according to the World Health Organization, these actions are correct to prevent the epidemic. And let us continue so that the Philippines does not record itself as a SARS country. You know this SARS, we recognized it as SARS according to the WHO report on March 15. But SARS started, according to studies and going back to history, as early as November in Guangdong, China. From November to March, SARS was spreading, but it was not yet known and it was not yet known how to handle it. You countries infected with SARS, those who got SARS before March 15 — China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Vietnam, including the area of Taiwan — thousands or hundreds were infected with SARS. But after March 15, when we recognized it and we are doing what we need to do according to the WHO's advice to avoid it like the Philippines and the other listed countries, look at the Philippines, if it's three thousand in China, it's three in the Philippines. It might even be two. Because Adela's father, we don't really know if he died of SARS or cancer. Because you remember Adela came here to look for a faith healer for her father who was dying of cancer. So look at the difference, three thousand for those who caught it before March 15. Three for a country like ours where it happened after March 15.

Therefore, knowledge is important. So let us remain vigilant but calm.

In Hong Kong, where more than a thousand people have SARS, in just one building, Amoy Gardens, SARS spread to three hundred victims because cockroaches spread the microbe through the sewage system. What is the lesson there? Let’s learn from that experience. Let’s actively participate in a nationwide clean-up campaign. Because cleanliness is health, whether there is SARS or not, and health is the wealth of a strong republic.

So carry on, let us win this battle for the sake of our people, for the sake of their livelihood and normal lives.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the National-Local Governments counter attack against SARS Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201358/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6322&Itemid=38