God bless you very much, Secretary Bello, for your beautiful introduction to us.

Apo Congressman Junie Cua, ti baru nga chairman ti Committee on Appropriations diay Kongreso, the first chairman of the Committee on Appropriations nga anak ti amyanan; (Applause) Apo Congressman Rodito Albano gapo Isabela; Apo Governor Daks Cua ken Mrs. Cua, the former Congresswoman Cua; Apo Bishop Villena; other Cabinet members; other officials ti probinsiya ti Quirino; amin nga mayores ken opisyales dagidiay naduma-duma nga ili ti Quirino; kakabsat ken gagayyem, naimbag a bigat yo amin ken maragsak nga fiesta kadakayo. (Applause)

Ken iso nga ti tema ti fiesta yo ket “I Love Quirino.” Immay kami met ta siyak met I love Quirino. (Applause) And I consider it a humbling experience to be able to serve, as Congressman Junie Cua mentioned in the various ways that we work together, the people of Quirino and thank you for the honor of serving you. (Applause) Uray no Quirino, adda sab-sabali nga ethnic groups. Dagiti Ilokano, dagiti Bugkalot, Ifugao, Kankana-ey, Ibaloi, Agta, nagkakadua kayo kas maysa nga umili tano agaramid para ti vision ti pagilyan tayo to become a first world nation in 20 years.

Show your generosity, not only to your province but to all of the Philippines, by sharing the bounty of your land with other provinces. The vegetables you grow here are praised by many of your fellow countrymen in other parts of Luzon and the Visayas. God bless you all. (Applause)

Fulfill your important role now that there is a food shortage throughout the world this year. You are self-sufficient in rice and you even export a part of it, and your province is the first banana producer in Region II. You will also provide other provinces with coffee, peanuts, and other crops because of the industry of the people of Quirino and other provinces that are self-sufficient in rice. We only need to import 10 percent of our rice requirements. Before, rice exporting countries stopped releasing their supplies to other countries. We have been working tirelessly to address challenges arising from the slowdown in the global economy combined with high oil and food prices. With the help of the province of Quirino, we have succeeded in ensuring that our country’s food supplies remain stable.

Isu nga pinagpigsa tayo iti agricultural production aglalo kadagiti probinsiya nga kangatuan iti yields da, babaen kas pagarigan ti irigasyon. (Applause) Ken kadua ti programa tayo ket ti Addalam Irrigation System (Applause) nga inrugi tayo idi Mayo. Ken kasla kuna ni Governor Daks Cua, adda gastos tayo nga 1.3 billion pesos (Applause) tapno maipatakder, but it will give us irrigation of 5,000 hectares — actually, 5,800 — of which 1,000 hectares already have been irrigated since last May diay ili ti Aglipay ken Saguday ditoy nga probinsiya ken kasta met iti Jones ken Echague diay Isabela. Manipud idi rugi daytoy nga panangaramid daytoy irrigation network ket nangaramid met tayo nga 1,200 nga baro nga trabaho.

And we have those who have benefited from this project. Elmer Pagaduan – addadtoy ni Elmer Pagaduan? Diak ammo no addadtoy because you’re so many here — used to have an idle land of 1.5 hectares diay Saguday. Itatta nga addan Addalam Irrigation System, fully irrigated, he expects to harvest at least 120 cavans this late September (Applause) compared to 60 cavans no idi no awan pay ti Addalam Irrigation System. Ta tatta, he is now assured of two croppings a year.

Maykadua iti proyekto iti Addalam River, adda met nagpaaramid met tayo iti 29 nga basbassit nga Community Irrigation Systems wenno Small Water Impounding Projects iti intero nga probinsiya nga mangpadanum iti 2,000 nga ektarya. (Applause) Ti intero nga pagilyan, we have restored about a million hectares of old rundown irrigation systems, including 2,000 hectares in Quirino. So the new and the restored irrigation systems have increased our nation’s irrigation land to 1.5 million hectares, including 10,000 hectares here in the province of Quirino. (Applause)

In terms of oil, the high price of oil and gasoline and everyday commodities hits our poor the hardest. While the high price of oil is a global issue and outside the control of the government, we have introduced measures to lift the burden of our people. Several months ago, we removed the tariff on oil. We have also been providing targeted cash payments to the poorest of the poor to help you cope with their electric bills. Diak ammo no idtoy Quirino, dagidiay consumers ti menos ti 100 kilowatts ti kuryente, addan diskuwento para makatulong kadakayo amin nga nagrigrigat ti kuryente. (Applause)

But the fact is that this is a global phenomenon and these global forces are causing real difficulties for all countries around the world. So no matter what actions we take, we must work together to resolve these global issues if we are to see any significant recovery in the world economy.

For Quirino, not only is farming important, land reform is also important. I am the committee on land reform, as the son of the President who initiated the emancipation of farmers through land reform.

I know for a fact from being around my father — who incidentally was a protégée of President Quirino after whom your province was named — I learned from him how challenging it is to govern our nation especially with the media that is the freest in the whole world as it was during my father’s presidency. But a President governs for the benefit of all Filipinos and should not be focused on public relations.

My father, according to former Governor Espino, when Quirino and Nueva Vizcaya were together, my father was the one who started the Diffun-Maddela road during his time. (Applause)

My father was my greatest mentor, role model and inspiration. I learned early from him the meaning and importance of fortitude. Kasla kuna ni Congressman Junie Cua idi 38 years ago, awan pay nga napipintas nga kalsada, irigasyon, awan pay nga uray anya. So nangruna pay idi tiyempo ni papang ko, and so the time when they came to open the Diffun-Maddela road, nagbiyahe da to… wen, 9 hours nagbangka gapo, saan? Sadinno? Gapo Aglipay inggana Maddela, 9 hours ti biyahe idi ngem itatta, nalpasen dagiti kalsada tayo, napipintasen dagiti kalsada tayo. But this lesson, travelling 9 hours by boat which is part of the two days of travel by land, is the lesson that still keeps us going everyday as we go about making tough decisions that we hope will set the Philippines on the path to becoming a modern, prosperous nation. (Applause)

Serving the people of our country iso ti importante. And I am very happy nga akas chairman ti Appropriations Committee itatta, Congressman Junie Cua, (Applause) will serve not only the people of Quirino but all the people of this great nation. (Applause) And I know he will be tireless in working to bring about the changes that will deliver a better life for all Filipinos including all the people of Quirino. And so, we work with the very strong work ethic at the same time promote an agenda that has delivered the strongest economy in more than 30 years and a better quality of life for millions of our countrymen including, I hope, the Bugkalots of Quirino. (Applause)

Dagiti Bugkalot kadagiti tallo nga probinsiya ti Quirino, Aurora ken Nueva Vizcaya ket naikkanen ti Certificates of Ancestral Domain Titles para ti 100,000 nga ektarya. Dagitoy CADTs, kadua dagiti sabali nga agricultural inputs ket mangikari to bring iti adu nga produksyon ken nangatngato nga kita. And that’s the reason why your mayor chieftain, Rosario Camma, was the best dressed person in the opening of Congress. (Applause)

But that is to symbolize ti importansiya ti Quirino para ti intero ti pagilyan. You know, all provinces, all districts lobby to be included in the SONA. Ngem diay SONA is only a 35-minute speech kadua ti palakpak maybe one hour, so you cannot talk about everybody. Ngem iti SONA tayo, Quirino was mentioned two times — Addalam River ken dagidiay Bugkalots nga nabaro nga CADTs. (Applause) Iso ti importansiya ti Quirino para ti intero nga pagilyan. Immuna ti kontribusyon yo dagidiay kanem ti pagilyan na ikadua ti kontribusyon yo para ti social justice para dagidiay indigenous population.

Iso nga no agkakayat tayo ti Quirino agkakayat tayo met ti intero nga pagilyan. (Applause) And so that’s why here we are — we love Quirino and we love the whole Philippines. And we are here to thank Quirino because you love the Philippines, you help feed the Philippines and you help the Philippines achieve social justice.

God bless you all and Happy 37th Anniversary! (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 37th ‘Araw Ng Quirino’ Anniversary or the Celebration of “Panagdadapun Festival”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412115240/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1690&Itemid=38