Abo nga salamat, Congressman Joven Miraflores and thank you for inviting me once again to join Aklan on your golden anniversary.

Mrs. Miraflores, Governor Marquez and Mrs. Marquez. Thank you governor for your very generous acknowledgement of the different ways by which we have worked together to make Aklan the very prosperous province that it is today.

Aklan is so famous, we have many visitors on your 50th anniversary. We have two lady governors: Governor Sally Perez of Antique and Governor Bella Castillo of Aurora. and with me are Secretary Ebdane of public works, Acting Secretary Hidalgo of education, and presidential adviser for Region VI, Former Governor Lito Coscoluella. Vice Governor Tolentino and the members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Mayor Rebaldo and all of the other mayors and all of the local officials of the various towns in the province of Aklan.

I would also like to make a special acknowledgement to the descendants of the father of Aklan, the children of the late Congressman Godofredo Ramos.

To all of you, happy happy golden anniversary!

Governor said that not many provinces get to have me twice to celebrate your anniversary. I was here 2002 but I must be back here again because it is the golden anniversary of the golden province of the Philippines.

Why are you the golden province of the Philippines? You contribute so much to the wealth and the GDP of the Philippines. You know around the world, it’s been said that Spain earns more from tourism than Saudi Arabia from oil. Well, that is how much Boracay is earning for Aklan and the whole Philippines.

I remember when I came here in 2002, we were talking about the island of Panay’s integrated development plan, and at that time we were talking agro-industrial. How time flies. It seems so long ago because now if tourism can earn more than oil, certainly, Boracay has caused a major difference in the lives of the people of Aklan since 2002. And I am as excited as you are about the big difference in your life during the past four years. And I am very proud that this big change in your life happened during my administration.

Boracay was number one in tourism last year. It was number one among all of the new year’s eve destinations. It was number one again this holy week. And I must congratulate you, but more than congratulating you, I have the fervent prayer that Boracay will spread the gold and be the hub of development all over Aklan, all over Panay including Antique which is only 45 minutes drive away. The way that Kuta, that famous beach in Bali, became the hub of development in Bali which is now enjoying a higher standard of living than Jakarta.

But when we talk about tourism, we’re not only talking about the beach, we’re not only talking about the resorts, we’re talking about the products that you can sell to the tourists. I hope your mango, your piña, your abaca will find their way to the hotels, restaurants and souvenir shops of Boracay. That way the whole island of Aklan will become very rich because you have a built-in market for the great products that you have in your province.

You know just a few days ago, funded by the international financing corporation of the World Bank, Mina Gabor, Former Secretary of tourism and her group, presented to us a proposed master plan for the sustainable development of Boracay. And in her concluding frame, she reminded us that for three times conde-nast named Boracay as the very best beach in the world. I think every year it’s one of the ten, but three times it was number one. And I hope it will always be number one and I hope that the tourism of Boracay will be the road to prosperity not only for Boracay, not only for Malay, but for Aklan and the whole island of Panay, and in fact for the rest of the Philippines.

I just come from Romblon and from Antique. I especially chose those two neighboring provinces to be my side visit on the day that you invited me here just to stress to them, to you and to our country — because the media follows me wherever I go — how the multiplier of Boracay is so widespread.

Antique, 45 minutes by road. In fact, during my administration, we built that beautiful road so that some of your excess tourists can still swim in Boracay but should already sleep in resorts here in the mainland — Caticlan mainland, Nabas, Buruanga, Pandan, Libertad — and therefore spread development in Panay.

But on the other side, I told the people of Romblon, your hope is not to be trading with other poor provinces. Your hope is to attach your economy to Boracay because San Jose is 20 minutes from Boracay. The children of San Jose town of Romblon study in Boracay, and Sta. Fe is one hour away. So Boracay is a hub not only for Region VI but for the entire central Philippines. And I congratulate the people of Aklan for giving us that golden opportunity.

Because people have been coming here to Boracay, they have also discovered so many other scenic spots in Aklan, isn’t it? You scenic spots in Aklan are top rate natural advantages that must be optimized in accordance with the principles of sustainable development.

Way back in 2001 when the tourists were not yet this numerous, I foresaw this. I said in my State of the Nation Address: “We will promote fast-growing industries where high-value jobs are most plentiful. We have the competitive edge in tourism in the natural wonders of our country and the natural warmth of our people.” I think those tourists would not have come to Aklan only because of the natural wonders, they have also come because of the natural warmth of the Aklanons. And I thank you for your hospitality.

What is the national government’s obligation? Our obligation is to provide the roads to those wonders and the means to take the tourists there. That is why we have been liberalizing the airline industry and there are more than 30 flights everyday to and from Aklan. So much so that even people from other provinces nearby drive to Kalibo to catch the flight because it is so convenient to catch the hourly flights.

The world’s most beautiful beach should be enjoyed by people all over the world in a manner that will keep it beautiful for all time. And in manner whereby everybody else in Aklan and Panay and even neighboring Romblon will be able to develop.

I am happy to hear of investors upgrading facilities and building new high-end ones to remain competitive and ensure your visitors’ comfort. There is a very strong private interest to invest not only in world class tourism facilities similar to Shangri-La, but not only in Boracay anymore, but in the mainland of Aklan world class facilities. There is also interest in developing a world class emergency hospital. I congratulate the people of the province of Aklan for the beautiful new hospital that we have just inaugurated.

There are private investors who also want to put up a hospital in Boracay itself but there’s no property. And I was hoping your officials can help the Department of Tourism locate a property for the hospital which will ensure the safety and warmth that forms part of Aklan’s charm. But Congressman Miraflores told me that there is an old provincial hospital that has been inundated, not operating anymore. So we will offer that to investors for leasing.

And speaking of safety, your resorts both in Boracay and in the mainland of Aklan are part of the area of operations of what we call ‘task force stingray’ which protects the resort islands in Central Philippines especially from terrorist threats. Within that task force, i’m organizing a special sub-task force for your beach resorts called ‘Baywatch’ to include lifeguards, protection from stray animals.

And I am so happy not only that Boracay has changed the life of Aklan but also the Ro-Ro port that we put up here three years ago which has also revolutionized your life. And upon the request of local officials we are devolving the Caticlan port to the provincial government of Aklan.

We will make it a tourist Ro-Ro port. I told the Secretary of Transportation this morning that we must phase out the cargo loading and unloading in Caticlan. So he said, “Wo what happens to the cargo?” Well, all the cargo bound for Aklan or going out of Aklan should be in the Ro-Ro trucks and let the Ro-Ro trucks roll-off and roll-on the vessels and let the cargo be loaded or unloaded in the original points of origin or the final points of destination. well, that will soon be implemented by the provincial government because they are already preparing the memorandum of agreement for the devolution of the Caticlan port from the Philippine Port Authority to the provincial government of Aklan.

Governor Marquez also talked about the airport of Caticlan. I’m very happy that… Well, four years ago, I gave 40 million pesos for the airport of Caticlan, and I’m glad to hear that it is already implemented.

Now for Kalibo, we have released — and I announced this during the Ati-Atihan, and I’m happy to report it’s been accomplished — we have released 55 million pesos for the instrument landing facilities for the Kalibo airport. now, your local officials are working on buying the right of way. And the target is by October the instrument landing facilities will be completed and although charter flights waiting to land in Kalibo in Aklan will be coming. If you have 34 flights now, imagine how many flights you will be having when we have the instrument landing system.

The experts say that the Kalibo airport is actually sufficient to keep up the volume of tourists in Boracay consistent with sustainable development. However, I know of private sector investors who want to invest in the Caticlan airport and improve it some more. Well, we will not stop them. They can go ahead as long as they don’t require any government guarantees. Imagine, if you should have two airports, one will be the government and one if the private sector should decide to upgrade it.

There is really a tremendous demand coming up. Power is gonna be a big problem later on, not yet now. Why not yet now? Because you remember during one of my visits here, we inaugurated the mirant power plant in Nabas to serve Boracay but also to increase the province’s energy supply. And anticipating that your very rapid development will have another power shortage or need by 2010, this early I have suggested to your officials that they should discuss with the department of energy so that we can incorporate — Governor Marquez, you were saying earlier — the hydro power plant here in Aklan for the 27th yen package with the government of Japan.

So much to do. Let’s all work together to make Aklan richer and richer from the best beach in the world because the richer Aklan becomes, the richer the Philippines becomes. That is why you are our golden province. You are the goose that lays the golden egg. And we want that goose to be more and more prosperous for the sake of the rest of our country.

Happy golden anniversary to our golden province!

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Golden Anniversay Celebration of Aklan Province. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214040/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2432&Itemid=38