Thank you very much, Dick. My very active, aggressive and effective Secretary of Tourism.

And to all of you, headed by Mr. Long, Chairman of PATA; President, Mr. Yong; Congressman Ablan, who is a PATA life member; Dick’s very word, his predecessors — Mina Gabor and Narz Lim; Mr. Kohli; Mr. Kitamura; the Mayor of Olongapo City, Mayor Kate Gordon; all of you, members of the Board of Directors, indeed, welcome to the Philippines!

Dick said he was expecting eighty of you to come but one hundred sixty of you came. Thank you very much for your interest in the Philippines.

All our cultures uphold and share the principle of peace, unity and understanding.

All these are achieved through travel and tourism as we strengthen links between our nations and peoples, sustain cross-border social or trade visits, boost our rapidly integrating economies, and most of all, help our peoples prosper by bringing them together.

Tourism is a powerful growth engine and deserves to be a top national priority. In my country, as dick said, it is a top national priority.

When I made my State of the Nation Address before Congress last year, my first State of the Nation Address as President, I said, that we see in the Philippines as our growth sectors for the future the human resource intensive skills intensive high close service sectors like information and communication technology and tourism.

Tourism is a giant global industry. Seven hundred million international tourists spent 475 billion dollars in the year 2000, including domestic tourists, total spending was three trillion dollars.

Tourism has a huge additional potential for growth. The long-term points to an 11 percent growth in spending. Only 3.5 percent of the world population has travelled internationally. And as the world grows more of them will want to travel. Asia-Pacific which is the area of operations of PATA is projected to grow from a 16 percent share of the tourism market to 25 percent by the year 2020.

Investment in tourism, yes, requires an enormous capacity but it is highly scalable.

The domestic value-added of tourism is 90 percent of sales for a hotel stay in the Philippines unlike manufactured exports, for example, electronics, our number one export only has a 10 to 30 percent domestic value-added.

Tourism is a huge dollar earner. It is the biggest global export. The average international tourist spends over a thousand dollars per visit to the Philippines. There is a low capital expenditure import component: 6 to 8 percent for tourism in the Philippines compared to 35 to 45 percent for automobiles.

Tourism can have a rapid impact. Thailand which is the number one in tourism in Asia increased its arrivals by 25 percent in the first year of “Visit Thailand” in 1987. And when the tourist suddenly start coming existing supply can be improved quickly.

Indeed, tourism deserves to be a national priority. I have given economic reasons why tourism deserves to be a national priority but over and above economic reasons, tourism deserves to be a national priority because of its impact on social development. In terms of jobs, it is what is called a “big tent” industry. It is labor intensive. One international arrival creates one job. It promotes job security because it is personal service oriented, we cannot automate and replace the people who serve the tourists. It is open to unskilled and skilled workers alike. The jobs can be created anywhere that has tourism potential.

Tourism provides excellent training for skills. It provides good personal development opportunities. And the skills it creates are exportable.

The culture of tourism, for instance, the culture of having a safe and clean environment benefits not just the tourists but the entire community.

Tourism is a proven growth engine even in countries that have security problems. We have security problems in the world around us but tourism can still continue. For instance, Egypt in 1996 had security problems, gunmen in that year opened fire on and killed 18 tourists. The next year in 1997, dozens of tourist died in an attack, and yet in those years, each of those two years, 4 million tourists visited Egypt. In Spain, where ETA is one of the Europe’s most feared separatist groups, the year 2000 saw 50 million tourist arrivals. In the Indonesia of 1998, where hundreds died from unrest and there were anti-Chinese riots, 5 million tourists still visited Indonesia. And so, therefore, we must not allow terrorism to beat tourism. And these countries have shown it can be done.

Our tourism vision for the Philippines by the year 2010, the year when we would like to say that we have won the battle against poverty is, as Dick said, “more than the usual Wow! Philippines.” More than the usual sun and beaches, nature, fun, service and tourist mindset. We would like international arrivals to grow from 2 million in the year 2000 to 5 million in the year 2010. We would like jobs in tourism to grow from 3 million in the year 2000 to double in the year 2010. We would like the contribution of tourism to grow from 7 billion dollars in the year 2000 to 17 billion dollars in the year 2010. And we would like domestic tourism to grow from 800 million dollars in the year 2000 to 2.5 billion dollars in 2010.

How will we do this? What is Dick Gordon doing for this? I chose him to be the Secretary of Tourism because I know he can carry out the resolve to harness the Philippine tourism growth engine. Harnessing the tourism engine requires focus, execution, and coordinated leadership. Which is why as dick said, i elevated the department of tourism into a super Cabinet member with policy ascendance over other departments that need to serve tourism. Because we need these other departments to serve our national strategy for tourism.

In this strategy for tourism, we have identified specific tourist segment priorities. First priority are the short-haul beach tourism, domestic tourism, and short-haul sightseeing and shopping tourism. Our approach to these segments is to market the relevant destinations through core multi-channel marketing, spending 60-70 percent of our promotion budget. And this budget will be spent or is being spent primarily on Japanese, Korean and Chinese markets.

Next to the three segment priorities are short-haul recreation tourism, short-haul Eco-tourism and Balikbayan tourism, which means the visits from our overseas Filipinos, and long-haul backpackers. These are niche segments which call for a tailored marketing approach where we will be spending 20-30 percent of our promotions budget on rifle shot promotions tailored to specific niches such as Japanese golfers.

Why do we spend most of our budget on the countries I mentioned. We are prioritizing North Asia within the short-haul market segment because that is where the market is leading us to. Japan has been traditionally our largest market and yet it is still highly underpenetrated. Korea is a rapidly growing market. And China’s proximity to the Philippines, especially to the hometown of Congressman Ablan, provides us an opportunity to be a frontrunner in a strategic emerging market with a huge potential.

I am very happy to have been learning from dick this past several months about our continuing growth in tourism. And our data further indicate that the visitors to the Philippines have certain favorite destinations within the Philippines. They seem to flock to Cebu and Bohol, Manila and its environs, and Palawan. These three seemingly favorite destinations of the tourists are probably favorites because they all have a good carrying capacity; they have a good number of destinations within themselves; they have a good fit with the segment markets that i cited earlier that are coming here, the first and second priority segment markets; they have a good number of major attractions; they have relatively acceptable infrastructure. For instance, Cebu has a good international airport, and Manila, of course, is the primary gateway to the Philippines. Since these are favorite and therefore major destinations, our plan for them is to be the focus of major infrastructure improvement so that we can aggressively close the gaps that tourists identify and we can promote them immediately.

Next to these three major destinations, the favorite special interest destination of visitors to the Philippines seem to be Boracay and the Baguio-Banaue circuit. And for these special destinations or special niche destinations, special interest destinations, we shall increase their accessibility and improve their existing product offering.

The presence of international airports make Laoag-Vigan, i said the hometown of Congressman Ablan, and Clark-Subic, my hometown and the hometown of Secretary Dick Gordon and Mayor Kate Gordon also current tourism destinations. All these destinations, we shall build more attractions to make them good tourism options some more.

And experts considered Davao as a major potential destination. Davao also has an international airport which we will be opening — i mean the airport already exists but the nice airport will be opened about four months from now — and there we can build for the future.

In doing the marketing, Dick follows three steps to successful marketing: build awareness, generate interest, induce trial. How does dick build awareness, through public relations, also building a distinctive image as he has done “more than the usual” via advertising with sufficient reach and frequency of message. So you see us on international cable TV. Dick generates interest by providing… I mean our plan to generate interest includes providing detailed information via the internet, allowing for a sampling of the country experience via tourism fairs — where the Philippines won the best marketing booth, right, Dick? In Germany last year. Yes, the best marketing effort — and generating hype via special events especially what will happen next year. And Dick induces trial. One way to induce trial is providing segments-specific incentives via direct mail. But because we were very, very big Philippine community abroad, one main effort for inducing trial is recommendation from family and friends. And that is Dick’s V-12 program for the Philippines from the overseas Filipinos. And then, the final push by sales promotion that chairman long talked about in New York, and Dick has just come back from China and Hongkong on this sales push.

Thailand, the tourism leader in Asia, employed all these three successfully. And of course, it is good for us to follow proven success.

Our Philippine marketing plan starts with “Visit the Philippines year 2003.” If Thailand was able to have a 25 percent increase in its tourism when it had the first “Visit to Thailand Year,” I hope we will have a similar increase. We have a 12-month calendar of events, and I hope the PATA executives and directors will help us promote the Philippines during “Visit the Philippines Year.”

In our vision for 2010, there are many tourism investment opportunities. The main framework would be tourism enterprise zones. These are an ideal vehicle for focused development at the local level. A tourism enterprise zone is a specially designated priority tourist destination that aligns with one or more of the department’s target segments. It will be located in a larger destination area, one of the many that I mentioned earlier. It will have a clearly delineated and sufficiently large tract of land that will receive focused and high-impact development and resources. This estate could be a contiguous land or group of islands, it could be an entirely new development or re-development of an existing area, it could be public land or consolidated private land. This is the kind of tourism that we would like to be able to see by the year 2010. And we are inviting investors even today.

Also, I said in my first State of the Nation Address last year, because we want to promote tourism, we have a policy to liberalize air access. We are releasing air access restrictions to promote tourism flow. Our policy is to liberalize airline policy by negotiating limited open skies from Japan and Korea to Cebu and Palawan, and explore ways to use trigger mechanisms to immediately increase capacity entitlements. In fact, this trigger mechanism is already enforce in our air panel negotiations. We would like to organize or facilitate charter flights to immediately release constraints in key markets. And the Department of Tourism is represented in the air panel I spoke about. In fact, you are Vice Chairman, aren’t you Dick? To represent the Philippine tourism interest. We will expand and upgrade the key tourist airports. These have been identified as Coron in Palawan, Bohol and Boracay. And for our thrust towards 2010, they will be upgraded to international standards. In the meantime, as we seek to build them — which would take some years — we will adjust landing fees in key destinations as incentives to additional flights to the area.

Yes, indeed, we can harness the tourism growth engine, and i hope PATA will be there to help us not only in promotion but also in investment in tourism facilities.

We want the Philippines to be a pleasant and safe destination for our tourists. As Dick said, we must not let terrorism defeat tourism. And so, on our part here in the Philippines, we will soon put an end to local terrorists. Even as we speak, the Armed Forces of the Philippines are relentlessly pursuing the Abu Sayyaf who have now gathered in their main lair in one island for their last but hopeless stand.

As for foreign terrorists who may attempt to venture into the country, we are keeping a close watch on our entry points. They won’t get far because we have a trilateral agreement with Indonesia and Malaysia soon to be quadrilateral with Thailand to check terrorist incursions in our common seas and common borders.

In the meantime, we have taken determined step to keep the country on a stable growth path. In the light of the prolonged global economic uncertainties, we are shoring up domestic productivity, applying the managed asset reflation principle popularized again by Thailand. This is boosting domestic demand. This is characterized too by prudent monetary policy, a gradual reduction in public sector debt and a balanced budget. It is focused on spurring small and medium industries in the countryside, as it strives to draw greater participation from the private sector while government’s limited funds are concentrated on programs that have the broadest social or economic impact.

I am happy that despite government’s conservative spending policies and the current global uncertainties, our economy continues to grow along with tourism particularly in the second quarter. The first half of this year, Philippine GNP grew by 5.2 percent. This is the highest growth of Philippine GNP since the fourth quarter of the year 2000.

The rise is attributed to the manufacturing sectors 5 percent upswing from a negative rate, and the service sectors dramatic 17.7 percent increase. The service to the service sector belongs the tourism sector. And so the positive growth rates in tourism that Dick talked about brought about our 5.2 percent growth rate. Also our exports rallied with an 8.9 percent increase. This growth heralds our continuing recovery and the steady growth of our industries including tourism.

As a final note, therefore, I would like to make a strong pitch for our “Visit Philippines Year” program once again. As i told you earlier, the celebration will run the whole year and will feature colorful festivals, cultural fair, food, handicrafts and other products.

I hope your promotional efforts will keep in step with our plans. You can always tell your clients that there are at least 7,000 reasons for them to visit the Philippines. There will always be something here even for the most discriminating visitor.

And most importantly, as said by Mr. Long, the Philippines is home to the world’s most hospitable, cheerful and charming English-speaking people. The Filipino people are the best reason for visiting the Philippines.

In behalf of the Filipino people, therefore, and in behalf of our government, I bid you all once again a warm welcome to our country. May our ties ever be strong and rewarding.

My best wishes for a very successful meeting. As Dick said, Mabuhay! And may I add, thank you all very much.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Dinner Reception in Honor of the Pacific Asia Travel Association (PATA) Board of Directors. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211407/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8380&Itemid=38