Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the mass oath-taking of barangay officials (Manila Chapter).

Thank you very much to all of you. And thank you very much to the mayor of Manila, Mayor Lito Atienza, who, like Joey Lina and me, is pro-life, which is why that is his discourse.

Honorable Joey Lina, he is the father of local governments because he is the Secretary of DILG, but he is also the nephew of Mayor Lito Atienza.

Vice Mayor Danny Lacuna; Congressman Rudy Bacani; diligent councilors; newly elected and re-elected barangay captains of Manila; distinguished guests; my beloved Manileños:

Congratulations to all of you.

And a belated happy birthday to Mayor Atienza.

I am pleased to greet your almost 900 Barangay chairmen and chairwomen of Manila — there are so many of you that the Manila Hotel ballroom is truly the appropriate venue for your oathtaking. And not only that, the historic Manila Hotel is a perfect fit for you because of the role you play in our country and in the capital of the country, the city of Manila.

You are needed – as I said in my State of the Nation Address – in the establishment of our Philippine Republic. I said then that there are two very important characteristics of a strong Philippine Republic.

First, we must represent not the powerful but the weak and the poor. And who best represents the poor? None other than those who lead the basic organization in our government, none other than the chairmen.

The second characteristic of a strong Philippine Republic is that in order to represent the poor and the weak rather than the powerful, our institutions must be strong. And perhaps of all our Philippine institutions, one of the strongest and most powerful institutions is the institution of the barangay organization and barangay chairman and chairwoman. Because, I am the President of the Philippines but my power is only executive; Mayor Atienza, mayor of the most important city, the capital of the Philippines, but the only power he wields is executive; the legislature in the national government, congressmen, Congressman Bacani and the senators; those who judge, our magistrates. Here in Manila, the executive is Lito, but the legislature is Danny and the councilors; but you, Barangay chairmen and chairwomen, embody the three powers within you – executive, legislative, as well as the barangay court.

That is why your institution is so strong and it is important to recognize your strength as an institution and expand it in deed and not just in law. Your power must be respected, your autonomy must be respected.

When I was new president – I became president on a Saturday, which shouldn't be a day off, no office; it should be rest, Sunday; Monday was the first day of work, the first day of papers – but that night, Sunday, oh, my Executive Secretary then, Rene de Villa, was hurrying me, there were papers I needed to see that night. What could be so important that it couldn't wait until my first working day on Monday? It turned out to be travel authorities of some barangay captains. Because even a barangay captain, all 900 of you, 42,000 throughout the Philippines, needed permission from the president to travel. What if we were overwhelmed with paperwork or were lazy? Then nothing would happen. What would happen to your power?

That's why the first thing I did, I said that barangay officials would no longer ask me for permission, and at the very least, I would give it, I would delegate it to Joey Lina.

The same goes for buying cars, you no longer need to ask me for permission, I am lowering that to Joey Lina.

And more importantly, your IRA. Have you noticed that your IRA is no longer being reduced, it is given to you in full? And not only that, the debts of the previous administration are being paid by my administration even though those debts did not come from me.

All of that is in recognition of the power and important role of our barangay organization.

Then, during my tour of the barangay officials, I don't know if it's here in Manila because you are rich, that's your problem, but in the provinces many complain to me, they say the GSIS benefits — the death benefits, the disability benefits, in other words the life insurance or disability insurance, they can't claim them. What kind of power is that if you, let's not be unlucky, it's a pity for the relatives, the families if someone dies or if you become disabled, it's a pity for you in your life needing many things, things you need to continue your activities. So that's something Joey Lina and I worked on, and now I created an Executive Order, regarding these things — life insurance and disability insurance — the payment to you will no longer need to be claimed from the GSIS, the DILG will be responsible for paying your benefits.

What do we need from you in giving all the power and recognizing your power? Of course, because you are the basic organization, you are the executive, legislative and judge in your communities, we need your help with the barangays: you need to be a bridge in sending projects against poverty. You need to be the eyes and ears and strong hand to ensure peace in your barangays. You also need to be the voice of the government to tell what the policies are and explain the government's side on various issues that are important in your areas.

That's why the barangay chairman and chairwoman are very important. I congratulate all of you because being a Barangay Official in Manila is very important. And many barangay chairmen and chairwomen I know ran unopposed, right Lito, in this last election? That means the people liked your performance during your last term.

For those who are new, your constituents have high hopes for your good governance.

So tonight we celebrate your success because you have a new mandate from our people. This very new mandate is also very much needed by the national government to be used so that you will be the bridge of the national government to the communities.

So again, it is a great honor for me that we are working together. As Lito said, it's not politics because barangay officials are non-partisan. So it is important that we work together. You are actually helping us more, our help to you is to give you your rights — the funds, the powers that pass through you while possible, our activities.

So Joey Lina and I created a kind of service that we can do together with our citizens we serve. It's called the Gabay sa Mamamayang Action Center. and it's like a one-stop information center where everyone will know how to get government services without having to go here, go there, go there, it's all there in the barangay. In the coming days we will have seminars from the Local Government Academy, Joey Lina will tell this, what? Gabay sa Mamamayan Action Center. A way to further centralize, to make a one-stop shop for our help to our citizens.

These are just a few examples of our enhanced service to our citizens.

I am pleased that you are here. Thank you for the support you have shown me in the past year and a half of my presidency. And in the coming times, let us work together to make Manila even greater, the capital of the Philippines.

Thank you very much and congratulations to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Mass Oathtaking of Barangay Officials (Manila Chapter). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224719/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8373&Itemid=38