Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at a meeting with the Filipino community.

Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo for your introduction. Thank you very much, Ambassador Siazon for your words of welcome to us and for what you are also doing here in Japan for our country and also for our Filipinos here in Japan.

I am also with tonight some members of our government as members of our delegation. Here is not only my Atty. Mike Arroyo, my husband; here is also Senator Edgardo Angara; there are also some congressmen and representing them here on stage, Deputy Speaker Eric Singson; We also have governors, businessmen and of course members of our cabinet and senior government officials who are involved in talks with Japanese officials during our visit.

We all greet the Filipinos here in Japan. My fellow Kapampangan, good evening to all of you. To the constituents of Ambassador Siazon, good evening to all of you. To my mother’s townsfolk, may peace be with all of you. There are only a few Pangasinan people here. To our relatives from the Visayas and Mindanao, good evening. And I saw earlier my husband’s provincemates, the Ilonggos, good evening to all of you; To the Bicolanos, good evening to all of you. There is Nonoy Andaya here, our Bicolano cabinet member; and good evening to all of you.

A big greeting and thank you to all those who attended today. Thank you, long live you too! I know that some of you have come from far away places, right Ambassador Siazon? In Nagano, in Ibaraki, in Kanagawa, in Chiba, there are different prefectures so thank you very much for traveling here.

From what we heard, your various aspirations as Overseas Filipino Workers here in Japan. And Secretary Roque already whispered to me that the OFW Wing at the Philippine General Hospital will be built starting next month. (applause) Not only there, an OFW Wing will also be built in Iloilo, so we will start there next month.

And I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the Japan Seamen’s Union for always being supportive of the Filipino community here. I’m so familiar with this place because the old Japan Seamen’s Union has always allowed us so generously to use this venue everytime we have a gathering with the Filipino community. So in behalf of the 38,000 Filipino Seafarers who work on Japanese shipping lines and our members of all Japan Seamen’s Union, tonight we conferred a Special Presidential Citation on the Japan Seamen’s Union together with the three hospitals that have been helping so much our Filipino workers.

Earlier I came from… I had a meal with the Japan Seamen’s Union as well as the Japan Ship Owner’s Association, discussing the welfare of seafarers especially the dangers not only because of the global economic crisis, but also the danger to your bodies because many Filipino Seafarers reach the Gulf of Aden and sometimes, not just sometimes, of course there is a danger that you might be caught by pirates there in Somalia. And I am grateful that Japan does not want us to ban Filipino Seafarers because in our difficulty, we continuously hear news that Filipino Seafarers are being kidnapped in the Gulf of Aden, the Department of Foreign Affairs even considered banning seafarers working on ships passing through there but what will happen to the entire Japanese industry? What will happen to our 38,000 Seafarers? And we are not just thinking about that, Japan is thinking about that, the government and the Japanese shipping industry.

So the good news that was given to me earlier by their Minister of Transportation and Member of Parliament, Prime Minister Taro Aso also announced yesterday that the Japanese Diet passed a law allowing their Patrol Trucks, the Self Defense Force of Japan, to go to the Gulf of Aden to defend not only Japanese ships but all ships around the world, so that will help the safety of our Filipinos.

I think that is one of the best news we can bring back to the other seafarers who are in the Philippines and are afraid of their fate, and the Japanese told us that since March, they have already started. But in March, they were only defending, they were only monitoring Japanese ships, but they told Secretary Romulo, our DFA Secretary who is always negotiating when a Filipino Seafarer is kidnapped, that since Japan started monitoring their ships in the Gulf of Aden, no kidnapping has happened, especially now that all ships, regardless of flag, can be defended and protected by the Seacraft and Aircraft of the Japanese Defense Force. Secretary Romulo said that many people are talking about the problem of piracy in Somalia, but Japan was the first to provide a comprehensive response to defend and protect our Filipino Seafarers passing through there.

And this shows how Japan is a strong and reliable partner to the Philippines and to our region as a whole. With the global economic crisis continuing to create challenges for all our economies, there is no better time than now to strengthen our partnership between Japan and the Philippines.

And this is what we are celebrating on my visit today, the new Japan-Philippines Economic Partnership Agreement or JPEPA, which will be the reason needed to bring the benefits of further economic cooperation through Japan and the Philippines and the people of our two countries. And the reason why I went here with our economic managers is to work closely with Japan to ensure that the JPEPA is fully implemented and effectively implemented so that we can really see the creation of jobs, the expansion of the economy and the business opportunities in these difficult times.

A big thing for our country is the implementation of the JPEPA. The JPEPA will bring easier trade between our two countries. Investment in the Philippines from Japan will be easier, and Japan's aid to the Philippines will increase.

It will be easier for bananas, pineapples, crabs, shrimp, chicken, and tuna from the Philippines to enter Japan. And Philippine factories will be able to use important materials from Japan such as special steel products, auto parts, electronic and electrical parts to make our manufacturing more efficient, and textiles and clothing will be easier to import and export.

And because of the JPEPA, more of our countrymen will have jobs here. Just last May, 283 nurses and caregivers arrived here. Are there any nurses here, are you the ones who arrived? Okay, and tomorrow we will visit the others. And they have already started training in the Japanese language. In the coming days, weeks and months, more Filipinos will get jobs here, especially when Japan's recovery begins, the economic recovery of Japan is beginning to be seen now not only in nurses and caregivers but also in English teachers and those working in Information Technology.

Here in Japan, there are of course many, 38,000 seafarers, that's a huge part of the Filipino Community here, but I heard, 200,000, is that right Ambassador Siazon, the entire Filipino Community here? And many of you are here because you have married and started families here in Japan. And when I visited, my wife Atty. Arroyo and I visited their Majesties, the Emperor and Empress of Japan, they gave me permission to tell you that they always think about and always want to happen a good life for the Filipinas who have married Japanese here in their country and in our country.

On your regional and global level, Japan deserves special credit for its role in working to return the world to sustainable economic growth. Its leadership, innovative, generous and bold, in the G-7, the seven wealthiest countries in the world, or the G-20, the twenty largest economies in the world, or the ASEAN Plus Three where the Philippines is included, or the East Asia Summit, sixteen countries including the Philippines, and its early pledge to contribute $100 billion to the IMF to lend to countries experiencing cash flow problems. This not only provided very important and necessary assistance and support in a very delicate time, it also encouraged other economies to step up to the plate and make similar pledges. Even though the Japanese economy is struggling, they are still the first to help the world. And Japan has done much to support the region and it will continue to play the role of a valued partner for economic development and regional stability.

So you live in a very important economy in the world. The Filipino community here in Japan is growing. Before, the number wasn't 200,000 and it will continue to grow as we fully realize and build the benefits coming from the JPEPA.

And I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, our hardworking Filipinos who send remittances to your families. Because these remittances help us have what we call good domestic consumption. Because look at the struggling economies around the world now, these are the ones that export a lot.

For example, when America's economy struggled, when the economy collapsed, the economies it sold to also collapsed. But in our country, before, when I wasn't yet President, 49% of our production went to other countries, for export. But now, because we have a lot of domestic consumption within our country itself, only 28.5% is expected to be exported, so domestic consumption is a very big guide for the advancement of our economy. And that is a very big help from our Overseas Filipinos, the things you bring home or the remittances you send help, your family shops, goes to the mall, and spends on various things, that is a big domestic demand.

Or also, however, over the last eight years, we have been building greater internal strength to our economy. And even though many are losing jobs around the world, including in our export-oriented industries, we have new jobs being created by our economy, right Secretary Roque? So, we continue to create employment opportunities for our people at home. And our development is helping us have a cushion against the difficulties coming from the volatility of the global economy.

The government is intensifying our programs not only to reduce the impact of the global economic crisis on our economy, but also because we want that when the day comes that we are developed. And this development, we are working for the day when, because there are good jobs in the Philippines, we hope that someday, going abroad will just be a career option and not the only choice for a hardworking Filipino. That is what we aspire to.

For example, we established the Business Processing Sector like call centers. There were almost none before. When I became president, I found 4,000 workers in the BPO sector. Now, 400,000 workers are in the BPO center sector. These are jobs with good salaries and many young Filipinos and Filipinas tell me thank you for the job in the call center, they will just stay in the Philippines and no longer need to go abroad. That is what we want to happen in our economy.

And well, in terms of our economy, we recorded modest growth in the first quarter of the year. But the fact is, against considerable odds that are challenging all countries, the fact that we have managed a positive growth shows that our economy is relatively strong and resilient. And we have been able to avoid the worse effects of a crisis in the Philippines because we took the bitter pill of economic reform years ago. Secretary Ralph Recto can tell you about the hardships he experienced when he was a senator because he authored our tax reforms.

And those efforts are now creating what economists call a firewall – perhaps we all know what that is. If two houses are next to each other, if one catches fire, the other will burn as well. But if there’s a wall in between them, that’s a firewall, so if one burns, the other won’t burn as much or only a little. And these reforms that we have are creating a firewall, so even though we were affected, the global economic downturn didn’t have a severe impact on us.

But we do face considerable pressures and we’re working hard to keep the global economic wave from washing over the Philippines. Part of that process is us striving, we are diligently striving to ensure our needs for food, gasoline, and rice. We are investing in energy and rice self-sufficiency.

We are building our schools, and we are jumpstarting the economy with much-needed infrastructure projects. These projects are human infrastructure like training and physical infrastructure like roads, bridges and others.

That training, education and health care, we have significantly increased spending there. For example, regarding training. Before our administration, Nonoy Andaya said that the government spent P200 million on skills training. This year, we are spending P3 billion on skills training.

And the roads, I don’t know how long it’s been since you… since the last time you visited the Philippines, but perhaps those of you who have recently returned have seen how quickly you can get to Nueva Ecija if you’re from Nueva Ecija because of the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway, or you can go from Manila to the Visayas or Mindanao by bus only, or go to Boracay by bus only because the bus will ride the Roll-on-Roll-off ferry. So these infrastructures that we have built will ensure that we would be well-positioned for higher growth once the global economy rebounds. But earlier, I said that what was really hit in our country was the export sector. Thankfully, we are only expecting 28.95% for exports.

This is really a hit to our economy, but as they say here in Japan, we are already seeing a slight recovery in exports, although it’s not the same as last year. But this is already a very good improvement if we compare it to other countries in the region. That export market, that 28.5% is still large. It’s a major driver for our economy, and the same is true throughout the world. That’s why we are doing everything to support our exporters. For example, we have a P1 billion Fund to support exports, but to support our OFWs, who may be losing their jobs, we also have a P1 billion Filipinos Overseas Livelihood Support Fund. So that’s what Noel said, hopefully the reintegration can be expanded, this is what we are funding with P1 billion. (applause) This is a loan for OFWs, Seamen who have lost their jobs due to the crisis, it can be used as a loan for investment if you want to start your own business or for expenses for retraining so you can find another job, and this is part of our program for OFWs as a return for your concern for our country.

Part of the program is also help in finding a new job, there are kiosks at DOLE so you can find out where the available jobs are and they are doing aggressive marketing in new markets for overseas Filipinos. And as I mentioned earlier, we are spending P3 billion on training now. And many of those are for Overseas Filipinos who are returning so that you are ready again for another type of job.

Really now is the time to work together to strengthen the competitiveness of our great Filipino worker. Now also is the time to work together to strengthen trade and that is what the JPEPA is doing. This is what the JPEPA is trying to do on a bilateral level between the Philippines and Japan.

This JPEPA is an important support system for Filipino exporters, and for Japanese exporters, it will provide an important opportunity for businesses during this time of hardship around the world.

And I can tell you, I am grateful for the opportunity that we are together now. And I am pleased that we had been able to institute improvements on a wide range of fronts.

If we look at the Philippines now and look at the Philippines maybe ten years ago, it is very different. We have a country that is safe and more secure. We have an economy that is stronger and able to withstand the shocks like what the global financial crisis is throwing at us. And we are investing in new and modern infrastructure and this infrastructure will provide benefits not only now but for future generations and make our economy more competitive.

Millions of new jobs have been created, millions have reached health care and education that before they could not reach. And we are doing all of this while we stay the course to beat our fiscal obligations, we are doing this but we are still paying off our debts so that we can balance our budget in the long term. So now is really the time to work and work together.

Earlier, as I was coming in here, someone ran up to me and said, we want to help. She is married to a Japanese and she works as a caregiver and she said we want to help. I am happy that the Filipino community in Japan is active in civic work. Look at Noel Cristobal's organization, Philippine Assistance Group, it really helps, that is the goal and because you are helpful, you are also able to influence your other Japanese friends to help, our old Japan Seamen’s Union has been very supportive, our three hospitals have been very helpful, it is really a time of cooperation.

I thank you because you are helpful to each other. Let us pray for the good of our country, for the faster recovery of the world economy. And thank you very much for your concern, thank you very much, long live the Filipino workers here in Japan.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). PGMA’s speech during a meeting with the Filipino community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412101452/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=25407&Itemid=38