Thank you very much, Dr. Amable Aguiluz V, the father of A.M.A., the father of the A.M.A. Computer University and the pioneer of computer education in the Philippines and many parts of the world.

Dr. Allan Fisher, President, Icarnegie Mellon University. Thank you for coming here and thank you for giving me the observation about a wonderful thing about our Philippine culture.

In the United States where I studied, as soon as a student graduates all she or he wants to do is get away from his own home and live by himself, alone, independent of his parents. Here we see our graduates, as our students graduate, they acknowledge the great support of their parents and they dedicate their education to their parents. Family life continues beyond graduation. We saw this in the life of our valedictorian, Miss Liamzon, and her parents and her family.

I want to congratulate all the graduates today. I want to congratulate all their parents, represented by Mr. Liamzon, who has been working for eighteen years in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates. It is a great sacrifice for his child to study at a good university, as is the sacrifice of all parents who have worked and sacrificed. So you can now sit down so you no longer have to sacrifice.

Dr. Rodriguez, Vice President for Academic Affairs, Mr. Michael Hague, the National Computer Center of the U.K. This only proves that A.M.A. not only provides our society with ICT graduates but also provides the global society with certified program graduates. Because just because you have studied computers doesn't mean you have a job. You need certification programs and all graduates in ICT at A.M.A. are certified programmers. As Mr. Michael Hague said, double congratulations to all of you.

Members of the academe, as I said, the graduates I’d like to also acknowledge the presence of my presidential party here: my Presidential Assistant Dodie Limcaoco, and it so happens the general manager of the airport, Ed Manda, is here not because he is the general manager of the airport but because he is one of the parents who worked hard so that his child would have an education at A.M.A. Computer University.

Our ceremony is different, isn't it? The demonstration of the unity of the Filipino family. The sacrifice of parents who continue to work, if necessary, abroad so that their child has a good education. And this graduation itself, as our foreign guests said, is a major event in the history of the education system in the Philippines and even around the world. Because today, we stand, I stand, you sit in front of twelve thousand students graduating from different campuses of A.M.A. in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. This ceremony, as the speakers said, is being broadcast simultaneously in different cities where A.M.A. Computer University has different campuses.

This event is also distributed to A.M.A. students in different parts of the world, in the kingdom of Bahrain, in different parts of the world. And it is also being watched on the internet by the colleagues of Mr. Liamzon, not only the 150,000 Filipino workers in the U.A.E. but also in different parts of our Middle East and around the world. So I would like to use this opportunity to express to the Filipinos in Bahrain, to the Filipinos in the United Arab Emirates, to all Filipinos there in the Gulf States. I want to convey to you and announce that this morning I signed the papers of Dr. Amable Aguiluz as special envoy of the President of the Republic of the Philippines to the Gulf Cooperation Council. This Gulf Cooperation Council is composed of six countries in the Arabian Gulf — Bahrain where A.M.A. has a school; Kuwait which we have been watching every day for the past month because that is where the frontline is in the battle there in Iraq; Oman; Qatar; the United Arab Emirates where Mr. Liamzon has been working for the last 18 years; and Saudi Arabia.

And therefore, speaking of Saudi Arabia let me take this opportunity to express that I sympathize with the families of the victims in the Riyadh bombing in Saudi Arabia. This is a risk inherent in the deployment of millions of Filipinos worldwide. It’s also a risk we carry for being part of a global war against terrorism. The world has known for a long time that the tentacles of terrorism stretch across borders and can only be destroyed by international action. We need to destroy global terrorism for the sake of our great Filipino workers, like Mr. Liamzon, who are sought after and admired everywhere, whether as nurses, engineers, office staff, managers or knowledge workers like those graduating from A.M.A.

I am very happy to learn that the Philippines topped the knowledge jobs category in the global new e-economy index or the G.N.E.I. the G.N.E.I. is a technological competitiveness index that determines the I.T. readiness and I.T. capability of each country.

Australia was number two, America was number three, the Philippines was number one. This means we have more qualified ICT professionals, engineers and senior ICT managers than any other country. And we have a higher net enrollment in the field among persons between the ages of 17 and 34. And we achieved this number one ranking, thanks to A.M.A., thanks to King Aguiluz, the father of A.M.A. in the Philippines, as well as in the Arabian Gulf.

As I said, A.M.A. has a school in Bahrain. Mr. Liamzon said that because there are so many Filipinos in the United Arab Emirates, perhaps A.M.A. will also put up a school there in Dubai.

As my special envoy to the Arabian Gulf, I want, if possible, Dr. Aguiluz to go to express my condolences to our Filipino communities who suffered in the bombing in Saudi Arabia. Our Embassy in Saudi Arabia will work closely with Saudi authorities in Riyadh to get at the root of this incident and obtain justice for the victims. The OWWA will see to the welfare of their bereaved families. This tragedy shows the utter helplessness of the civilians against the agents of terror. We are experiencing this in our own country where we are now thick in punitive actions against terrorists in Mindanao. To our graduates there in Mindanao who are happy now in the Davao Convention Center, my message to you and your families, we will not relent in this campaign until we achieve justice for the victims of senseless murder.

The MILF must renounce links with international terrorists. Surrender the terrorists who murdered innocent civilians and stop all forms of terrorism. The people would like to read this from the lips of the MILF leadership. Anything short of these will be considered half measures, which will not do. Punitive actions will continue and we will escalate political and military measures as necessary. To our brothers and sisters in Mindanao, I would like to stress, this is not a fight against Muslims. This is a fight against terror being waged by all decent and civilized Filipinos. We will not acknowledge the false offers of peace or succumb to political pressure. To retreat now would only invite more depredations. I have the duty to protect the national interest from greater harm.

It is also my duty, along with our fight against terrorism. It is also my duty, even with the crisis in the world, to strive to promote our economy so that our citizens have jobs. I know, A.M.A. graduates, you have a big advantage because you have a good education, but for some of you who may not have a job yet, I want to remind you that at SM Megamall, the DOLE has a job fair currently, which started in April and continues until June 10th. There is also a job fair in Davao and Cebu. There are one hundred thousand jobs offered at the job fair at SM Megamall, the DOLE job fair. As far as I know, sixteen thousand people have already found jobs at that job fair. So there are eighty-four thousand jobs waiting for A.M.A. graduates and other college graduates.

In our fight against poverty, we truly need the jobs that come from investors, such as the jobs available to you at the DOLE jobs fair in SM Megamall. We also need the modernization of farms, direct services to ease the lives of the poor, and good governance. In all of this, ICT or IT is needed. I want to leave a legacy that ICT has enhanced all of this: investment, agriculture, services for the poor, and governance.

For example, in governance. I’m determined that ICT will ensure clean and honest elections from 2004 onwards.

I am determined to lead and support all efforts as I have made the budget available from many sources to ensure that the national elections next year will make full use of computerized canvassing of returns and thereby minimize, if not totally eradicate, the cheating that used to be done through the traditional mode.

As we install more ICT and ICT-based projects in the different programs of effective governance, investment promotion, agricultural modernization and poverty alleviation, the demand for ICT workers especially those graduating from an excellent school like A.M.A. is bound to increase.

I challenge the graduates of A.M.A. to continue to be models, model citizens of an electronically enabled Philippines. You, the graduates of A.M.A., you have what it takes to succeed. I ask you help others do the same.

And as model citizens, never lose sight of your equally important roles in the fight against poverty, ignorance, disease and injustice in our society.

And wherever you go, whether here in Manila, whether in Makati where Ann Marie Liamzon graduated, whether there in Cebu, in Davao, whether abroad, I shall continue to depend on your unremitting excellence and patriotism. Graduates of A.M.A University, you are blessed with an excellent education.

Good luck! For the rest of your lives, and may you use your knowledge not only for your beloved parents and your beloved families, but together with them and your families, for the good of the people of the Philippines whom we all love so much.

Congratulations! And long live you all.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 19th Commencement Exercises of A.M.A. Computer University. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412201306/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6316&Itemid=38