Thank you very much.

Thank you very much. I’d like to greet first the members of Congress who are here. Francis Nepomuceno, thank you for coming and presenting the first set of awardees to us. I also see Congressman Nereus Acosta, thank you for coming.

I’d like to greet the Metrobank foundation — oh! there’s Francis — the Metrobank foundation, thank you for your annual awards to the outstanding policemen. And I’m looking forward to having a dedicated program for the outstanding teachers. Members of the government who are here today, inductees from the government and NGO sector, awardees, guests, ladies and gentlemen:

Today, I organized the awards in order to give honor to two important sectors of our society — the women and the police and their partners. And I want to thank you for all the work you’ve been doing. And I want to thank you and congratulate you on the outstanding work that you’ve been done to deserve these awards.

I’m very happy about the 117 because this was one of the innovations of our administration. And I’m very happy that it has really helped bring down our crime rate and even our kidnapping rate to virtually zero.

This is part of our efforts that we’ve done in the past four years to improve governance. This effort of 117 is very quiet, low key but very effective. And I felt that today we should remind one and all how important these innovations in our technology can help us to improve our services to the poor.

When we talk about reforms, we talk about governance and we talk about reaching the poor more quickly. I have announced already two important designations regarding governance. And what I want to do now is to talk about a particular aspect of our pro-poor program that hopefully we can make… reach everybody that it should reach in a very short period of time. And I did it today because this program is something that should benefit the women and the police. This is part of our pro-poor platform which we continue to do. People ask, can I govern? Yes, I can govern. And I am governing. Whereas our opponents can only sit down and raise controversies at the expense of our poor because they seek to tear down our society. If they seek to tear down our society, that’s their problem. It is not our problem because we continue to work on governance and continue to work for the poor.

Our opponents have no platform. They have no concrete and viable plan to help the poor. They only find the time to plan to reverse progress. This is the most cynical manipulation of hardworking and caring Filipinos.

And so today, I would like to again bring to the attention of our women and our police one of the very important programs of our government and that is microfinance. I reiterate this announcement today because like the 117 it’s been working quietly but effectively. In the last four years we have already been able to engage two million entrepreneurs borrowing 20 billion pesos worth of loans.

But still when I go around the country and especially Metro Manila, so ironic they say, “yeah we heard about microfinance but where is it?” and so I said that if we are going to make this reach the poor, the standard beneficiary of microfinance is women, but it should also help augment the income of those in the lower echelons of our institutions like the police. It’s important that we have fresh funds that will go to these specific areas that have not been receiving it and to the sectors that of course need it most.

Last Tuesday, the Land Bank of the Philippines and the National Development Corporation made available 600 million pesos in fresh microfinance funds.

Today, the National Livelihood Support Fund is making available another new 100 million pesos in microfinance funds. that’s 700 million pesos made available as of today.

And I want to announce this to our women’s groups who have been helping spread microfinance. And I want to announce this to the police because so many of your ordinary rank-and-file policemen and women need to augment their incomes. Seven hundred million pesos in new funds available now even as we speak.

Because we want to make these funds reach the poor as quickly as possible, we have made some initial prioritizations in the implementation. For instance, the grassroots of Metro Manila, a big part of these funds will be distributed to the market vendors because they’re already there and they can be reached and they have their organizations.

Another big portion of these funds should go to the urban poor communities. And this is where I ask the women’s groups to participate in their distribution.

The lending has already started and will continue until we make a lasting impact on the families that live on the margins of poverty.

How do we access these funds? One is from NLSF, one is from the Land Bank and one is from the NDC going through the PCFC.

I am directing the Philippine… the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, the PCFC, who is supposed to be the super conduit for all these funds to immediately do an information campaign to the urban poor areas, to the market place, to the women’s organizations, to organizations with many members living on the margins of poverty like the police, and also to the business associations — I saw Serge Luis Ortiz here — because we don’t want 700 million pesos staying in the bank. We want them in the hands of our small and micro entrepreneurs.

And so I ask you women leaders who took their oath of office here today. I ask you members of the police. I ask you leaders of the business community. Please don’t hesitate to sit down with the Land Bank and to sit down with the PCFC so that you can work out the conduiting mechanisms. Land Bank does not lend directly to the poor communities. It goes through qualified conduits. The same thing with the People’s Credit and Finance Corporation, it does not lend directly to retail self-employment or microfinance organizations. It gives it through qualified conduits.

There are certain qualifications to be a conduit. Track record in already being a conduit for microfinance. Years of doing that number of beneficiaries that you have served and have paid you back well. Your own equity. There are these qualifications to become a conduit. And I urge the business sector, the women’s organizations and the police’ welfare offices to work with Land Bank, NDC, PCFC and LSF for this purpose.

So I thank you all for making this good celebration of our women and our police — the common denominator there was the policewomen. So, that’s why I decided to put the two groups together.

So, I thank you all. I congratulate you and what I’d like to say is let’s use that 700 million pesos right away so that the poor can feel it right away.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech on Women Empowerment and Availability of Microfinance Funds during the Mass Oathtaking and Awarding Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080212/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5098&Itemid=38