Maraming salamat, Secretary Ermita.

Her Excellency Ambassador Kenney, His Excellency Ambassador Yamazaki, other members of the diplomatic corps, Governor Garcia, our host governor and the people of Bataan, Congressman Gidaya and our beloved veterans, Congressman Garcia and Congressman Roman, other officials and citizens of Bataan, members of the Cabinet, General Senga and the other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, ladies and gentlemen, ating magigiting na bayani.

Once more, we commemorate the heroism, the valor of the Filipino and American soldiers of the 2nd world war especially in Bataan and Corregidor. The soldiers who sacrificed their lives, their youth and their dreams so that we, the next generation, can enjoy freedom and democracy.

Our forebears stood shoulder to shoulder and fought to the death when freedom came under severe attack.

Today, in the globalized regime and after fifty years of deep friendship with the people of Japan, we no longer differentiate the causes of the Filipino, American and Japanese soldiers during that war. Whatever side they were on, whatever country they came from, they passed the tests of their time with full honors. Their fight for freedom goes on because now we are all brothers and sisters in democracy. But, in our time, no longer for freedom from invaders rather, as our two ambassadors have pointed out, we are now all fighting for freedom from hunger, from crime, from corruption, from terrorism, from communism and from religious and ethnic misunderstanding and warfare.

As we commemorate the death march, we celebrate the valor of Filipinos to face adversities in the name of freedom and show our resilience in the face of difficulties that come our way. We have great hope and optimism that any national situation has a way of exacting the best virtues of the Filipino.

We have won many victories in our struggles, because we help one another and because we know how to sacrifice. The struggle is still long and heavy but we are determined to win because we have the needed weapons: the citizens’ sense of sacrifice that has enabled us to make difficult but necessary economic and fiscal reforms in the past few years, the meaningful social programs and job- creating infrastructure that now at last we can carry out because we have made those fiscal reforms, and the political will to make our system more attune, more responsive and keeping up-to-date with the demands of the 21st century.

Our fiscal reforms also enable us now to start paying our nation’s debts to our veterans and the orphans of our heroes who now rest in peace. Not only in words, not only in memorial ceremonies like today, but also in concrete material terms.

Thus, to begin paying the arrears in the old-age pension, death pension, disability pension and educational benefits of our veterans — thanks to our fiscal reforms — we are now in a position to release one billion pesos to start paying our debts.

I would like to inform our beloved veterans that your president is doing everything possible to address your needs.

Once again, to our traditional allies, to our new allies in the fight against poverty in the Philippines and to our veterans, our heroes, maraming salamat.

Long live you all!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Observance of the 64th “Araw ng Kagitingan”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214204/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2441&Itemid=38