Thank you very much Secretary Romulo for your introduction. I also greet Mrs. Romulo. Thank you very much Ambassador Bernardo for everything you do for our Filipinos here in Spain.

You know, it’s very happy to be with you all again. There are even more of you now than when I was here last year. Thank you very much. And thank you for our gathering here and thank you for the warm welcome you have given me and my entire delegation from the Philippines.

It looks very lively here in Madrid because of the many Filipinos here!

Our Ambassador to Spain, Lani Bernardo, said that the number of Filipinos living in Spain has almost reached fifty thousand. And thank you for coming from all over. Very distant places of Spain, even its territories, you came to this week, thank you very much. Lani also said that almost all of our countrymen here are now Spanish residents or Spanish citizens. And some others also have dual citizenship.

That’s why I’m happy that in 2003, we were able to pass the law, the Citizenship Reacquisition and Retention Act. And you here are very lucky because even though we have a dual citizenship law, there are countries that don’t want you to become Filipino again, you will lose your citizenship in their country. But here, they allow dual citizenship even if you have been granted Spanish citizenship.

And we are happy to see firsthand, how you, our kababayan here in Spain, have integrated so well into Spanish society. You have contributed many positive benefits to your host country, you have earned the respect and affection of the Spanish people. That’s why Ed Angara was saying earlier, because the 300 who will work there in Andalucia should be from Aurora. Then they said, they were joking, they should send the not-so-beautiful ones because the beautiful ones won’t return because they will be courted by the Spaniards here. Because Filipinos are very charming here in Spain. But Ed said there are no ugly people in Aurora so those who will come here will still be beautiful. Anyway we feel very proud of your achievements here in Spain.

And of course we know that over a century ago, Spain was also a haven, there was also a Filipino community here, the best minds and talents of the Philippines. At that time, we had a Filipino community in this country, it was probably the very first organized Filipino community abroad. That’s why your tradition is very admirable — the tradition of the Filipino community here.

Before, Filipino talent was already known, now Filipino talent is still known here. That’s why because your talent is known, it’s easy to enter Spain. For example, the engineers mentioned by Lani, are they here? the engineers who will take…there you are, congratulations. Forty are being hired by the Spanish company Grupo Tecnicas Reunidas to prepare the engineering design for a large project in the Middle East. So congratulations to all of you.

And of course last year, Lani also mentioned that we met the first group, one hundred and twenty Filipino caregivers, who came here, who was here last year among the caregivers? There you go, how are you all again? Oh, you're happy. You came here for the pilot project to see if employing skilled Filipino caregivers in this country is effective. So 130 last year, how many now? 480, Lani said our embassy has received nothing but praise from the Ministry of Labor of Spain regarding this pilot project. And because of this, as Lani also said, the Spanish Government really wants to continue and expand it, to hire more of our caregivers and nurses for here in Spain.

The close relationship between our countries is also manifested in your presence, the large Filipino community here in Spain. We are proud of your achievements and your contributions to this country. We also recognize your vital role in forging closer personal ties between the Filipino and Spanish peoples.

Overseas Filipinos like you are honored by the government and the people for your sacrifice and your dedication to your work, your family and our nation. And we welcome your contribution.

You know, earlier at Lourdes, we were talking about the Filipino overseas workers with the bishop. And the priest even said in the sermon that Filipinos are well-known in various parts of Europe and Filipinos are very much loved. So we were talking earlier, ten percent of Filipinos are abroad because there are 85 million Filipinos, 8 million are abroad. That's the same percentage as Portugal, ten percent of Portuguese are also abroad. It's even higher than the percentage in New Zealand, 25 percent of New Zealanders are outside of New Zealand. But the Prime Minister told me the difference, the 25 percent of New Zealanders are yuppies, being sent additional allowance from mom and pop from New Zealand wherever they are. But you, you are the ones sending money back to our country.

But we’re working towards the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job. We’re working for the day when overseas work will be just another career option and not the only choice a hard working Filipino has to earn a living.

Earlier, our Filipino community mentioned some of the reforms we are making so that there will be more jobs for you. And we firmly believe that our ambitious economic reforms will help break the offshore cycle and will increasingly be keeping our best and brightest right in the Philippines, closer to friends and families, helping to build our communities and providing the next generation of leadership.

You know, they say that if we want to eradicate poverty in a country, we need seven years of 7 percent growth rate. In the past, if we reached five percent, we already celebrated. So the ambition of our administration was to reach 7 percent by the end of my term in 2010. But by the grace of God, we reached 7 percent as early as 2007.

Of course, a big contribution to this is the overseas Filipinos who do not rely on mom and dad back home and instead support the education of the next generation.

We’ve been working with the Central Bank of the Philippines to raise what they call the financial literacy of overseas Filipinos and your families. We advocate that financial freedom doesn’t stop at having enough funds to sustain your family’s basic needs. But it’s good if you will accumulate sufficient savings and turn this hard-earned money into solid capital. We’ve been promoting a culture of savings and encouraging overseas Filipinos and your families to channel your savings into investments.

You know, this number of 8 million Filipinos, it was like that when I started in 2001, it’s still like that now, 8 million. Because while some are leaving, some are returning. And… there was a note but not anymore. I’ll explain later why. Anyway, while some are returning, some are leaving, some are returning. That’s why it was 8 million then, and it’s still 8 million now. But when I started, I found remittances at 7 billion dollars. Now it’s 13 billion dollars. Almost the same number, double the amount being sent home. That’s why your contribution to our country is really huge.

And today, your remittances are increasingly being used towards investments in human resource capital because, as I said earlier, you are sending your relatives to school, so if they say there is a brain drain, you are supporting education in our country in return; healthcare also for your families; physical capital because you acquire real properties, including land purchases and home construction; in fact, what percentage did they say our real estate boom is now? If you go to the Philippines you will see that construction is happening everywhere, much of it is government construction, but even private individuals are building roads, and our deficit is decreasing, not increasing. Because of the reforms of our congressmen and senators, taxes have increased but we are putting it into infrastructure so we don’t have to borrow as much. But a lot of the construction is also houses, condominium units. And according to real estate companies, 40 percent of their real estate market comes from overseas Filipinos, so your contribution to housing in the Philippines is very large.

And more Filipinos abroad are also investing in financial and capital investment. Many Filipinos are now investing in the stock market. So, as I understood it earlier, Lani Bernardo said that Francis Lim, there you go, are you finished with your presentation Francis, the President of the Philippine Stock Exchange came here to announce to our Filipinos overseas the benefits of investing in our stock market in the Philippines which is very vigorous now, one of the best performing stock markets in the world today. And many of you are also funding small and medium enterprises of your relatives.

So I am happy, not only do we have Francis Lim of the Philippine Stock Exchange on this visit, I have the opportunity to thank you, to express my gratitude to you that aside from the benefits of investing in the Philippine stock market, you also invest in direct investment for the small and medium enterprises of your families.

Earlier, in your expression of support for me, you not only mentioned the good programs that help you, you also mentioned the turmoil that happened the other day. And thank you for the support you expressed for me.

And I want to let you know, my dear countrymen, the situation in the Philippines is peaceful and orderly now. The turmoil in Makati was resolved effectively and quickly. And there was only one night of curfew. People have returned to their normal routines. Makati and the entire country are back to normal.

You should feel at ease, the Filipino people should feel at ease that the institutions of our government and civil society are strong and stable. The government defends the people and promotes order and stability.

We saw the other day that the rule of law prevailed. And I can assure that the transgressors will not hold our nation hostage with impunity. They will be punished with the full force of justice. Justice shall be served and the interests of the people upheld.

And again, who became the heroes? Once more, the heroes are the quiet heroes, the hardworking ones like you, the patriotic ones like you, the Filipinos with compassion like you, those who turned their backs on that excessive madness like you. Thank you very much for what you said, you do not support that.

And so once again let me thank you for being such heroes. Thank you for continuing to be a valuable member of both the Philippine and the Spanish community.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].