Thank you Secretary Pamintuan for your introduction. Other Cabinet members, Chairman Nam Ho Cho and the other officials of Hanjin; Chairman Papadimitriou and your beloved parents; and the other officials and guests. Our friends from Greece, our Father of Subic, Senator Richard Gordon, Governor Deloso and Governor Tet Garcia, Congressman Magsaysay, and Congressman Monico Fuentabella, Mayor Jeffrey D. Khonghun, and the other officials of Subic, the host municipality. Chairman Salonga, Administrator Arreza and the other officials of Subic, not to mention, our very, very proud work force that we all proud to have.

Ambassador Hong Jeong-KI of South Korea and the Charge-de-affairs of the Greek Embassy, Philippine Ambassador to Greece, Bobbi Tiglao, Mr. Shim.

I had mentioned already our Cabinet members, Peter Favila and Cerge Remonde, our beloved countrymen especially the proud people of Zambales and Subic, ladies and gentlemen.

Congratulations to Hanjin for this milestone achievement in shipbuilding. Congratulations too, to the Dioryx Maritime Corporation — the first shipping firm to buy, the first ship from Hanjin Philippines, the largest ship in the Philippines and the first of six ships which had have a total of half a billion dollars worth. Thank you very much and congratulations. Oh, $1.2 billion for the six ships, wonderful.

Congratulations to the workers of Hanjin for your superior Filipinos here. And congratulations to the Filipino people for having the fourth largest shipyard in the world. We are very proud of that.

This very first ship that sails out of Hanjin’s Shipyard, the largest ship ever built in the Philippines, M/V Argolikos, is a marvelous showcase of sound engineering and design, completed six months ahead of schedule. This 41,000-ton container carrier brings pride to its creator, it brings pride to us as the host of its creation. M/V Argolikos shows off to the whole world the excellence of the Filipino workforce in building vessels sailing the seven seas. In the past, our Filipinos were known for being excellent seamen, now, they are also known for being excellent in the making of seacraft.

So, especially, congratulations to all the Filipino workers who participated in the creation of this giant ship. And we thank Hanjin Philippines and the Dioryx Maritime Corporation for giving us this opportunity. I remember three years ago, almost to the same date, July 2005, when Congressman Monico Fuentabella of Negros, of Bacolod, brought Mr. Shim to me in Malacañang to tell me Hanjin is going to put up a $1-billion dollar investment to the Philippines. I said, wow, that’s fantastic and not very long after, we were here groundbreaking the $1.7 billion Hanjin Shipyard.

A massive boost to the Philippines’ bid to be the best value for investment in Asia. So today, we see the first fruit of Hanjin’s investment in this shipyard. And we are elated and proud. Hanjin is helping secure our country’s place as an attractive investment destination. It is a display of our countrymen’s skills and work ethic. Hindi lang kayo magagaling, masisipag at may malasakit. And we are happy to hear that at the end of the day Hanjin will have created at least 21,000 new jobs here.

We join Hanjin in looking forward to the five other ships of Dioryx that will be built here. One is being built, we look forward to its christening also this coming November and we look forward to ask other vessels for other international companies.

Our vision, as Armand Arreza said, there are three ship building or ship-related establishments here in Subic. Our vision is to develop the Clark-Subic corridor into the most competitive international service and logistics center in the region. The Clark-Subic corridor is at the northern edge of the superregion that we call Luzon Urban Beltway which extends all the way from Subic-Clark through Metro Manila through Calabarzon to Batangas Port. The economic activity along this beltway generates 55% of national economic production. And therefore, the biggest challenge of this beltway is to remain competitive.

The Clark-Subic corridor literally opened a few months ago when we inaugurated the Subic-Clark Expressway. Businesses can now optimize the services of the Clark International Airport and this beautiful Subic International Airport linked by a half-hour drive, like similar seaport-airport, tandems across the Southeast-Asian region.

And to our friends here, our Korean friends here, KAMSAHAMNIDA for keeping faith in our country and our people.

May ships built in this shipyard and hopefully, very soon also in the shipyard of Mindanao from Hanjin, sail over the seven seas of the world for many years.

Thank you for your investment in Asia.

Long live Hanjin.

Long live Dioryx.

Long live the Philippines.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo at the Hanjin Subic Shipyard. Retrieved https://web.archive.org/web/20100412120027/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1617&Itemid=38