Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the luncheon with Filipino Olympians and the Filipino community in Beijing.

Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo, for your introduction.

Thank you very much also, Speaker Nograles and other members of the Philippine delegation who came here to Beijing, especially to give recognition and to cheer on our Filipino athletes here in Beijing. (applause)

I would like to introduce to you some of our Southeast Asian Games gold medalists who are here now at the Olympics. Well, he is not a Southeast Asian Games gold medalist but first of all, you have met our four-time world champion of boxing, Manny Pacquiao. (applause) He brought with him his inspiration, Jinkee. (applause)

Manny is now considered the greatest Asian boxer in history (applause) because he was a world champion in four weight classes. Now he will compete for a fifth, he is training in America, but he returned here to Asia to give recognition to our athletes. (applause)

Our gold medalists in the Southeast Asian Games who are here now to compete in the Olympics, here is Miguel Molina (applause); Daniel Coakley (applause); Ryan Arabejo (applause); James Walsh (applause); Sheila Mae Perez (applause); Ryan Fabrega (applause). And I also want to acknowledge our other athletes who will be competing now. (applause)

You know, when they were making this… when this protocol and schedule were being made, they said to invite the athletes to the Filipino community. I said, only if they want to, let's not force them because we want their rest and training to not be disturbed because the biggest honor they can give to our countrymen is to win, and we don't want anything to hinder their victory by coming here.

But this morning, I asked, “Are any athletes coming?” “There are.” Did you tell them it wasn't necessary because we want them to rest and practice? They said they knew that, but they came here on their own to greet our Filipinos as well. (applause)

And here in China, we also have Filipino gold medalists. Not necessarily in the Beijing Olympics, but in their economy, in their community.

Well, during my last few visits here in China, our celebrity was Jimmy Flor Cruz. (applause) And the torch bearer who was introduced by Ambassador Sonia Brady, whom I also greet now, turned out to be the son of Jimmy Flor Cruz, right? (applause)

Another torch bearer introduced by Ambassador Brady is Marco Torres (applause) who represents the Filipino community here on stage. And I am pleased that Marco Torres is a marketing manager of one of the leading design firms in Asia. That is an example of the talented Filipinos here in Beijing and in China. (applause)

We have another superstar, Ben Lim of Reuters (applause). And another export from China to the Philippines, because Vlad Reyes will be the manager of the Peninsula there in the Philippines. (applause)

And to the other teachers, professionals, musicians that Sonia mentioned earlier, congratulations to all of you. You represent our country so beautifully here in China. (applause)

I am grateful for the opportunity to see you all again. Some of you I have already met during previous visits, as I said, Jimmy Flor Cruz is someone we always have 'flag wave' for because of his celebrity status. But I am happy that you are here again and to reiterate what Sonia said, you are respected by the government and the Filipino people because of your sacrifice and dedication to your work, your family, and our country.

And we wholeheartedly accept your contribution. But as Sonia said, we are also working to improve our economy so that the day will come when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad to work, that the day can come when overseas work is just a career option and not the only choice you have for a good job. (applause)

Last year, we in the Philippines experienced the highest growth of our economy in a generation. But this year, the whole world is struggling with the global economic slowdown and the sudden increase in the price of oil and food.

So we tirelessly work to face the challenges coming from the weakening global economy, compounded by the surge in high prices of oil and food. We work diligently to ensure a stable food supply in our country and food on every table. And thankfully, when you watch television, you see food riots in various parts of the world. In the Philippines, we don't run out of rice. (applause)

Not only that, the price of rice now in the Philippines is lower than the price in our neighboring countries. We are also taking steps to reduce the burden on our people from these high prices of oil and food in the world.

For example, we have subsidies for rice and electricity for the poorest of the poor. So we have… the price of rice in, for example, Thailand or Vietnam reaches 50, 60 pesos. In our country, we have rice available, market price of 32 pesos. Malaysia, Indonesia, they subsidize rice. Their subsidized rice is around 25, 27 pesos; our subsidized rice, 18.25. And we are able to do this because of the tax reform we made several years ago. We have a large national treasury now for those kinds of subsidies. So I thank again our congressmen who are here today because if you hadn't done that a few years ago, we wouldn't be able to cope with the crisis happening around the world. (applause)

The impact of the oil price on transportation should have been the biggest. But despite the huge surge in oil prices around the world, because we have assistance given to the transportation sector, they agree that the fare increase in the Philippines is only one peso, like the price of a text message from your relatives in the Philippines. And with electricity, the second biggest impact of expensive oil in the world, we are able to give a little subsidy to the poorest of the poor, subsidy, to help pay their electric bills. So these are the things we are doing, along with other ways to alleviate the enormous burden carried by the ordinary and poor Filipinos.

We are also teaching Nutrition Education, or about affordable and nutritious food. This includes promoting breastfeeding so we don't need to import too much milk from other countries. And that's why we accepted the launch here before you of the 2008 Breastfeeding Olympics or Worldwide Synchronized Breast-feeding. So, congratulations! (applause)

However, whatever actions we take, the problem of food and oil is a global problem. We need to work together to resolve these issues if we want to see a meaningful recovery of the global economy.

As President Hu Jintao said yesterday in his state lunch for the guests of the Olympics, and I quote, he said, “The international community faces grave challenges unprecedented in history. There has never been a greater need for us to understand, accommodate and cooperate with each other.” That was what President Hu Jintao said yesterday.

And these Olympics offer every country in the world the opportunity to set aside what divides us and truly come together and celebrate the human spirit. And that's why we are proud of our athletes who qualified for the Beijing Olympics.

You know, we have 15 athletes because it was very difficult just to qualify. So, the fact that they have qualified, they are already champions in the hearts of Filipinos. (applause)

Like Manny, our Olympic athletes are role models for the next generation of Filipinos. Because our country, the Philippines, don't we really love sports? And don't we admire the sacrifices of our athletes to compete at a world-class level? That's why Manny Pacquiao is a true idol to so many because we see his sacrifice and we see the fruits of that sacrifice through his success on the world stage. Here at the Olympics, the Philippine delegation of athletes represents all Filipinos. So I’m glad that they are here even if we did not require them to come. I’m glad that they are here in this lunch so they know that the whole country is cheering for them. (applause)

China has worked hard to bring the world a truly memorable Olympics. And you yourselves, because you live here in Beijing, you are witnesses, firsthand, to the very hard work that China did to build these spectacular facilities and the exciting events associated with these games.

I remember the APEC Summit in 2001. Some of us were together there in Shanghai. I have had the pleasure of attending a number of APEC Summits but the one I remember most was the summit that China so ably hosted in Shanghai in 2001. It’s similar to how they are hosting the Olympics now. It was my first summit after I became president. But more than that, it was the first summit coming on the heels of the tragedy of 9/11, which had changed the world, heightened global concern regarding terrorism which generated so many unfortunate events, including a global economic slowdown, similar to what is happening now with the global economic slowdown.

My concern at the time under China’s oversight, that APEC Summit in Shanghai played a major role in sending a clear and strong message to the international community that the Asia-Pacific community was united in its efforts to counter the threat of terrorism and that the economies of APEC were also united in their efforts to promote APEC’s vision of free, open and prosperous economies.

They said, this was China’s coming out party. The APEC Summit, that was their coming out party in the world economy. And the fact that APEC subsequently gave its support to China’s membership in the WTO, that year can clearly be attributed in great part to the leadership that China showed at the summit and afterwards. (applause)

First impressions are always powerful. In this case, not only was China my first APEC Summit, but China was also one of the first to congratulate me when I was sworn in as President of the Philippines in 2001. (applause) In President Jiang Zemin’s message, he called me an “old friend of the Chinese people.” We all know, for the Filipino people as well as for the Chinese people, reference to an “old friend” is an expression of deep respect and openness toward the other. The APEC Leaders’ Summit in Shanghai was also my first visit to China as head of state, though as vice-president, I had already come here as a guest of Vice-President Hu Jintao during that time so it had been a long time – truly an old friend.

So, I particularly remember the warm reception I received from the leaders of China, who manifested China’s wish to build our relations. And that was not just in words.

Today, Philippines-China relations are at an all-time high.

Yesterday, at President Hu Jintao’s state luncheon, you know, eighty heads of government came here, but he could only seat a dozen at his head table, including the President of the Philippines. (applause)

And of those eighty leaders here, he couldn’t meet everyone in bilateral meetings, so there were groups. Only a few were truly bilateral, one-on-one, and one of those, as Sonia Brady mentioned, was with the Philippine delegation. (applause)

And our trade is expanding greatly, so, look at those handsome Americans over there, they represent our large business delegation that is here now. (applause) They are just representatives because there are so many others with ongoing bilateral meetings, you know, bilateral meetings between Chinese businessmen.

Just now, President Hu Jintao mentioned that our trade with each other has reached 30 billion U.S. dollars, and China is now our number one export market. (applause)

We continue to deepen our ventures in other areas. And an important partner in this is the important contribution of you, our Overseas Filipinos here in China. (applause) Yes, there are only 1,500 of you here in Beijing, as Sonia said, but that 1,500 is significant, very important members of Beijing (applause) you are here. Our Filipino professionals, our skilled workers, our technical workers, you have a large contribution to the economy and culture of the People’s Republic of China.

Therefore, with your very respectful work and positions in your workplaces here in China, you greatly help strengthen our relationship between China and the Philippines.

So, aside from the remittances you send, your contribution to the development of our country is very large.

Therefore, I thank our 1,500 Filipinos here in Beijing, thank you for your help in our improving, increasingly improving relationship with China.

Thank you for your help in the development of our country. And may your support for our beloved Philippines continue.

Thank you very much to all of you (applause).

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during a Luncheon with the Filipino Olympians and the Filipino Community in Beijing. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412113406/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1648&Itemid=38