Thank you very much, Secretary Romulo, for your introduction of me. We greet the Cabinet Members and national government officials who are here today at our business mission. I also greet our elected officials who are here led by Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa of Mindoro Occidental. I greet our Filipino officials who are here in Hong Kong and in China led by Ambassador Brady and Consul General Vicente, and I also greet Jojo, thank you! And to all of you Filipinos here, my beloved (transmission cut) good evening to all of you!

I am happy to be with you again. Sunday is usually a day of rest, of relaxation, but you are here tonight so thank you very much to all of you. And here is Secretary Romulo and Ambassador Brady all the way from Beijing because nowhere is foreign policy more important than in protecting and advancing the interest of our overseas workers, you are a very important objective of our foreign policy. In places further away than Hong Kong, — Bert, I would like to congratulate you all. The DFA recently reported that a seaman was released after fourteen (14) years in a Bangladeshi jail. And if you remember, when I went to Saudi Arabia, we released seven hundred (700) prisoners. Now, there are another one hundred fifty (150) being released from Middle East jails. And that is very important in the Middle East because two million (2,000,000) Filipinos are there, but here in Hong Kong — Hong Kong is also very popular as a destination for OFWs. You are one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) Filipinos living and working here and salute to all of you — to all of those here in Hong Kong. Congratulations!

It should be said, your diligence and the quality of your work are undeniable, your good character, your loyalty to duty, so, even though Sonia Brady is far away, there in Beijing, we have one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) Philippine ambassadors here in Hong Kong, and that is you, our overseas Filipinos. And not only that, you are even more important to our country, the Philippines, your sacrifice and loyalty to your work, to your family and to our country are honored and valued.

Earlier, Consul General said that the number of immigrants from Southern Europe is decreasing. But if we look at Portugal, they are also quite rich, ten (10) percent of their population are still Overseas Portuguese Workers, just like the Philippines, ten (10) percent. In New Zealand, it is rich, but twenty five (25) percent of New Zealand are overseas (workers) as well. The difference with New Zealand, even though their yachts work abroad, mom and dad still send money to their child abroad. Filipinos, you are the ones sending money to your family, not the other way around. So, you are helping your family, you are helping our country. Thank you very much to all of you!

But, we aspire to the day, as Consul General said, that a hardworking Filipino no longer needs to go abroad to find decent work. We are working for a strong and growing economy to pave the day when Filipino’s no longer need to go abroad for a job and being an overseas worker is just another career option, not the only choice for (someone) to earn a living. A strong and growing economy is the central pillar that we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. And it is paying off, 2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in more than thirty (30) years. However, when the economy is strong, the peso is also strong. It is also undeniable that the strengthening of the peso affects the spending of OFW families. However, eighty (80) million Filipinos also benefited because they were not as affected by the full price increase of oil in the world. Because if the exchange rate was fifty five (55) pesos per dollar like in the old days, gasoline and diesel would have been five (5) pesos more expensive per liter.

The government and corporate dollar debt has also been reduced, so we can allocate more to the budget for mass projects. The country's borrowing rate has also decreased, so interest rates on housing and business loans are also lower. Pag-ibig is now only six (6) percent, this is the first time that has happened, because of the strong peso. If the peso had not strengthened, the increase in prices in the country would have been worse.

However, to prevent the strengthening of the peso from being too burdensome for OFWs, you saw the vigorous actions of our administration this afternoon. We have instructed government financial institutions to create ways to maximize the benefits of the earnings you OFWs receive.

If you recall, in January, didn't Vice President Noli De Castro come here to launch the Hedging program of the Development Bank of the Philippines? He was with Mike Arroyo, my husband, he was here at that time. This is to protect the value of your earnings. In the Hedging program, you can already decide, as Jojo said, what exchange rate and you can change your US Dollars into Pesos in the future or you can get some insurance and have the option to sell your Dollars for Pesos in the future, either at a certain projected rate or at the prevailing market rate, whichever is better for you. This DBP Hedging Program, here is the President of the DBP, isn't Rey David here, I saw him? There he is! Rey, did you mention the incentive to the first one hundred (100) OFWs earlier? The DBP will provide an incentive to the first one hundred (100) OFWs who avail of Peso Insurance. They will be given a fifty (50) percent discount on the insurance fee of the remittance, as long as it does not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) dollars per month. Meanwhile, Consul General Vicente mentioned the DBP's I-net Negosyo Program to help your families in the Philippines progress and start a business. The DBP has a one billion (1,000,000,000) loan for OFWs to set up small internet stations.

We also launched programs of the Central Bank, with our Central Bank Governor, Say Tetangco, present. You know Say, you can’t order him around because he is independent from the national government, but he is here because he is teaching the Financial Literacy Program to OFWs. And the stock exchanges are here so you can invest in the stock exchange. That is better than those pyramids. In the stock exchange, you see the price of your stocks minute by minute. These are to provide knowledge about money and to encourage OFWs to invest for your families. Because we aspire to give OFWs the opportunity, not just to be overseas workers, not just to be ambassadors to Hong Kong, but to be Overseas Filipino Investors or OFIs. Another program is Tindahang Pinoy. When you came in, (didn’t you) did you see a booth? That is Tindahang Pinoy. It is for those who want to sell Filipino products in the areas where OFWs work. Tindahang Pinoy brings together various products made in our country, such as Kornik or Boy Bawang, gapo from the North, broas and other native delicacies from the South; sardines from Saranggani Bay – there seem to be many from South Cotabato there, sell sardines from Saranggani Bay in Mindanao and dried mango from Cebu. Not just food, it also includes business training for OFWs returning home, implemented by OWWA, which, in the past, was led by our new Secretary of Labor, Nitoy Roque. Congratulations Nitoy! DOLE and OWWA will open a call center training program for OFWs here in Hong Kong. Aren’t there many OFW teachers? Teachers who are good at English? Your English, if you have call center training, your income will increase when you return to the Philippines. The training cost will be subsidized by OWWA, through their scholarship for OWWA members as preparation for your return to work in the Philippines. Land Bank, (coverage cut) is safe and affordable, as long as you have twenty thousand (P20,000) pesos minimum. In fact, this twenty thousand is smaller than many time deposits, the interest will be higher for five (5) or ten (10) year deposits than regular bank savings.

Regarding fees for sending money, Land Bank has the OFW Cash Card which is easier to use and has cheaper remittance fees. There’s Manny Pangilinan, an OFW in Hong Kong, by choice, not by necessity, you know Smart, right? Manny owns Smart, that is also electronic remittance. So, that is Manny’s service because he understands the life of an OFW. Even though Manny Pangilinan is a very wealthy OFW.

Anyway, I congratulate the users of these products, congratulations to those who have availed of these products. May others be encouraged by your benefits, by the programs of the government. By the way, speaking of remittances, Congressman Danny Suarez is here. He has a proposed law, reducing the transaction cost for money remittances from abroad coursed through the Philippines Banking System and remittance centers to help our OFWs.

Let's return to the economy of the Philippines; the flow of investment is strong, we are close to balancing our budget. But in the past, we had to make tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crack down on tax cheats so that we could invest in our physical infrastructures and in our people. But we know the problems facing our country and what the people expect and we are delivering on the economy, the education and the environment. We want that when you return to the Philippines, you will return to a good Philippines, that you have jobs, not only because of the Reintegration Program, but because there are many opportunities in the Philippines. So thank you very much for your sacrifices here in Hong Kong. We hope that when you return to the Philippines, your lives will be comfortable because of our efforts to strengthen the economy of our country, the Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). Speech of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo in Hong Kong. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122348/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1055&Itemid=38