I greet you all who join us today in commemorating the 138th birthday of our hero, Gat Andres Bonifacio. Surely we remember, we cannot forget, that Bonifacio started the struggle of the working class for the freedom of the Filipino people from the oppression of foreigners.

The struggle he and the Katipuneros launched is also the root of the birth of our nation, the Philippines. He started our revolution in 1896, Andres Bonifacio. The history of our national revolution began in the heart of the hero we honor today. Bonifacio and his fellow Katipuneros sacrificed their lives defending the poor and advocating for national freedom.

The aspiration for freedom is inseparable from the fight against poverty. That is the lesson we learn from Andres Bonifacio because Andres Bonifacio started the revolution of 1896 against foreigners. But because he… was for the poor, we know he was not only fighting foreigners in his revolution. He was also fighting his desire to eradicate the poverty of our country.

Therefore, his revolution has two parts. His revolution of the masses, a revolution against the Spaniards, and a revolution against poverty. And then and until now, our struggle against poverty continues to improve the lives of the Filipino people and strengthen the foundation of our freedom.

In 1898, the revolution started by Andres Bonifacio achieved success because we were liberated from the Spaniards. But one part of his revolution is still not finished, our freedom against poverty.

Our nationhood and the dream of a good future for all Filipinos were first given life by Andres Bonifacio. That revolution of his was called the Revolt of the Masses. Because he represented the working class and he was called the Great Plebian. Because in Rome during the Roman Empire there were two types: the Patricians – those were the aristocrats; and the Plebians – the common people. That is why we call Bonifacio the Great Plebian.

Bonifacio's revolution ended the revolution against foreigners but the revolution against poverty is not yet finished. That became the inspiration of my father, Diosdado Macapagal. Because Diosdado Macapagal was the only President who came from the ranks of the poor.

That is what he said, I remember my father. When he became President, that is what he said. Bonifacio's revolution did not end. Freedom from the Spaniards was achieved but not freedom from poverty. So my father, that is what he wanted to continue, the revolution against poverty.

Therefore, Bonifacio came from the ranks of the Plebeians. My father, on the other hand, came from the ranks of the poor farmers, the son of a farmworker. So my father's main desire in concrete principles was to fight for the Land Reform Law to liberate the farmers from bondage to the land. And to continue Bonifacio's revolution in a peaceful manner.

And I, as the son of my father, also inherited my father's desire. That is why when I assumed office as President, I said that our priority will be the fight against poverty. For the ILO delegates to hear, the elimination of poverty is our unfinished business from the past dating back from the creation of our Republic whose seeds were sown in the revolution launched in 1896 by the Plebian Andres Bonifacio. It was an unfinished business for up to today poverty remain our national problem.

The sacrifices and hardships of Bonifacio, his Katipunan comrades, and our other heroes should be our guide in improving the condition of our countrymen. Let us face the challenges of the present time with firmness and let us unite and help each other. Let us work together to end poverty in our country.

In this time of turmoil caused by the attacks of terrorists on September 11, unity and cooperation are even more necessary. Now, the conditions of the world economy are uncertain. Therefore, we should rely more on our own efforts, our own intelligence, our own economy.

So my call to everyone is not to add to our problems. Let us remain within the boundaries of the democratic space and give the democratic process a chance in our fight against poverty and in resolving problems and conflicts.

On the part of the government, we will continue to open various avenues for consultation and dialogue with the different sectors of our society. We need to respond to the character of our politics, the new politics of programs and processes of consultation with the people.

Let us all be diligent in guarding our democratic institutions and methods, which are my guide in running our government.

We started the fight against poverty through a series of consultations and dialogues with workers and the urban poor, to ensure the true grievances and needs. And this day is important for that purpose because on this day we have come together again on this occasion, different types of workers have come together – from employed workers in industry, from agriculture and services. Those who are self-employed, even those workers who have their own livelihood, and even those workers who are unemployed, we are all together today.

These various sectors also comprise the majority of the urban poor.

Before you now are representatives of government agencies involved in delivering basic services to citizens in the areas of livelihood, health, and housing. They are here to be reminded on Great Plebian Day of their duty to consult with the labor sector and the urban poor at the national and regional levels.

From these consultations, the concept of a basic benefit for formal and informal workers will be given concrete form.

And on my part, all my actions, even my travels to America, Malaysia, Japan, Singapore, and Brunei, aim to expand job opportunities for Filipino citizens.

Thank you for your proposals and recommendations. Following your recommendation, I will declare the year 2002 as the Centenary of the Labor Movement in the Philippines, in recognition of the important role of the labor movement in our economy, politics, and national security.

Because as we recall today, the first union in the Philippines was established in 1902 under the leadership of the valiant missionary Isabelo Delos Reyes.

The Department of Labor has formed a committee to oversee the preparation for the said celebration. And I am directing the Office of the Presidential Adviser for Social Concern to coordinate with the DOLE to make the celebration even more successful.

As we look back on the past hundred years that we have had a labor movement, we can see the sacrifices made by our labor leaders. They offered their youth and lifelong commitment for the Filipino worker. Names like Johnny Tan and Democrito Mendoza are now part of the history of the labor movement and the economy of our country. Their efforts should not be wasted; the efforts of our labor movement leaders, the efforts of our heroes over the past hundred years that we have had a labor movement. We also need to recognize our workers not only as defenders of your rights, but as effective partners in striving for prosperity for all.

In this regard, I recommend that you look into the following issues as a basis for our discussion. First, we need to review our policies on how to expand jobs that provide a true living wage. What are these jobs? What are these industries? Those are what we should implement in the Twenty-First Century.

One of these is Information and Communications Technology. And we need to examine how to add non-wage benefits to improve the well-being of our workers. Second, we should also carefully study the ability… of workers to adapt to new jobs created by the rapid change of technologies… of the Twenty-First Century. In this way, we can avoid a situation where a worker is trapped by their skills; and if their industry is no longer needed in our world, they will have nothing to do. We must avoid that situation. That is what is called alienation of labor. And third, we need to see the difference between a home and a place to stay that is near work. I know many are reluctant to move to another place because they are getting far from work. As more and more people flock to urban centers, even as these urban centers grow, we need to expand these urban centers. Let's put up infrastructure to really expand the comfort in the urban center.

For example, because Metro Manila is too congested, I see that it won't be long before Metro Manila becomes Mega Manila. This Metro Manila becoming Mega Manila will extend to Clark and Subic in the north, and to Calabarzon and Batangas Port in the south. It will be just one Mega Manila. And in preparation for this, we are also accelerating the mass transit project to speed up commuting to and from work for workers wherever you live in Mega Manila. In this way, no matter where your workplace is in Mega Manila, you can still quickly reach your place of residence from where you live.

We still have a lot to do for the benefit of our workers. Let's also revitalize the establishment of tripartite bodies, which were mentioned earlier by those conducting performance audits, and have recommendations on the program and personnel of DOLE and the National Labor Relations Commission.

Let's also strengthen the program for employment generation, human resource development and job preservation, whether public or private.

Earlier, there was loud applause when it was said to look for additional livelihoods. What I want to remind you is that we have micro-finance, about two billion is its capital. I hope there is a way for the groups here, the organizations here, to reach that micro-finance program. This is for women. So I think that's a big job that Percy needs to do – to organize you – you are organized – but to organize you to access this micro-finance.

The assistance we are giving to our poor urban brothers and sisters through the presidential proclamation and community mortgage program also responds to the needs of our workers, most of whom are in poor communities.

Soon, we will be proclaiming some poor communities as settlements for informal settlers. You said, I hope to put up a big community in Rizal that has amenities. There is already a big community in Rizal, Montalban. What is lacking are the amenities. So last time there was a consultation with the urban poor, your servant from the President’s Social Fund, the National Anti-Poverty Commission, Ging Deles, was given P40 million to put up amenities there in Montalban.

And now, Mike Defensor says that there is already an elementary school, they are building the… And other needs for that, that is what will be the biggest community for the resettlement of our urban poor.

But here within Metro Manila itself — because Montalban Mega Manila is already in Rizal. But here within Metro Manila, there is still staff work being completed for the underprivileged communities so they can be proclaimed as able to buy the land they are living on. This includes land owned by the GSIS on D. Ampil Street, on P. Burgos Extension, on Quintin Extension, and Pureza Interior, all in Sta. Mesa, Manila; land owned by the BCDA — sixth and seventh in Libis, Quezon City; and land owned by Napocor in PVA, Bagong Silang, Sucat, Paranaque City. This is part of the examples we are saying, reaching the basic benefits that workers need. And the government's aid package may also be through benefits that will reduce the expenses of workers.

I repeat my order regarding the moratorium on demolitions on government-owned lands that have no immediate use. Government-owned land should not be demolished if there is no proper relocation.

So, whoever from public works violates that, report them to Percy Chavez so it can be discussed in the Cabinet. The clinic day that you requested, we will also have a clinic day in each underprivileged community for free doctor consultations and free medicine on that day.

The Kadiwa Store, what we will do is operate rolling stores in underprivileged communities for basic commodities, especially rice that a family needs, which can be bought at a low price. We are also pursuing electricity and clean water flowing from the faucets in our depressed communities.

In fact, when I visited Rawis, right? What, has your electricity been paid? Has the electricity been restored? But it's no longer cut off. Because the problem is collection, because there is only one meter. So it was cut off a long time ago, so Malacañang just paid the past debt. But can you, when the meters are restored, you will pay the subsequent bills, okay? Meanwhile, I ordered an investigation into syndicates stealing land and making fake titles, deceiving our poor countrymen. This is through the Land Registration Authority. So I am also asking Percy to remind Justice ……who is the head of the LRA to establish an investigating body on fake titles, especially those occupied by urban poor.

All of this we are doing as part of the campaign against poverty. But all of this and other things that need to be done will only succeed if we continue to work together. So I ask for your help. I ask that you help me throughout my time as president of our country because this is for your own good. And because this is for the bright future of your children.

I repeat my call for a moratorium on politicking. Because this moratorium is more needed now, especially the fear of terrorism is weakening the economy of our world. Although you are not politicians, I know you believe that our fight against terrorism and poverty will be easier if the clashes are stopped and everyone unites.

When we Filipinos unite, that is when we will end the hardships we are experiencing. Many more trials await us. Through our unity and cooperation, we will only overcome all of this and only then will we make our country prosperous and abundant.

Andres Bonifacio and the Katipuneros sacrificed their lives so that we may be free. It is only right that we all show that we also have love and concern for… the current times do not require us to sacrifice our lives like Bonifacio. What is needed is for us to be diligent and cooperate to achieve the true success of these programs.

The success of the government in fighting terrorism and poverty, in achieving peace and tranquility in our country, in suppressing corruption and anomalies, is also the success of everyone and of the entire Filipino people. Let us ensure that the success of the Filipino people and that we have fulfilled the dream of Andres Bonifacio.

So on this day, Happy Birthday to Andres Bonifacio, let us continue his fight for freedom against poverty.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech at the Urban Poor and Labor Sector Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212503/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8759&Itemid=38