Many thanks to our Secretary of Tourism Ace Durano who every year introduces me, right?

To my friends and they always give me great support. Congressman Romualdo and Governor Romualdo, thank you very much for your invitation to me again for this Lanzones Festival. To the Vice Governor, to Mambajao Mayor Romualdo, all the officials here. I am also with my various Cabinet members, not just Ace Durano, also Secretary Nitoy Roque of labor and Secretary Panganiban of NAPC. We are also with other officials from other provinces and districts who are visiting today, Governor Moreno from Misamis Oriental, Congressman Aquino from Agusan del Norte and Congressman Pancrudo from Bukidnon.

Our fellowmen, Happy 30th Lanzones Festival to all of you. I am very happy and honored to be able to return again as every year during my presidency. We have completed the record to join your celebration which is special this year because it is the third decade or Pearl Anniversary of celebrating the Lanzones Festival here in the province with the sweetest lanzones in the world. The pearl anniversary is truly fitting because the lanzones is the pearl of Camiguin and the pearl of the Philippines.

Together with you, I now thank our Lord that even though there were many strong typhoons in Luzon, the weather in Camiguin is good this year, (applause) so there are many fruits not only lanzones but also your other products of the province. Congratulations to all of you!

But of course, with the occurrence of typhoons in Luzon, we cannot forget that you experienced great damage caused by climate change in 2001. We saw the effect of climate change for the first time in our administration in 2001. Here in Camiguin which is no longer, is no longer in the path of typhoons but a typhoon happened in 2001. But now, as we look at our work like what Governor Jayjay Romualdo said our various projects Camiguin has been rehabilitated from that typhoon in 2001. And for those watching in Luzon, because I am always with the media here maybe even though you are busy with the typhoons happening, maybe if you see a small province of Camiguin that experienced that disaster in 2001 is now rehabilitated and it is progressive so let us not lose hope for Luzon.

With typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng that hit Luzon, I learned that there are people from Camiguin living in Metro Manila and the province of Rizal and they also suffered from the floods like others living there. I really want to thank Cong. Loloy and Gov. Jayjay for their help through the DSWD for the Camiguinons and others affected by the flood. Thank you very much Congressman and Governor.

I also thank all of you for your prayers for the victims. Those Camiguinons who live in… because I asked Congressman, how many from Camiguin who live in Metro Manila and became victims of the flooding? Where do they live in endangered areas or usually safe areas? Congressman said, some are in ordinary and okay areas but some live in endangered areas. So, to those who live in endangered areas in Metro Manila or Rizal, please don't return to their homes, or if they want to return to Camiguin we have a program “Balik Probinsya.”

Balik probinsiya entails the DSWD providing transportation and other assistance to families desiring to start anew in the province or city of their choice. Aside from transportation they are provided with food supply good for one month and household items such as beddings and clothing. At destination, here in Camiguin, they are linked to appropriate government agencies that will help them get started. For instance, DA for farm implements and seedlings, DOLE under the leadership of Secretary of Labor Nitoy Roque for employment, and also microfinance to start a small business.

NHA also has its own program, which they are using now for those that have to be resettled from the endangered areas. They give cash assistance equivalent to 60 days times minimum wage to families that have to relocate involuntarily from those endangered areas.

We can also help them through our Comprehensive Livelihood and Emergency Employment Program or CLEEP. In fact, earlier, today, during your festival, it is also an important time to launch and provide not just 300,000 jobs but 350,000 people who have received benefits from CLEEP, one of our programs included in the Economic Resiliency Plan.

Our nurses are with CLEEP. Those 100 plus that Mayor Romualdo received the certificate for 500,000 pesos but the important thing is the people, so 111 people, right? Okay, those 111 people plus our nurses now, one of them is the 350th beneficiary of our CLEEP Program.

So, I am happy that we were able to help here in Camiguin not only with our emergency employment, not only with returning to the province – for those who want to return – but also with our various infrastructure projects so that there will be great progress in the province of Camiguin. But, it’s like… like… it’s like Congressman Romualdo said, our mutual assistance with each other, so in my… in my opinion, I still want to express my great gratitude for the support that the officials and people of Camiguin constantly give me.

And I have no doubt that you will continue your support for me, so I will no longer ask, I will just thank you.

Thank you for your help to me in politics since 1992, and thank you for your continued help in our efforts towards progress for all Filipinos, for the people of Mindanao, and for the people of Camiguin. On my 9th time coming to your Lanzones Festival, thank you very much and happy celebration of the 30th Lanzones Festival to my beloved Camiguinons!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 30th Camiguin Lanzones Festival and the 300,000th Comprehensive Livelihood and Emergency Employment Program (CLEEP) Milestone Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134056/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26548&Itemid=38