Assalamu Alaikum Warahmatullahi Wabarakatu! Peace be unto all of you! We praise and thank Our Lord, Allah for another chance to break bread together.

As we celebrate Ramadhan, we are hopeful that lasting peace for the whole country and especially for Mindanao will soon be counted among our blessings.

The sad irony of Mindanao is that it is our bread basket or food basket, and yet it has some of the highest hunger in our nation. It has large fields of high productivity, yet it also has the majority of our poorest provinces.

The prime reason is the endless Mindanao conflict.

Our archipelagic nation has had its share of religious strife, ethnic tension and violence. For years, we have worked earnestly and honestly to achieve peace in that southern island of our country only to have the peace process upended by the recent violence carried out by lawless elements.

Notwithstanding the setbacks in our peace process, I stand before you tonight to declare loud and clear that the Philippines will have peace in Mindanao. There is no alternative to peace. With the help of friends like the World Islamic Call Society, and our other nation friends from the Islamic countries, we will bring peace to Mindanao. So, we take this opportunity to acknowledge here tonight the central role of so many friends and allies in bringing peace and hope to the Philippines.

We have traveled many miles to keep the peace these last seven years, that gives me hope and confidence that we will rekindle the will to focus on peace.

We will refocus all peace talks from one that is centered on dialogues with rebels to one of authentic dialogues with the communities, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or DDR shall be the context of our engagement with all armed groups.

And we thank our friends in the Islamic World both within this country, in the Middle East and Southeast Asia who have played or wish to play a role in making this possible.

Each and every one of our friends — these friends represented here tonight — these friends of peace and of the Philippines, have made the world better and safer because of your concern for what happens in Mindanao. For that, we are eternally grateful.

DDR is an internationally and UN-accepted process for resolving armed conflicts.

DDR is a UN peacekeeping term. It is part of the peace process in the post-conflict scenario being applied in such places as Liberia and Afghanistan.

Disarmament entails the physical removal on the means of combat from ex-belligerents, such as weapons and arms. Demobilization entails the disbanding of armed groups. Reintegration describes the process of reintegrating former combatants into civil society, ensuring against the possibility of a resurgence of armed conflict.

DDR activities are crucial components of both the initial stabilization of war-torn societies as well as their long-term development. As such, needs for DDR must be integrated into the entire peace process from the initial peace negotiations through peacekeeping and follow-on peace-building activities.

The objective of the DDR process is to contribute to security and stability in post-conflict environments, so that recovery and development can begin. DDR lays the groundwork for safeguarding and sustaining the communities in which individuals can live as law-abiding citizens, while building capacity for long-term peace, security and development.

We have high hopes that our friends in the Islamic World will support our focus. We maintain high hopes as well in the strength of our program of interfaith dialogue as a means to achieving the end of building bridges rather than barriers between communities of different faiths, cultures, traditions and ethnicity.

In continuation of this effort, the Philippines next year, will host the first ever Special Ministerial Meeting on Interfaith Dialogue for Cooperation and Development in May. And we hope that we will have the support of our brothers from the Muslim world. We will also cooperate with the Alliance of Civilizations.

Peace and dialogue are more vital than ever with the world undergoing economic turmoil.

Almost overnight, the global economic environment has turned 180 degrees. The dramatic surge in food and fuel prices and the financial turmoil in the world markets have created a global price crisis, the worst since the Great Depression and the end of World War II.

This is a complex time that defies easy and simple solutions. It’s hard to identify villains, unlike in the 1997 financial crisis. Everyone seems to be a victim, rich countries and poor, though certainly some can take more punishment than others.

So, we must all band together now and find the right balance between our global economic dependence and national self-reliance.

In our shared quest for a brighter future, both in terms of peace and in terms of prosperity, we hope the peoples of the world can perceive that underneath the external differences among regions, tribes and religions, there remains one common truth: we are all in this world by the grace of a merciful God. A God that is called Allah in the Islamic language and that is called “Ama” in the Filipino language. But that is the same God and we must therefore praise, glorify and obey Him.

Thank you all very much.

Source : Adamson University Library