And I would like to greet President Democrito Mendoza, he is not only Spiderman or Superman, he could even be in High School Musical.

I will no longer greet everyone here individually because I have to conserve my voice. I have pharyngitis and this is my last speaking engagement for the next three days, I have already cancelled everything else. But TUCP, I cannot cancel this.

I greet you on your convention. Imagine, you are 32 years old since 1975. The largest in the Philippines and the longest lasting and long surviving. Congratulations! And it is heartwarming to hear your discussion on expanding benefits for our workers and their families. You want to go beyond the traditional services that a regular labor organization renders.

I would like to give serious attention to job searching, connecting with trade unions in other countries for the protection of our workers there abroad, establishing training centers and providing scholarships to the children of union members.

Here in the training center, as Manong Mocring said, you are working with TESDA in providing training, and because of this, the workers of TUCP here and abroad have become more competitive. TUCP is part of the four million Filipinos enrolled in various TESDA programs and accredited voc-tech schools.

Many programs pass through TUCP, congratulations! You want to focus on establishing a grocery and store where goods are cheaper. I know that Boy Herrera is still doing that, getting supplies from other trade unions abroad. But it is also good that we have a way to partner because we are establishing Tindahan Natin (Our Stores) where you can buy cheap rice, noodles and we can build these in areas of the country experiencing hunger. And now that there are almost eight thousand Tindahan Natin stores in the country, let's work together, let's put up TUCP Tindahan Natin outlets in Boy Herrera's stores.

You also want to focus on creating businesses to increase the funds of your organization and helping members establish their own businesses.

We already see signs of the current benign, stable growth conditions sparking a wave of entrepreneurial activity in the Philippines. And it will not only help you raise money for your union, trade union, it will also help you become the vibrant middle-class we need, if we are to join the ranks of first-world in 20 years. In several key areas we have promoted a new entrepreneurial class. One is in microfinance, where the system has extended more than P80 billion loans to low income men and women who want to start their own business. In addition, through our Central Bank, we have created a series of investment incentives and programs for foreign remittance to be invested into capital enterprises.

In the micro and SME sector, with the former colleague of Cerge Remonde who is now with me, we have created more than two million jobs since 2004. We have lent P190 billion to more than three million micro and SMEs, and many of these are workers.

Perhaps Art Brion, you're a lawyer, study how we can make TUCP a microfinance conduit. That is a good business.

You also want to focus on the construction of affordable housing, Manong Mocring said, and as you want, we are making housing programs affordable for our workers. The Pag-ibig housing loan interest rate was lowered to only 6 percent, it used to be 9 percent. The interest rate for those with 300,000 pesos and above has also gone down to 9 percent from 10 percent. And the repayment period has also been extended to thirty years. It's a good business for TUCP to enter into housing for the workers.

You want to focus on the provision of health assistance. Our Philhealth program is in line with your program. Over the next three years, we will invest in our country and our people to improve services like health insurance for ingredient families. Now, 63 million Filipinos are included in this program. Not just the poor, all Filipinos are included in this program. Not just the poor, all Filipinos. Out of the 85 million Filipinos, 63 are already covered by health insurance. And for the very poor members of TUCP, we can help pay for the first premium of your members to help and improve their health.

Those Botika ng Bayan (People's Drugstores) and Botika ng Barangay (Village Drugstores) can buy medicine at half the price. We already have almost 10,000 Botika ng Barangay. Botika ng Bayan has more than 1,000. One is over the counter, the other includes a prescription. We hope that Congress will pass the cheap medicine law so that even if it's not in the barangay drugstore, you can buy half-price medicine. But in the meantime, TUCP can also have a Botika ng Bayan. That's also a good business for TUCP.

Over the next three years, we’ll also invest to improve our infrastructure. Because you said you want to find jobs for the unemployed and you will be the jobnet. The job of the government is to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people because more jobs means less poverty.

A strong infrastructure network is the backbone of a modern nation. That’s why this year, we’re spending 50 percent more on infrastructure than in 2001 when our administration took over. And we’re able to do that because of the additional resources generated by our economic reforms. This is part of our 1.7 trillion-peso plan to invest in social and physical infrastructure which includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines. This will attract more investment and create more jobs gaya nang sabi ninyo. Mas maraming company ang maglilista sa Jobnet.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with one of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in 20 years. In 2001, six years ago, no one thought we could get more revenues, cut down on our tax cheats, strengthen the peso, move the stock market. No one thought we could bring our consolidated public sector deficit budget into balance, or lower our debts and raise employment, but we have. We now have a surplus of about 62 billion in our consolidated national sector deficit. And our national government is also decreasing because the peso is strengthening.

Employment in April 2007 Tama ba ito , Art? – increased by 3.1 percent with around one million new employed workers. Employment was raised to 33.7 million from 32.7 million in April last year. So, we have kept up with our average of one million jobs a year, the highest in any administration.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. Investments are pouring in and the peso is strong. I know this is a two-edged sword and we want to help our overseas workers cope with a strong peso. Our stock market has reached historic heights and we have created six million jobs in six years. And the world is taking notice, I believe because we have such productive workers and such rational and reasonable trade unions like TUCP, the Philippines offers one of the best values in Asia for investors. Marami doon ay dahil sa TUCP.

As I said earlier, we want to join the ranks of first-world nations in 20 years. As I said earlier, we’ll need a robust middle-class world class, world class infrastructure, strong institutions of government. Yet in the near term we must address the issues of hunger and poverty. We can t say we have moved forward if we don’t lift up the poor and the hungry among us. Let’s be measured by our ability to live our faith.

We continue to fight hunger. Last year, we formulated a plan to fight hunger. The plan is centered on affordable food, assistance to the hungry through work on roads and in the fields, family vegetable gardens, microfinance, and wage increases under the Regional Wage Boards.

And I am pleased and proud that in the Regional Wage Boards, almost all employee representatives come from TUCP. The hunger mitigation program is based on the recognition that there is hunger: first, because there is a lack of affordable food; and second, there is no money to buy food. Therefore, we need to increase affordable food – supply side; and grow income and livelihood – demand side.

On the supply side, the plan includes: strengthening food production; improving the food delivery system. On the demand side: increasing people's income; teaching proper nutrition; promoting natural family planning.

To strengthen food production, we are promoting poultry, swine, cattle, agriculture, irrigation, mass vegetable gardening, and the reforestation of forests and fisheries. The TUCP can get involved here, the government can help.

To enhance efficiency of logistics and food delivery the program consists of: barangay food terminals. The TUCP can also establish food drop-off points aside from Tindahan Natin, so you can help here; roll-on/roll-off ferry routes. You already operate ports, why don't you operate roll-on/roll-off ferry boats yourself?; farm-to-market roads; efficient local transport in the provinces; the food-for-school program; an NGO network to support feeding programs; farmers option to buy back their produce. This is the way to make the delivery of food faster.

On the demand side of hunger mitigation, putting more money in people’s pockets, the program includes: more aggressive micro financing. Kaya kabalikat kayo ; aggressive training . Kabalikat din kayo.

To provide good nutrition, the program includes: social marketing; promoting exclusive breastfeeding; nutrition education in schools. And to promote natural family planning, responsible parenthood programs are being done, kasama ang birth spacing.

It’s really time, I’m glad that TUCP is reinventing itself, because it’s really time for the nation to focus on issues that are important to our future: creating more jobs, keeping prices down, providing affordable housing, providing access to education for our children.

Your construction of schools is a big help in alleviating our need for education. Education is a core value of Philippine society and life. The hardworking men and women of this nation put their family first. And the best gift any family can give to a child is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty. That’s why we will continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level and to bolster our college scholarship program for schools ready for higher education. We can also help by providing scholarships for the children of TUCP members. You just need to coordinate with CHED.

Teachers are the backbone of our educational system. Without these selfless men and women our children would fall short of their dreams and aspiration. We’re indebted to their hard work and dedication. Their work is noble. They deserve the praise and respect of every Filipino.

In the past, because there were so many teachers, half a million, when the government gave an extra bonus, teachers were not included. But in our administration, we include teachers in our extra Christmas bonus.

And I hope that the PGEA, which is with the TUCP, will recruit teachers as your members so that we have more partners in planning what is good for teachers.

I have full confidence that you will succeed in your new endeavor. I also hope that you will continue to support me as you always have.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches [of] Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2007 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].