Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremonies of the 24th National Convention of the Chamber of Real Estate and Builders’ Association (CREBA), Inc.

[Delivered at the Grand Caprice Atrium, Limketkai Center, Cagayan de Oro City, Misamis Oriental, October 8, 2009]

Thank you Secretary Dureza for your introduction.

Governor Oscar Moreno whom I understand you visited earlier and he knows your industry very well because before he became a government official he was for a long time in your industry with Ayala and he knows your needs very well including securitization. Of course, Jimmy Cura thank you for the invitation for me to join you today and congratulations on holding this national convention and the theme of your convention. I would like to also congratulate the CREBA Chapter of Cagayan de Oro Edward Argayoso (applause) for hosting this convention of your very important national association. And I’m looking at your theme, “Pinoy Economic Stimuli in a Global Recession: — and you recognized two stimuli — the Mass Housing and the World Class Tourism.” And so I suppose during your meeting this is what you will be talking about — how to avail of the many opportunities that await you in these two areas.

And as Jimmy Cura mentioned about our resilience let me quote The Economist Intelligence Unit which says: “Where the Philippines differs from its neighbors, and indeed from most crisis-hit economies, is that the crisis has generated less pronounced economic ups and downs. The economy has not contracted at all in year-on-year terms during the global current crisis.”

How true this is, indeed.

Because we have achieved much in the areas of infrastructure investment, job creation, macroeconomic stability and improvements in our overall business environment — including your industry real estate and building — your industry has helped us through the worst of the global economic crisis. And I thank you for that. The result is a Philippine economy that is stronger and more able to withstand shocks such as those that the global financial crisis is throwing at us. Not only have we sustained positive economic growth throughout the global recession, we even exceeded expectations in the second quarter of this year.

Moreover, financial reforms — including the ones that Oca did when he was still in the Congress — have created the fundamentals that underpin our financial sector today, reinforced by conservative banking practices. And these values have significantly sheltered our country’s finances and therefore allows our banking sector to continue to have the liquidity to finance your projects because we know in today’s modern times real estate construction housing all are dependent on how smooth is the credit system of the country.

We know how the U.S. economy collapsed — the sub-prime credit. But here in this country we don’t really have sub-prime credits the conservative banking practices have kept your credit clients and your own members as creditworthy. So, in recognition of this stability, Moody’s Investors Service upgraded the Philippine credit rating last July.

And a lot of this is because of the bitter medicine of reform that we took early on and the economic resilience that it has in turn created, so we are today a stronger, more robust nation. And now that we are seeing some signs of a recovery in the world that we hope will be sustained, we are poised to ride the wave of the impending global economic rebound and to offer your industry what you have recognized these opportunities to capture the growth prospects provided by the impending world recovery.

So you mentioned world class tourism, indeed, there are more and more tourists coming to the Philippines and travelling even within the Philippines. For instance, within the Philippines, more and more people are flocking to the centers of commerce and tourism here in Mindanao as well as the Visayas, as tourist destinations spread to what we call the super region called Central Philippines which covers Bicol, Palawan, the Visayas, and the northern islands of Mindanao. The gateway to one of those islands, Camiguin, is Cagayan de Oro which by itself as well is the regional center and the most populous highly urbanized city in Northern Mindanao.

Very important project of ours — we talk about it everytime Oca and I see each other is the first thing we talk about — is the Laguindingan Airport. And I am happy to hear upon my arrival here that concrete is already going to start pouring on the runway this week. So, congratulations for that Oca! (applasue) And that will make tourism even stronger here in Northern Mindanao when you will be able to have first the regional airlines coming, the international airlines that will take sometime because we have to wait for America and Europe to recover but the airlines around will be able to land in that airport, that runway that we are now concreting.

In fact tourism in the Philippines grew significantly in the past eight years, and our Undersecretary here who is one of your speakers — I see Undersecretary Palabyab. Have you done your speech? Not yet — can attest to that that in the past eight years we fleshed out our tourism plan. In the early part of our administration the DOT got Mc Kinsey to do a tourism masterplan, and that is essentially what we are following. And we have transformed that into what we call our Tourism Central Philippines.

One breakthrough for domestic tourism was when we completed the Western Nautical RORO Highway in 2003. It allowed travel by car or bus from Manila, not only to Boracay but also to Northern Mindanao.

And now with the Western, Central and Eastern Nautical RORO Highways, we have had busy tourist traffic in the past five years in Central Philippines and many parts of Mindanao. So I am glad that you are looking at world class tourism as an important opportunity because our tourism is growing and the only limit to its growth is the availability of the tourism establishments. All our resorts are fully booked all the time. So, Ace Durano tells me rather than promoting tourism he promotes tourism investments because what seems to be happening is you build it and they come. So that is a great opportunity.

Now, as you rightly recognized, mass housing is another good opportunity inspite of the global recession in the Philippines this past year. Jimmy Cura said you were so scared a year ago when the recession started in the world, but during this past year Philippine private construction grew by 17%. Congratulations to all of you! And why did it grow that fast because of the surge in middle and low income housing.

The primary cause of demand for homes is migration to urban centers in search of jobs or livelihood. And the most workable solution is not for the government to build the houses but for you private sector low-cost housing. And this trend is encouraging you, the land developers and the builders, to explore outside Metro Manila for more opportunities to build homes for our people.

And now that there is natural calamity our plan, and we will be discussing this some more on Tuesday in our next NDCC Cabinet Level Meeting, is that because we know that many years ago or over the decades people have been occupying riversides, creeksides and lakeshores — not the lake shore that is… that lakeshore that’s an artificial lake, it’s the shore of an artificial lake. What we’re talking about lakeshores like Laguna de Bay, okay. The lakeshores, the dangerous places over the decades people have been staying there, not you know, not really your clients but rather informal dwellers.

And what we want is that those who evacuated should not go back to those places anymore. So we have to work very quickly on their relocation rather than returning to the same dangerous places that they have now escaped from. So, yesterday, we started the first relocation of the evacuees, from Marikina they went to Sta. Rosa and I will visit them tomorrow.

And I understand from Vice President de Castro — who I see is one of your speakers that… and he will maybe tell you more about it tomorrow — that several of you the developers have committed that in some of the areas that were already prepared for development by the government or even not yet prepared but the land is there a lot of the developers have said that within one month you will be able to have houses that people can move into. So we thank you very much for that because that is a great opportunity for your industry, it’s also a great opportunity now to transform our informal settlers, dwellers in those dangerous places to legitimate homeowners in places where they will be safer from natural calamities.

And to ensure that your market will be sustained, that you will continue to have this market that market that made you grow 17 percent during a world crisis and maybe even faster when the world rebounds, we will continue to work aggressively to ensure that our growth that has been generating jobs and revenue to invest in new infrastructure and critical social programs will be sustained.

We will continue our Economic Resiliency Plan and its important components like the Conditional Cash Transfers of the poorest of the poor. This is the allowance we give to the identified 700,000 and now one million poorest families in the country. We give them a very modest allowance on the condition that they send their children to school and they go to regular public health services. Ang tawag na Pantawid Pamilya para makatawid sila para maging mas matatag ang kanilang pamumuhay and then they will begin to think of microfinance, microbusiness and begin to be able to hopefully afford their own modest housing coming from your industry.

Through the support of all levels of government, provincial governments for instance like Oca Moreno, and the hard work of our people, including your industry, we will not be deterred in our effort to maintain growth. We will intensify our investment in infrastructure. Because you’re building houses you need infrastructure to go to the houses that you will build.

We will continue our Livelihood and Emergency Employment Program so that the people can continue to pay their installments and the credit system will continue to support your industry. In fact Secretary Peter Favila is meeting now in a Monetary Board Meeting, he represents the national government, and they will be discussing about how to provide, how to make credit easier. For one thing, they will maintain their interest rates so that your industry will continue to have this important facility. GSIS, SSS and Pag-IBIG have been instructed to give deferral of the repayment of their loans because that deferral increases their take home pay and therefore they can continue therefore to continue with whatever installments they need from you or to have additional new loans to repair their homes or to build new ones.

We will continue to work with you to ensure our public-private sector partnership. I think you know more than I, and Vice President will elaborate tomorrow I‘m sure that HUDCC has dropped interest rates, it has increased the coverage of socialized housing loans and the maximum loanable amount. And as I said earlier, the Bangko Sentral even if during a calamity normally it would want to raise rates to avoid an inflationary pressure will be keeping the key policy rates unchanged.

So, because we are doing a public-private sector partnership as President Cura said even if we’re very busy in Luzon on things to address the natural calamity. I’m here because CREBA is an important partner in our public-private sector partnerships. And I count on CREBA to continue to be the government’s efficient shelter partner because that is the way by which we can move towards the first world in 20 years.

Once again to all of you, congratulations on your terrific growth during this global economic crisis and may you have more progress yet in the year to come.

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the opening ceremonies of the 24th National Convention of the Chamber of Real Estate and Builders’ Association (CREBA), Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134201/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26441&Itemid=38