Thank you very much Secretary Sto. Tomas, I always say his job is heavy because he doesn't just take care of workers in the Philippines and Filipino workers abroad as Secretary of Labor, he also takes care of workers all over the world as president of the International Labor Organization but he gives great honor to our country in his position.

I greet our leaders in Congress, Congressman Kako Lacson and Congresswoman Imee Marcos are here. I would also like to greet the ambassadors of the countries who host many overseas Filipinos; Secretary Lorenzo and various officials of the Department of Labor and its agencies; our Filipino workers abroad; Mr. Aligada, representing the labor group leaders of the overseas Filipinos; those of us who received awards given today:

Good morning to all of you and happy Migrant Workers Day.

I am happy that we had the opportunity to come together this morning here at Malacañang, the Palace of the Nation, the Palace of the Great Filipino Worker.

It is important that I have this opportunity to speak to the seven million Filipinos in different parts of the world through you. According to Undersecretary Baldoz, seven million Filipinos, three million are overseas contract workers, four million are permanent residents in various countries. This day has become the day when the Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipino Act became law. So on this day, the Philippines all over the world, Filipinos all over the world are focusing on the great Filipino worker abroad.

Many times I have visited our great Filipino workers in different parts of the world.

I did this when I was still a senator and vice president, and even more so now that I have become president, whenever I have visitors in other countries there is always time for Filipinos during my travels as president.

And now again, here as your president, great Filipino workers abroad, in the name of your fellow countrymen in the Philippines, I praise you because through your work ethic, you uplift the dignity of the Filipino people. You show the world that Filipinos should be proud of and admired.

Throughout the world, countries, investors and parents feel the great help of Filipinos, of the great Filipino worker. That is why these foreigners think that it might be true that the Philippines is the home of the great worker.

The government and the people of the Philippines recognize the contribution of overseas Filipinos to the economy and national livelihood. Your great help invigorates the economy and drives the development of the country.

On top of the good reputation you give to our country as the home of the great Filipino worker, millions of young people are able to study or finish their education with your help. Thousands of new houses are being built and those of you who build new houses, they are having a new life.

Because of your help, we have launched many businesses, even small businesses all over the country because your loved ones invest your remittances. The successful businesses established in our country because of your remittances are a major pillar of our economy. Many barangays, towns, cities and provinces have flourished with the contribution of overseas Filipinos.

The largest foreign investment in the Philippines is five billion dollars, that's Shell's investment in Malampaya. But the great Filipino worker invests in our country the Philippines six billion dollars every year — more than the largest foreign investment in our country.

So, you heard our speakers earlier — Undersecretary Baldoz, our emcee — what do they call you? Investors, because you are major economic investors in the country.

That's why I often say that we should add to the designation of our overseas Filipinos. The common term for Filipinos abroad is overseas workers. But of the seven million, three are overseas contract workers, but all seven million send money to invest with their relatives here. So I think what is really appropriate, the more generic term to call overseas Filipinos is really overseas Filipino investors.

You are the overseas Filipino investors who invest daily in the development of our country. Your investment is your “productive years” for the sake of our nation. I salute you. It is only right that the country reciprocate your help.

In my state of the nation address, I said — only fifteen bills were those I said I needed, the most needed of all — and I said that part of those fifteen, a major priority of my government is the passage of the absentee voting bill. When I was a senator from 1992 to 1998, I filed an absentee voting bill, so as president it was natural that I certified this absentee voting bill as an urgent administration measure.

I have also certified the Bill on Dual Citizenship as an urgent administration measure. And I expect that these laws will not become a source of contention in the senate. Although I will not neglect my duty as leader of the country, leader of my coalition, and leader of my party, I consider the contention in the senate to be, overall, a matter pertaining to their own house. What I am focusing on and concerned about, my focus is my daily work on how to create more jobs in our country and how to ensure that the poor can afford their basic necessities.

Perhaps you are also reading sometimes about complications not only in the Legislature but also in the Executive. For example, perhaps you are reading about the complicated welfare fund issue. This is what I can say about it: if there are allegations of anomalies, it is the duty of the department secretary to investigate. And if an investigation has been conducted, the one being investigated also has the right to defend himself — this is due process in a democracy. However, it is not right to have personal attacks in the media — that is not part of due process — and it is important that the agency’s service to our great Filipino worker should not stop.

The Philippine economy will, for the foreseeable future, continue to be heavily dependent on overseas worker remittances. On the basis of this realization, this reality, and on the basis of the nation’s humanitarian responsibilities to its people wherever they are, our government is working hard to strengthen overseas Filipino workers’ protection. And this is part of our motivation for strengthening bilateral relations with countries which host large numbers of Filipinos.

Regarding the benefits — many blessings mentioned by Mr. Aligada that hopefully can be expressed, offered — many of those are actually already there but it seems like there is a lack of information. For example, our housing program. We have a housing program for overseas Filipinos under the housing and urban developing coordinating council. This is part of our goal to provide a hundred thousand housing units a year for workers, whether these workers are working in the Philippines or outside.

So far, we have only built about 60,000 houses, so we have 40,000 houses more to go under our targets, and surely among the three or four or seven million overseas Filipinos, you could go to our embassies and work with their… And apply for these housing benefits for your relatives back home. Many are already doing this but there are many more that can still do it.

And Mr. Aligada also mentioned dual citizenship. That is really important — first of all, so you can vote. But regarding business, for investment, when I was a senator I sponsored the law — a law — called “further liberalization of foreign investments.” In that law there is a provision about where former Filipino citizens with different citizenship can invest, including owning land for business, including investing in some institutions normally reserved 100 percent for Filipinos but if you are a former Filipino you can invest there.

So I hope that what I am asking from our DOLE is to publicize these benefits more so that many can benefit. The SSS was also mentioned by Mr. Aligada, the insurance, the provident fund. We already have a provident fund for OFWs in the SSS but out of the seven million overseas Filipinos, only 2,000 are benefiting, only 2,000 are members. So there is a lot that can be done, this announcement needs to be disseminated to all our overseas Filipinos.

And i hope that you already realize that last year we scrapped the requirements for overseas Filipino workers to file an income tax information sheet so there is no more penalty for non-filing.

I have also observed that when many migrant workers return — we have given many prizes or awards because they used their expertise to become an important part of the community after returning. But earlier, didn’t I mention, “what is your investment that made you overseas Filipino investors?” — your most productive years. So what I have observed is that they usually return when they are already older, past their most productive years so it is difficult to find employment. So I am directing Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas to create a department in DOLE specifically for a reintegration program and the one who will lead it should have the rank of assistant secretary.

I am also directing the Overseas Workers Welfare Fund to separate the contributions of seamen and land-based workers to the welfare fund.

And to the doctors and social workers that we are sending, that we will be sending to various overseas posts, please take good care of our great Filipino worker because you are a concrete sign of our concern for the Filipino migrant, especially in difficult areas where the culture of the employer is very different.

The economy I inherited last year was very precarious. Then the new york incident changed the global mood some more. But despite the stark economy we inherited and the uncertain world business conditions in 2001, we made progress. Where bigger and richer economies failed, ours moved forward. Our GDP grew by 3.4 percent last year and this first quarter it grew by 3.8 percent. Our GDP grew 3.7 percent last year and in the first quarter of this year, it grew by 4.9 percent. GDP is lower than GNP because GDP does not include the contribution of overseas Filipinos, GNP does. Imagine, last year the difference was 3.4 versus 3.7 — a 0.3 percentage point difference. Now 3.8 versus 4.9 — 1.9 percent of our growth rate is the contribution of overseas Filipinos this first quarter. So thank you very much for your contribution to our GNP growth rate.

So when they say brain drain, I say, “no, they are serving there and still serving here because they do not forget their families, their communities, and in that way our country also benefits.” The important thing is what we see is the demand for skills, our school system should produce and produce. If there is a large demand for nurses, produce more nurses; if there is a large demand for IT workers, produce more IT workers because we also need them here, we need them abroad. So it is beneficial if they are there, it is beneficial if they are here, so produce more because there is an overall increase in demand.

And because of our overseas Filipino workers, as well as our relative success compared to many other economies in surviving the crisis of last year, we have gone a long way in bringing our country back on the radar screens of the world, and the work and reputation of the overseas Filipinos confirm to the world that indeed the Philippines is the home of the great Filipino worker.

And because of you, your remittances which have helped our economy, which have helped our banking system, interest rates and inflation rates have declined. The interest rate is very low now compared to previous years, so I expect that your loved ones will be able to leverage your remittances to borrow from banks to build, especially low-cost housing for themselves and other loved ones.

Last year, 1.5 million new jobs were created in our country — of that 850,000 was in agriculture. As I said to Cito Lorenzo, the one million jobs in agriculture we expect for the next three years, 850,000 was already achieved last year. And the unemployment rate in Metro Manila is higher than in the rest of the country so I asked Cito Lorenzo we’d better look for jobs for our workers here in Metro Manila.

So we have been conducting jobs fairs. But yesterday’s jobs fairs were quite a — not a revelation because I’ve seen it even in other places but especially here — for every five jobs available in the jobs fair there was only one applicant so I think the problem is not totally a lack of job opportunities, there is some friction in the distribution system, in the matching. A lot of the unemployment is what they call structural unemployment, and this is what we have to work for here in the Philippines.

I hope that in the coming days, hopefully in this decade, as we fix the knots in our job market here in the Philippines, there will be enough jobs in the Philippines so you no longer need to seek a livelihood abroad.

Jobs, education, own home, food on every table, this is your aspiration that’s why you go abroad; and this, in common sense and plain talk, is also the core of my vision for the country.

When I made my state of the nation address last year, I expressed this vision, and I also urged everyone listening to that address last July 23rd last year to set aside bickering and politicking for at least one year. I said I hoped that instead of conflict, we would work together for one year for the good of the people. It hasn't been a year yet, so I repeat my request.

Let us work together to achieve the four objectives of our national agenda: first, an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century; second, a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity; third, a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan; and fourth, improved moral standards in government and society.

We have the competitive edge in our human resource-intensive, skills-intensive service sectors. The biggest proof of this is our great Filipino worker who proves greatness abroad.

I thank Mr. Aligada for the statement of support from our migrant workers; and I hope that our discussion today will be heard by our Filipino workers in various parts of the world, including the Middle East, Asia, Europe and America. This is the best way to celebrate Migrant Workers Day, to be able to talk to the migrant workers themselves in their place of work. I know, for example, that many are waiting in Saudi Arabia for my message for migrant day. In Japan, there is a community picnic offered by the embassy. In Spain, there is a week-long celebration that will end with a dialogue with Vice-President Guingona.

And the recommendations made by Mr. Aligada, I mentioned some of them now, but as Mr. Aligada said, you are happy because the dialogue between Secretary Sto. Tomas and you is ongoing.

My request to you, great Filipino workers, is to continue to cooperate with me.

I am counting on all of you. I need you and I love you all, and I thank you for your love for our country.

Thank you very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Celebration of Migrant Workers Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225203/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8335&Itemid=38