Thank you very much, Mayor Lito Atienza. And thank you to the women of Manila who are always dependable.

Distinguished President Ramos, distinguished Speaker de Venecia, fellow citizens, may the Almighty bless us on this special day.

I am married to our country. Together with you, our people, we fight for change for the common Filipino so that there is food on every table, secure homes, health, and good education. We had a good start in a short period of time. We turned the economy around, stabilized the chaos we inherited, achieved unprecedented progress in land distribution — that's why so many have received land who are here today — health insurance reached many families, affordable medicine was made available in government pharmacies, systems against corruption were put in place.

We used our foreign policy to bring in investments to create jobs and increase salaries, to build infrastructure and push the frontiers of education, job training, other tools for people to succeed.

These are downpayments. But more installments are still needed. We still have a lot to do.

Now, with us are some who will help in the relentless fight for change. Let me introduce some of them.

First to file and already went to Surigao to express condolences to his province during the disaster, is Bobby Barbers. Here is his equally handsome son, Dean Barbers. Yes, because Bobby is in Mindanao, he filed first, went to Mindanao but you already know him because you elected him six years ago, son of Mindanao – the Philippines’ food basket — Mr. Law and Order, author of one of the toughest drug laws in the world, Senator Bobby Barbers.

Pong Biazon. He fights for the welfare of soldiers. He fights for housing. He fights for sectors endangered by globalization — that's Pong Biazon.

Pia Cayetano. Colleague, youth, young professional with brains and heart, daughter of the late Senator Rene Cayetano. We once had a colleague, now we have a colleague, Pia Cayetano.

Dick Gordon, Mr. “WOW Philippines.” created so many jobs and livelihoods due to the spread of tourism. We had SARS, it still rose… Oh, we didn’t have SARS. The world had SARS, but tourism in the Philippines still rose — “WOW” Dick Gordon.

Parouk Hussin. Rebel who returned to the government. A true symbol of our sincerity in the peace process, a symbol of our fulfillment of our peace agreements because the former MNLF is now governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao. Champion of the Muslims for peace and development — Dr. Parouk Hussin.

His son Dudut, Sonny Jaworski, represents him. Star of a godly spirit within a disciplined body. In English, a fighter for a sound mind in a sound body, on and off the court — Bobby Jaworski. Maybe Dudut will get votes in the Senate, huh?

Lito Lapid. Wow! Clearly a popular governor of Pampanga. Helper of the masses in times of crisis — Lito Lapid.

Orly Mercado. My colleague, my dear. And you may not know that he has long been helping my government in the peaceful care of workers — Orly Mercado.

Sonny Osmeña. With the law he made, he made it easy to use cell phones, so the Philippines is now the text capital of the world, thanks to Sonny Osmeña.

Bong Revilla. Guardian of Filipino films, the terror of VCD pirates — Bong Revilla. Mar Roxas. Mr. Market. Father of affordable prices. Champion of consumers. Champion of small businesses — Mar Roxas.

And our candidate for vice president, Noli “Kabayan” de Castro, the most famous television commentator. Expanding the knowledge of the masses, fighting for the rights of the masses, Mr. Public Service himself — Noli De Castro.

We are K4 — Coalition of Loyalty and Experience for the Future.

It will take time and resolve to overcome the strong forces trying to divide us. But K4 stands for resolve, K4 stands for clout, K4 stands for the experience to change the economy. To do the unprecedented changes that will make us more secure, that will strengthen our families, that will stamp out corruption. K4 can do it for the future of the average Filipino.

We have made progress, but we will need your support to get the job done for the fundamental change in our political system. K4 will fight for us to have a parliamentary and federal form of government. K4 will fight to change the culture of corruption. K4 will fight to stop the plague of drugs. K4 will fight to eradicate terrorism. K4 will bring health insurance to all families, all Filipino families. K4 will increase housing. K4 will expand land rights. K4 will create more jobs and higher salaries. We will have clean water and a clean government.

Rights and experience for the future. Long live K4!

Long live the Filipino people!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Proclamation Program of all Pro-administration Party Candidates. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412091157/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5510&Itemid=38