Thank you. (applause)

Thank you very much Mike, for your introduction and thank you to the other officers of ECOP for inviting me once again to be here and congratulations on your successful conference!

Don Emilio, thank you for hosting lunch today. And of course congratulations to Mr. Henry Sy and the Sy family. (applause) To Joe Ledesma’s team in St. Luke’s (applause) and to all our other awardees for being such model employers, and we need model employers in times like this. (applause) And to all of you and to all of the leaders and officers of ECOP led by Jun Ortiz Luis this year, thank you also through all the years that I have served as President, ECOP has always shown the sense of community and corporate social responsibility that I have asked from Philippine business. Salamat Jun, salamat sa iyong buong team. (applause)

You have always focused on what the synergy of government and the private sector can do to upgrade our human resources, to lower the cost of business, and to generate quality jobs for our growing labor force.

And today once again, I would like to thank you for the resolutions that you have made: Number one, to preserve whatever jobs and businesse you have. Number two, to minimize job loses and business dislocations. Number three, to build the capacity of the domestic economy to create jobs and businesses; and number four, to unite and support of reform and transformation in society. In your resolution, you have given several means by which you and we will attain all of these. So, thank you so much for that and congratulations! (applause)

The success of business and industry depends on how well on we get together, and it also depends of course on the excellence of our labor force, the genuine concern of the employers for the well-being of their workers as well as their companies — and this what our awardees exemplify — and government’s sound policies that serve as the framework for continuous growth.

In these trying economic times for the global economy, we must tackle many challenges at once to keep our economy and way of life going strong. On the part of government, we must live within our means and run a lean, efficient government. This includes continued fiscal prudence and efforts to work towards a balanced budget. All the while, we must also simultaneously invest in key programs for our people. For instance, food on the table, education for all, skills training, and good health for everyone.

And at this special time in world economic history, we are focused on creating jobs and keeping existing ones to prevent the global economic slump from becoming a Philippine crisis. Our priorities are on activities that can create the most number of jobs while allowing us to improve our people’s lives.

As I said earlier in government, we are undertaking massive belt-tightening in order to fund among other things the Comprehensive Livelihood and Emergency Employment Program or CLEEP.

CLEEP is area-specific. Secretary Nitoy Roque who helped in choosing our outstanding employers today — but who is not here because his son is graduating, isn’t it? — has identified with your help the names of the employees of the workers who lost their jobs because of the global crisis. And we have farmed out those names by area to different cabinet members, and the different cabinet members are supposed to supervise the CLEEP in their respective areas. Among other things, to spur emergency jobs in specific sectors that are best suited to each region’s resources and potential for development. A lot of you are in industry, a lot of industries in CALABARZON and a lot of our problems are in CALABARZON, a lot of which are in Laguna.

So, Secretary Peter Favila is the one handling that together with you — Oh, I see Mr. Mamon, is the chief in Laguna — but I think Enchanted Kingdon is still doing well, right? Congratulations!

But I am really very much concerned over the fate of our over 50,000 local workers, I guess excluding… that doesn’t include the SM workers because you’re doing well with the good domestic consumption. (applause) This 50,000 local workers are mainly from industrial parks and export-oriented companies. And these are the 50,000 domestic workers in those export-oriented companies who have been sidelined from work by the global crisis.

Because of our special concern for them the Export Development Council chaired by Secretary Peter Favila, who is not here now because he’s waiting for me in my next appointment, which is to meet with the exporters of the Philippines. Well, that Council — but some of you are members here – has submitted the “bill of materials” for the one billion-peso export support fund. I hope that’s part of Bobby Amores’ papers. (applause)

And I have instructed Secretary Favila to work with the Presidential Management Staff, the Department of Finance and the Department of Budget to facilitate the final evaluation of the various proposals with the intent of releasing the fund soonest. And I hope that that will help our export sector. (applause)

But it’s not only the government, it’s not only our employers as employers, it’s also the people as people that need to work altogether. On the part of the people, now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. And as I said, this should include the government, that’s why we’re working on CLEEP. It should include the religious sector, it should include civic groups, it should include non-government organizations like ECOP harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities.

I remember visiting, for instance, Yazaki Torres where — ‘coz I saw Toti Torres here — where your people, your employees were doing volunteer activities. And that is what a lot of the firms can be doing, focusing on such initiatives not part of your core activities like cleaning up our environment, building parks, planting trees, giving comfort to the poor through food banks, and bringing the dignity of literacy to adults who cannot read.

Yes I know, it is a great challenge because you’re trying to keep your business together. You’re trying to keep your workers within the fold. And on top of that, we are asking you and your workers to do volunteer work. Indeed, these are trying times, but during this trying times, the Filipino spirit and commitment to caring should prompt each one of us to count our blessings.

For instance, those companies that had not yet had to retrench, we must count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our nation needs us all pulling in the same direction. Volunteering time, skill and resources is a noble undertaking we should all take seriously.

I remember, for instance, when I visited Dole, a lot of your wives… of the executives do a lot of volunteer work, and they have organized the wives of those who are working there. So, there’s so much that can be done. And I know it’s a bigger challenge during this times but that’s why we’re specifically making a call to continue to do that as well as appreciating your resolve to continue to fight hard to keep the jobs that you have been giving and to create new ones as much as possible.

We conducted a number of worker-employer consultations with a view to integrating the initiatives of you the private sector with the coping strategies of labor. ECOP has been a strong presence in these fora whether or not you were invited as ECOP because you hold so many hats, sometimes you’re there but you were invited as PCCI or something else. But ECOP has always been a strong presence. And I thank you for that whether or not you have a formal invitation as ECOP. (applause)

And you know where you have been as a result of our consultations, we have followed a lot of your recommendations. For instance, we have doubled TESDA’s training budget this year to reach out to more members of the workforce, including displaced domestic and overseas workers. In this connection, I thank the many corporations, especially the early participants who partnered with TESDA in training workers and allowing their own workers to participate in internally generated work sharing and training arrangements.

And I would like to reiterate, for those of you who don’t want to let your workers go, who are willing to make them… to keep them and then make them work full time again when times get better — and I hope that times are beginning to get better because some orders are coming back — I’d like to remind you that the DOLE is giving you the privilege of paying only half of the minimum wage if your workers will enter our training program on our scholarship. So the half of the minimum wage that you are giving them is to help their transportation and their accommodations while they are training.

And we would like you to do the curriculum for the training so that when things get better, and I said I hope we have bottomed out already in the world, their workers will even be more productive than they were before the global crisis.

In Yazaki Torres where we visited last week, Toti is doing that. He’s keeping some of the workers even if they’re not working, paying them 25 percent because he’s paying about double the minimum wage, so that’s about half the minimum wage, and then TESDA can train them at the expense of TESDA not at your expense. Let’s do that to be able to keep our wokers on your payrolls and getting better for the recovery.

I was talking about SM keeping its market, and I think St. Luke’s is probably keeping its market and many companies are keeping their market a lot of these are keeping their markets and their employment because of our strong domestic demand. And this is not unique to the Philippines. China, India and Indonesia demonstrate that large populations can reasonably sustain business through the sheer number of domestic consumers. So while we do not have a population as large as theirs, our numbers so far seem to be able to support local industries during these challenging times. And I point this out because yesterday I was listening to the sermon of Cardinal Vidal against the Reproductive Health Bill because indeed during these times it is the countries with large populations with the reasonably good per capita income like the Philippines that are able to resist the worst effects of the global crisis.

I thank you all for trying as much as possible to keep our workers so that the number of displaced workers is very finite. Nitoy Roque can make a list and give it around to the cabinet members. Imagine all those other countries where the unemployment is down by two million. Oh, you cannot make a list that way and you cannot give it to cabinet members to take care of each subset of the list. But I thank ECOP because I think the list would have been much longer or it might have become infinite if you were not there to help us to keep the jobs even if you are making your own sacrifice.

I thank ECOP for the constant support and trust that you have given me not only during this time when you are keeping many workers even if you don’t specifically need them now but on other matters of policy. But during this time, I thank not only ECOP, I thank labor — and we have our labor leaders here — for the industrial peace we have enjoyed over the years. Salamat sa inyo. (applause)

I believe that because our labor force is very kind and compassionate, employers are more willing to help and avoid layoffs even during difficult times. And of course, we have the government agencies to help strengthen the strong tripartite bond.

And our most important message is that: we must and we will sustain this partnership as we work together to hasten our country’s economic rebound. And that is our response to the global crisis: staying together, pulling together, nagkakaisa sa ating kapatiran.

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 30th National Conference of Employers. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412103927/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=24880&Itemid=38