Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During her visit to Pampanga

[Delivered on August 30, 2001]

A pleasant good morning to all of you. And I join Mayor Lazatin in welcoming you, not only to the Philippines but to my province of Pampanga.

I think I can also welcome you in behalf of the department of social welfare and development. Because when I was vice president, that was my work, I was secretary of social welfare and development . And now that the secretary is in Indonesia on official business, I told her, okay, dinky, I’ll take care of welcoming them in your behalf. So in behalf of the DSWD, welcome too.

In fact, I was telling Lulu Pablo that it’s a good thing — I am able to come today, because when I was in DSWD and we had this consultation in Subic, I could not make it. Now that I am president, I can make it. I am very glad to be here at last.

And so to all of you, I truly congratulate you for this laudable undertaking, the sixth global consultation on child welfare services, which is the fourth to be held in this country.

The enduring partnership which you have forged since the first global consultation in 1993 should continue to be nurtured and strengthened. This partnership includes the DSWD which is the current agency of the Inter Country Adoption Board, or ICAB; the child caring agencies, both NGOs and the reception study centers for children without whom the entire program of child care services would certainly not have taken off and, of course, the foreign adoption agencies, our international partners in a united effort to give to our children and all the children of the world a rightful home of their own.

I think it is very fitting that we are holding these consultations here in Angeles city. Because Mayor Lazatin has told you earlier about what he is very proud of — his street children’s home. And let me say that the street children’s home of Angeles city is the best street children home outside of Makati and Muntinlupa. And Mayor Lazatin also has his own proactive street children than program in Angeles.

When I was vice president and secretary of social welfare, you may not know it mayor, but I was always monitoring the activities. Because every time we would do something in metro manila, Mayor Lazatin would do it also in Angeles city. He would also do his own echo or replication, so it’s a very good place to be in, in a city that loves children and takes care of them . Who among us does not have a soft spot in our hearts for children. The roman poet Cicero once wrote that, “of all natures gift to our human race, children are the sweetest.” even our lord Jesus Christ was recorded in the bible to have said to his disciples when they tried to prevent children from coming to him, “let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them for the kingdom of god belongs to such as this.”

I read the bible everyday. And I remember on the day that we had our first meeting when I was still the DSWD regarding the launching of the long term plan for children, that was the reading of the day. And so I felt inspired– indeed we must not close our doors to children. And I still remember what my predecessor said — Lina Laygo, the previous secretary of social welfare, who said the most important part of her social welfare work was the work for the children. Thus, there should not be any reason for anyone to cause these innocent, sweet, and lovable members of our race any pain or sorrow. Sadly though, this is not the situation in the real world. The sad plight of many children can make many of us ashamed of ourselves — for either being indifferent, or contributing to the condition that we find these children in …. In this country as well as all over the world.

There is a ray of hope, however, in this day and age of computers and cell phones, of the internet, of distance education, and of teleconferences, now that we have come to realize that the youth, the most valuable resource of every country in the world, need above all, special care and protection. It is now undisputed that the state has an interest in the rights and welfare of children. With this recognition has come a consequent shift in their treatment by the state.

Whereas within the last decade or so, the primary objective of adoption laws and programs was to provide childless couples with children, now the paramount consideration in adoption is the promotion of the welfare of the child.

The two principles that now guide attempts to find homes for children eligible for adoption are:

first, decision shall be made in the best interest of the child;

and second, the goal should be for permanency in a secure, stable, nurturing and loving environment.

Today, while parents remain primarily charged with the upbringing of children, numerous laws have been passed not only by your state, but also the international community, directly and indirectly affecting children. Most important among international treaties are the convention on the rights of the child, signed on November 20th 1989, and ratified by the Philippines on July 1990. The Philippines was one of the first to ratify this convention. And then we have the Hague convention on the protection of children and cooperation in respect of intercountry adoption signed on may 29,1993, and ratified by the Philippines on June 7, 1995.

While we can say that much has been done in efforts to promote the welfare of children, much remains to be done, however. Adoption has long served as means of providing care for children whose natural parents are unable to raise them for economic or other reasons, including the fact that they may have passed away. It has also become an alternative means of building a family for couples who are unable to have their own children. Many cases of adoption have been successful, in fact, I would say most cases of adoption have been successful. And countless adopted children and adoptive parents have given immeasurable joy to each other. Presently, however, there remains a need to collect information on adoption trends, adoption demand, and characteristics of children waiting to be adopted or placed in permanent care arrangements, as this information is crucial for formulating adoption and child welfare policies.

Republic act no. 8043, or the intercountry adoption act, created the intercountry board, or ICAB, which is the Philippine central authority in matters relating to the placement of Filipino children who had been cleared for intercountry adoption. The DSWD, through its programs and special projects bureau, functions as the competent authority on intercountry adoption.

This year’s theme for your global consultation, I understand, is “a child’s right to a family,” which focuses on current trends and practices on alternative family care. This is appropriate. While we in the Philippines and many countries all over the world have now realized that adoption is not meant mainly to serve the interest of the childless couple but rather to cater to the interest of the child, so also should we now address the issue of welfare, foster care, kinship care, privacy in adoption, and research and reunion issues.

I have been watching on TV these beautiful ads looking for foster parents. ….. Please, just for a little while somebody to love me while I am looking for somebody permanent. I hope that many volunteers come forward because of that moving advertisement looking for foster parents.

Today, it is estimated that there are about 7,000 children residing in child caring institutions throughout the country including the ones here in Angeles city. And I understand now that the consultant of the Angeles city street children’s home, Father Rocky Evangelista, has moved his own street children from Makati to the Muntinlupa, Alabang facility that we facilitated for him to build a really new and big one. Well, there is also the one of chosen children which is ran by my classmate Angelita Peypoch.

I remember one time, Gina Lopez, who also loves children. There was a time when she wanted to be the one to handle the RSCC. And she said, just watch me. I will transform this into a paradise for children. When I went to Lita Peypoch Fullerton’s chosen children, I said, “this is the paradise for children. I found it.” but well, Gina was unable to work out the terms and conditions for RSCC, but she is building her own now in Bulacan. And I hope therefore this will be another paradise that she will be able to provide.

Still and all, a great number roam the streets day and night, living with their parents in what may be farthest from what we know as permanent homes — or just living in the streets. There is a dearth of local adopted homes. Adoption continues to be primarily a kinship affair. And illegal adoptions through simulation of births continues to be practiced unabated.

What are the statistics? How many simulated births continue to be practiced regardless of the laws that we have enacted, regardless of the international treaties and conventions that we have ratified, regardless of the right of every child to a name and to true information regarding his or her birth family. How many children are still used and abused by the very parents whose major function in life should be to protect them, care for them, help them develop their full potential.

One time when I was still vice president, I went to this squatter area where there was a house smaller than the platform. And I went there because the newspapers had reported that the mother there, or the grandmother, was selling the children for she was giving birth to sell her children. And when I went there with the social workers, and I said, why are you doing this. And as we talked and talked, it dawned on us that she didn’t realize that what she was doing was a crime. She didn’t realize that there was something wrong with children being produced and being made a source of the family income. So indeed, much work remains to be done not only in regulation but in education.

We may not have all the answers today, but a group such as yours, of course, is expected to move in the direction we are all longing to achieve for our children — the joy and security of a permanent family.

Today, we are gathered to acknowledge. But though we take care of our own children, we cannot do it alone. Hence, the Hague treaty of 1993 was concluded, its main purpose being to protect children’s rights, and for countries to cooperate in programs that safeguard and protect those rights and their persons.

We acknowledge with gratitude the role that our partner agencies and receiving states have done and continue to do, in assisting us to protect and care for our children. In turn, we try our best to improve our services at the state of origin, both in preparing our children for intercountry adoption as well as shortening the period of waiting, making sure that interim care of acceptable standards are provided the children, be they in child caring institutions or in foster homes, and in instituting more efficient process of applications. It is my wish that by the 7th global consultation next year, we will have satisfactorily put in place the solutions that may have been arrived at in this current consultation.

When I made my state of the nation address last July, I said that within 12 months, all agencies that render frontline services are required to submit a program whereby they will cut the number of steps required for their services by one half. Today when I was coming up the stairs, I told acting secretary Lulu Pablo, “the ICAB, the intercountry adoption process, is one of those areas where we must cut the number of steps by one half.”

I hope that the issues regarding the appropriate alternative family care services and statistics on the Philippines as well as other states of origin particularly in the Asian region, will be truly online and effective.

And I would like to congratulate ICAB for signing an agreement today with Ireland, yet another country that will accept with love the children coming from the Philippines.

Our work is made more urgent by the dramatic increase in international adoptions, which have occurred in many countries. Intercountry adoption has now become a worldwide phenomenon involving the migration of children over long geographical distances from one society and culture to another very different environment. In the case of Ireland, it’s a catholic country. In that sense, it’s the same culture; English speaking, same culture; very I.T.-advanced. Hopefully we can say that’s the same culture, but there are many other differences in culture also between Ireland and the Philippines. To begin with, one is Caucasian, the other is Malay. So let us all provide the leadership and cooperation needed for the achievement of excellence in the protection of children and in the promotion of their well-being within their adoptive families, communities, and countries.

So I am very glad to be here with you today. And I congratulate ICAB and this conference. And because I am in Pampanga, and I see the Pampanga media being here – usually they want to find out not so much about the conference but what’s the latest thing I have to say. And I want to tell the people of Pampanga that starting yesterday, the dredging for the floods already started. You may not necessarily see it, because I think it begins in the mouth of the river, which is outside the Pampanga boundary. There is a ….. There, and there is another ….. That will be pulled out from another place – a bigger one than that – so that it can proceed faster.

So I hope that as we improve the lives of the people in central Luzon, as Mayor Lazatin and ….. And the other mayors who are here – I saw several of them here – work to improve the lives of the children in their different municipalities and cities, and all of us work to improve the lives of the children worldwide, I hope that intercourty adoption will continue to be a transparent and welcome way by which we can spread love and friendship across the world.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during her visit to Pampanga. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212906/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8676&Itemid=38