FROM OUR MOTHERS’ BOSOM

Yesterday, we launched the long-prepared program… Program for the children of the twenty-first century. This is what we called it, because our desire is for the child of the twenty-first century to be an intelligent child, we called this program “Bright Child.” And the programs are programs to ensure that the child in the twenty-first century is intelligent. So the programs that will ensure that he is intelligent begin while he is in his mother's womb. From the point of conception until the child is seventeen years old.

We’re determined to enable our children to have a strong start as the future builders of this nation. The positive impact of our national breastfeeding program will be felt not only by the newborn of this generation but all generations of Filipinos.

As he reported to you earlier, Secretary Duque in my behalf is working on the national breastfeeding program together with the World Health Organization, the UNICEF all their NGO partners and local governments. And we have all noted the valiant efforts, special mention of Mayor Atienza to make Manila the first city in the world to spearhead the cause of breastfeeding.

You children here today, you are intelligent and healthy because of the vitamins that came from your mothers’ milk. I am also… I was also a breastfeeding mother, but not exclusive. If I had been exposed to this program and this advocacy when I was a new mother, I would have fed… Breastfed my children exclusively up to age of six months. But since even for all my education, even though I finished a PhD, when I gave birth I didn't know that it should be six months exclusive breastfeeding. So if I had only known I would have done it, so I know that at that time there was a lack of information. That's why now that I have the opportunity for other mothers of the current generation to know more about this than I do, I am pleased, as president and mother, to proclaim August 1 to 4 as Breastfeeding Week. It also came from my experience about the lack of information when I was a young mother. It’s time to actively promote mother’s milk for the good or the child, for the good of the mother, the good of the nation.

Because the doctor, when you started your advocacy, I had already given birth, it was finished. If you had been there then, I would have known better.

All of this is part of our program “Bright Child” or intelligent child. Exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months, and breastfeeding should continue up to two years. When entering day care or pre-school up to grade one, our healthy start program or what we call *masiglang pasimula* (vigorous start) which provides nutritious breakfast in schools will also be included. The Bright Child or intelligent child program includes education, health, nutrition, as well as special attention to the children of the poor, so that we can get closer to our aspirations of having healthier and more intelligent Filipino children in a world where competition is increasingly intense.

Fr. Reuter, thank you very much for praying for us today.

The breastfeeding program benefits the national economy because if all lactating mothers at any given time breastfeed their infants exclusively up to six months, we would save the country 57 million dollars worth of milk formula imports per year. Because as far as I know, of all the milk we drink, only one percent is produced in the Philippines. Ninety nine percent imported. So our dairy industry, I suppose those who drink milk with coffee won’t run out of products to buy. That’s why the milk consumed by small children is all imported. So we spend a lot of money. And if the mothers will exclusively breastfeed we will also have less pollution in our rivers and in our garbage because less milk cans, less plastic bottles, less used rubber in our garbage dumps.

But even beyond the peso impact, our most potent reasons lie in the child’s own health and well-being. Now I know even when I was young, even then I knew that mother’s milk enhances the children’s brain capacity and produces more intelligent individuals. And that even then I knew that it bonds the mother and the child, and it protects both from illness. I knew that, that’s why I decided that at least I would partially breastfeed. What I didn’t know is that it is better to exclusively breastfeed.

That’s why I congratulate Mayor Atienza who I understand has committed to set up lactation stations in all over the City of Manila. And I hope other local governments will do the same.

In education, the day care program continues, which is the responsibility of local governments. We have also built almost thirty thousand classrooms, more than the average in the past, and we will close the classroom gap in grade school in the next five years as long as we use two shifts and fifty students per classroom is our number.

The new taxes that we have started collecting are being spent on things like this. Including improving the quality of education because as we have a bright child through nutrition, breastfeeding, breakfast program, we want to strengthen their train power and competitive power by strengthening education in english, math and science.

This is part of the second phase of our economic reform, where we are beginning to bring the benefits to the poor who made the decisions in the first phase. In the first phase, we decided that we would no longer pass on the huge debt to future generations, to our children. Now that the country has more income, we can fill the basic social services that will lift our poor people.

Before, it was difficult to make these programs. It was like a family with its own small livelihood, earning 700 pesos a month. But 300 pesos goes to the sari-sari store for past debts and interest payments. Then 250 pesos goes to a salary in his small food processing business, whatever the business is. Then 150 pesos goes to a sick parent in the province. What’s left of the 700? Where will you buy food? Debt again in the sari-sari store. Where will you buy repairs for the house? Debt again. The 300 being paid for debt won’t increase. That’s what happened before in our country.

Seven hundred billion is our tax collection. Three hundred goes to paying interest on the old debt. Two hundred fifty goes to salaries. And one hundred fifty goes to local government units because the law says so. That’s seven hundred billion, mothers. Where would we get programs for education, for feeding children? Where would we get our infrastructure to attract investors? All of that, what was happening before, came from debt. So the 300 billion being paid for interest on debt would increase. A day would come when we would be bankrupt. We didn’t want to leave that to our children, to your children. I hope, mothers, you understand why we are sacrificing and increasing our taxes. So that our children will be freed from debt and we can make programs that do not come from debt but from our own efforts.

But of course, that's harder. It hurts. For every family, when you decide that enough is enough, that all our income is just going to debt payments, we need to add income immediately. We need to add more capital. Of course, what will you do? You will tighten your belt, right? To look for where you can get additional capital. That's what we're experiencing now. So I hope you understand that even though these decisions are difficult and painful and heavy, they are for the greater well-being of our children. And I hope you understand and I hope you help me in these difficult times.

Along with the second phase, we will spend more on infrastructure, for agri-business infrastructure, for investing in energy independence, because oil prices are rising all over the world. So we need energy independence. We need to spend there. On investment in responsible mining. On studying and establishing the Philippines as a center for good jobs like call centers and outsourcing. That will not disappear in the coming… This century. That is our future. Information technology, call centers, doing bookkeeping, medical transcription, and so on through the internet will become more prevalent. There will be more jobs for your intelligent children. So, connected to our breastfeeding is the jobs where your children's intelligence can be used. All of this will come from more jobs which is our key to fighting poverty.

Every day I pray and reflect on how I can improve myself to be a better person and a better leader.

What our country needs is not drama, but action. The daily effort, waking up and striving to bring more health, water, electricity, land, housing to our poorest towns and barangays, that is enough drama. My attention is on bringing meaningful changes to the lives of individual Filipinos who have needs. I need to ask you, don't you think, mothers, what you need, mothers, it's not drama, right? What you need are results. So, that's what I'm striving for.

Many are throwing black propaganda at me. Many are saying this and that, especially those who are angry. Especially those who are in need, they always need money and are quick to sell their testimony. And… The difficulty of our political system now is that the accused, even the president, is not waited for the proper court where I can defend myself because we have rules of evidence and rules of due process. What is happening is that the testimony is done in press conferences, done in Congressional hearings in aid of legislation, not in aid of determining conviction. The court is different there. So that's what proves that our system is really getting worse while we have the opportunity to promote breastfeeding, because we are developing capabilities, but on the other hand our political system is getting worse. So we need to change that. So mothers, I hope you support me in these things. I hope you don't believe the black propaganda being expressed outside of a real court. And I hope you help me understand the change that is needed in our system.

I thank the UNICEF, the WHO for helping the Philippines promote breastfeeding. I thank all the NGOs involved in this campaign for their tireless advocacy of this program. And I thank the Congresswoman and the Congressmen for your great interest in this very, very important program for the health of our children and our nation.

I am instructing the DOH and its agency partners, the council for the welfare of children, and I ask all local government units, plus the DepEd and the DSWD, as well as the Philippine Information Agency to prepare their moves to bolster the program’s success.

Again, our legislators, our appointed officials, our NGOs, our mothers, our children, let us unite so that our country will flourish rather than continue to be fragmented due to excessive politics.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library