PUSHING FOR A COMPETITIVE LABOR FORCE AS A STRATEGIC RESOURCE

We have been celebrating Labor Day for a hundred years now, and I hope that on this day, despite the hardships in the world, we do not allow our celebration to be diverted by political issues or ideological issues.

Unity is even more needed now because the whole world and the country are going through difficult trials again. Nong Kito Mendoza and Vic Balais already mentioned the difficulties of the world today – terrorism, global slowdown, and SARS.

At the Asian SARS Summit held the day before yesterday in Thailand, I asked my fellow leaders to ensure that the best possible care is given to Filipinos suspected of or confirmed to have SARS. I was very touched by the response of Singapore and China, acknowledging the role of Filipino health workers at the forefront of the fight against SARS in their countries.

As Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore said, “Yes, President Arroyo, certainly, we will comply with your request to take care of your Filipinos well, especially in Singapore.” He recounted his admiration for our Filipinos. He recounted that our nurses, even those on vacation leave, returned to work when the SARS epidemic broke out because they said they knew they were needed by Singaporean society. We did not learn that from the newspapers, it was not announced. They are heroes who do not tell stories of their heroism, but Singapore and Hong Kong deeply love our health workers. We should be more proud of them and here in the Philippines, we should also love them.

All health workers at the frontline of the Anti-SARS campaign will be afforded full protection gear. Pat Sto. Tomas is a member of the SARS Crisis Management Committee, so that is one assignment she will ensure.

We will not take any chances with the safety and welfare of those who are bearing the brunt of sacrifice. Our resources will be used on the most basic and effective points of prevention. Our vigilance will be focused and relentless. I ask our people to follow the lead of competent government authority.

If we are to follow the statements, we should believe our leaders more – led by Secretary Dayrit of the Department of Health – so that we do not stray, we do not panic, and we do not overreact.

In Thailand, Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawat recounted that they have a large fiesta, but people are afraid to go to the fiesta, everyone is wearing a mask. According to the World Health Organization, that mask is a false security blanket. They say that only health workers who are in very close contact with the sick should use it. But those who use it in everyday life, who have no close contact with those showing symptoms, that is paranoia. So, Thaksin Shinawat went to the fiesta without wearing a mask, he shook hands and said he would give one million baht to anyone who gets sick or dies from SARS through local transmission. He said he hasn't given anyone a prize yet. He also said he would give two million baht to those who get sick from that fiesta, but he hasn't given anyone two million baht yet either.

So, when I arrived here in the Philippines, I used the example of those who attended the World Health Organization, I shook hands even with those who came from China. I shook hands when I returned here to the Philippines. And the day after tomorrow, I will go to Vacante in Alcala, Pangasinan because despite the need to be alert, we should not overreact. We should also not panic because panic is worse for our economy than SARS itself.

We don't want to panic because of SARS because that will weaken our economy and our workers will lose even more jobs. So, despite that, what we really need to protect from infection are our health workers.

I thank our health workers – I think the PHIC workers are here – please extend my gratitude to all your fellow health workers. I also thank the many and various workers who understand your duties during these times. I thank the labor leaders who truly consider the welfare of their members, the leaders who understand that what is most needed at this time is to maintain and even increase jobs.

So congratulations to TUCP. On top of what you are doing for the rights of your workers, you are still looking for jobs for them through the job corps handled by Senator Boy Herrera.

On the part of the government, we should also address the complaints we heard earlier, the complaints of the workers especially regarding the price of goods, although our inflation rate now is the lowest in fifteen years. From the very beginning of my term as President, complaints about prices always come, especially the price of electricity, and more so the price of PPA. I always think about how we can address these complaints of yours and they are being addressed.

In April 2001, three months into my presidency, we suspended the PPA of NAPOCOR by twenty cents per kilowatt-hour.

In June 2001, after the passage of the Electric Power Industry Reform Act, the price of electricity for residents was lowered by thirty cents, so in 2001, the price of electricity went down twice.

Last May of last year, 2002, as per my instruction, NAPOCOR extended the payment period of its obligations and lowered its Purchase Power Adjustment (PPA) to an average of eighty-five centavos. You saw that in your electric bill in June of 2002.

This year, our struggle to lower your electric bill continues. I instructed the Secretary of Energy, Vince Perez, to study how to do so. These are the solutions gathered:

Number one, justice will be done. MERALCO will have to comply with the decision of the Supreme Court. All that is left to do is to determine how to best implement this judicial mandate in a manner that will maximize the public interest.

The Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC), which is independent, will lead the determination process. The Department of Energy (DoE) will take charge of the involvement of the Executive Branch in the implemental stage. And in that capacity, the Department of Energy will petition the ERC to keep the charges small. The excess charges for those poor electricity users who have very small electric bills to begin with, will be fully refunded to those poor consumers with very small consumption. For workers whose bills are ordinary and not that small, but you are complaining, the DoE petition will make the refund a discount on the monthly bill. We have the confidence in the institutions involved and we will see this through.

Secondly, whatever the ERC’s decision may be regarding MERALCO’s petition for a rate increase, the DoE will also petition that any increase should be imposed on large consumers, on the wealthy. And for workers who consume electricity, they will be given further discounts under the principle of socialized pricing, so that the price of your electricity, workers, will be lowered further.

Thirdly, the power plants that sell to MERALCO have agreed to give a large discount that can be passed on to you, my dear workers, as a lower PPA.

Fourth, these power plants are also capable of lowering their charges, we hope they will be allowed to reach economies of scale in their production. This means, instead of the government-owned NAPOCOR competing with the private sector, the private sector, their power plant, will be allowed to maximize their capacity, in exchange – the charge per kilowatt-hour will be lowered.

What are these economies of scale? Let me try to explain it with a simple example. A power plant is like a truck, you can’t buy half a truck, and you can’t buy, if you’re an investor, half a power plant. Now, if the truck is carrying a lot of products, the cost of the truck is divided among many products, so the cost per unit of product is low. If the power plant has many users of electricity because business is good, the cost of the plant is divided among many, so the cost per kilowatt-hour is low. But if the truck is carrying only a few products, for example, because the economy is weak, there are few products, the charge per product is high. If the power plant has few users of its electricity because the season is weak, the charge per kilowatt-hour is also high. In short, it’s more expensive to buy in small quantities than in bulk.

So, what we will do is, NAPOCOR will downscale its operations so that private plants, power plants can sell more, and in return, they will lower the price of the PPAs.

Therefore, to answer those who philosophize and ask why we are paying for electricity that is not being used, the answer to them is economies of scale. The entire plant is paid for, whether many or few are using it.

Fifth, Malampaya, which gives us energy independence and clean energy, is only expensive now because, as I said, it has not yet reached economies of scale. However, we have also managed to agree that in the next three years, its charge to the powerplants will also be lowered. In this way, the savings will also be passed on to your workers as lower PPAs.

It's a bit complicated, right? The explanation is complicated because the research and studies done to reach these solutions are more complicated, but the bottom line for you, as you saw last year when the price of your electric bill went down around June 2002. We expect that all of this and other ways will be sought and done to lower your electric bill, and we expect you to see the results in your electric bill around July of this year.

These steps will be helpful no matter what happens in the future, including the MERALCO petition pending with the ERC. That is very important because I know you applauded it earlier when the PPA was mentioned. The second thing you applauded was the laws needed for the protection of women and youth, and we will leave that to the congressmen here.

I mentioned the congressmen, I mentioned what Ed Zialcita said that in all the history he has seen as a foreigner of housing, now the best housing programs of our country. And for housing, I also want to mention that Pag-IBIG has lowered the interest rate on housing loans for minimum wage earners to only six percent.

In connection with this, because Pag-IBIG is very important for workers, for your housing, I have re-appointed Alex Aguilar of TUCP and Esperanza Ocampo of the Philippine Government Employees Association as representatives of workers in Pag-IBIG.

I will also appoint, after a long review and examination of applicants, new commissioners of the National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC) to speed up the resolution of cases. In the NLRC, as well as in other councils, we will strive to further promote tripartism as a sign of respect for the workers' movement.

Because tripartism plays a very large role in improving the welfare of our workers, and our investment climate. Like what the construction industry did earlier. That is tripartism, and tripartism becomes successful if the managers are responsible and the workers are also responsible.

And I think today we celebrate the responsible labor movement. That is what is written on Ninong Kito Mendoza’s t-shirt — Responsible and Meaningful Unionism.

The labor movement has been a bastion of democracy, a pillar of development a vanguard of the Rule of Law. As President I acknowledge the constructive activism of the mainstream labor movement cutting across all vital issues of national interest.

I acknowledge labor’s devotion to democracy and its rejection of force in the pursuit of political ends.

I acknowledge labor’s discipline and forbearance, the mark of a true ally in the Rule of Law and Constitutional adherence.

Therefore, great responsible worker, great Filipino worker, thank you for being meaningful, thank you for being responsible and as everyone said, long live the great Filipino worker. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].