Thank you very much, Supreme Bishop Villamena, and as I told him, thank you, and for waiting for me. I just came from Malacañang, Secretary of State Collin Powell is still there, but I rushed because I didn't want to leave you waiting, in case you had to go home.

Bishop Godofredo David; Senate President Franklin Drilon; our officials of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente; Fr. Domingo, Secretary General of the National Priest Organization; Ms. Eclipse, National President of the Women Members of the congregation; Mr. Pico, the National President of the Laymen; Ms. Agustin, the National President of the Youth Members of the Congregation; a very respectable relative of Supreme Bishop Aglipay, Police Deputy Director General Edgardo Aglipay; Chairman of MMDA Bayani Fernando; Governor Yap of Tarlac. Is Sally Perez here? There she is. Ms. Sally Perez was the first to introduce me to Bishop Villamena when I was still a senator. Former Prime Minister Cesar Virata; Commissioner of Insurance Eduardo Malinis; Chairperson of the National Lay Council Dr. Elavasco; and my Presidential Adviser for Religious Affairs Dodi Limcauco; and all of you, the forty thousand members of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente who are here at our Centennial Anniversary:

Yesterday, as I was going to Pampanga because I had a close relative who passed away, I saw so many buses going here to Manila. What was written on them, printed on the streamer, was “Iglesia Filipina Independiente.” I said, here are the 40,000.

So to all of you, I greet you, good morning. And I congratulate you all on the centennial anniversary of the founding of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente.

The Iglesia Filipina Independiente has made a huge contribution to our history. One hundred years ago, in 1902, you declared independence in our worship of the Lord. You gave our worship independence, fitting for our independence from foreign rule. And you also started the labor movement in our society. Your founding of the labor movement also declared that our independence was not only freedom from foreign rule, but also that Filipinos should be free from the oppression of powerful Filipinos as well.

So thank you very much for your important role in our history, and congratulations to all of you.

I would also like to extend a special greeting to those who have been awarded a plaque of recognition and a certificate of appreciation for their wonderful service and achievements for your church and our society.

I also congratulate Dr. Manalo Vao, who wrote the book “Christianity, Folk Religion and Revolution (An Oppressed Nation’s Struggle for Liberation)” which was launched today. This book is a way for our countrymen to better understand the principles and ideals that ignited the passion of your founder, Bishop Gregorio Aglipay, and the great Isabelo De los Reyes.

As I said earlier, Bishop Gregorio Aglipay left not only a vast contribution to our history, not just members like you who continue to make a vast contribution to our society today, but also relatives who also make a big contribution to our peace and order. I am also saying this, one of the most important police officers in our country, my important guide in my work, Police Deputy Director Edgardo Aglipay. Thank you very much, Egay, thank you for your great work for the peace and order of our country and my administration. Congratulations on your good work.

The theme of our celebration, “New Century, Renewed Vigor in Serving God and Country” is timely and also fits my desire these days to give new vigor to the stability of the Republic of the Philippines — the same republic that Bishop Aglipay helped build when he established the Iglesia Filipina Independiente.

I said in my State of the Nation Address on July Twenty-Two that a strong Philippine Republic has two important characteristics:

First, it represents the people themselves and not just a few powerful people;

Second, it has strong institutions that enforce good policies.

Part of these strong institutions that help a strong Philippine Republic is the institution of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente.

So if your church was a big contribution to the first establishment of the republic in the past, your contribution is also big in stabilizing this republic in these days. In the two important characteristics of a strong republic, you have a contribution.

To build strong institutions for a strong Philippine republic that will represent the people rather than a few vested interests, we must wage a moral revolution from the top through leadership by example. Only moral strength can be the invincible foundation of good governance; and only good governance can serve as the pathway to peace, justice and the conquest of poverty.

When I assumed the presidency last year, I committed to the achievement of good governance based on three pillars:

First, a moral foundation to guide leadership at all levels, and this moral foundation, the Iglesia Filipina Independiente is a great help.

Second, the assurance of transparency in all government actions. And you have seen so many high officials here paying respect to your church, to your celebration, perhaps on behalf of – of Franklin Drilon, of Governor Yap and Governor Zaldivar, of Chairman Fernando and other members of my cabinet, General Aglipay and some members of the police. Perhaps on their behalf, I can tell you that we pay respect to your church not only by coming here but also by providing the transparency you expect in the actions of our government.

And the third principle of good governance is an ethic of effective implementation throughout the bureaucracy. For example, I hear that Bayani Fernando, Chairman of the MMDA, has already cleaned up many sidewalks and avoided traffic in just two months – ethic of effective implementation.

And your nephew and son, Egay Aglipay, you know I’ve known him since he was a senator, he was the Regional Director of Region III. Do you remember Egay in Pampanga? He already had an ethic of effective implementation back then.

And Senate President Franklin Drilon, that’s true that there are conflicts in the senate now but thanks to the leadership of Franklin Drilon, the reputation of the senate and our institution is still being saved.

Since I assumed the presidency of our country, I have always said that our morality must be strong so that it serves as the foundation of honest governance. I also believe that honest governance is the right path towards peace, justice, and the eradication of poverty.

The opposite of this – graft and corruption – is one of the main obstacles to our progress. It steals the resources that should go to our priority programs and projects. It destroys the trust of the citizens in the integrity of our institutions, and distances the feelings of the people from the government.

One way to fight corruption is to reduce red tape in the transactions of citizens with government agencies.

In the past year, twelve departments and nineteen government agencies have reduced their red tape, reducing the time to process documents in their offices.

For example, in housing, the processing time for obtaining a permit, which used to take 188 days, is now only 45 days. Oh, not days, signatures – 188 signatures, two years, now 45 signatures, six months, and it’s still being reduced.

The DOLE, too – perhaps many of you work abroad. Red tape was also encountered when I became president. So the DOLE has halved the processing of documentation for our overseas Filipino workers. Before, six hours were waited, now for those land-based overseas Filipino workers, only three hours; and for our seafarers, before you waited twelve hours for papers, now only six hours. In other words, the processing time of the papers was halved to reduce red tape.

There are also offices that use computerization and automation, especially in the purchase of equipment. These things make your time easier when dealing with the government, and also reduce graft and corruption.

Yes, I spoke at the State of the Nation Address, I said we will fight the problem of criminality, the problem of corruption, the problem of the cost of power. Well, perhaps many of you have already felt that your electric bill has gone down twice due to the efforts of our government.

And these days we are fighting corruption. Those who evade taxes, VAT payments, three hundred [pesos] are now being prosecuted. As for those who pay their taxes, it turns out that the branch of the BIR supposed to receive their payments is colluding and depositing it into private accounts, we are also arresting them – these are big syndicates – so that you, the portion of what you buy from them that is tax and should go to the government to serve you, will go to the government and truly provide service to all of you.

This is what we are doing to make our governance clean. And our governance needs to be clean so that we can say that our government agrees and is worthy of being a government where we celebrate the 100th anniversary of the principles of Gregorio Aglipay and the Iglesia Filipina Independiente.

Again, my friends, thank you for the opportunity to be here. The sun is rising very high, I don't want you to get too dark. I know that you traveled yesterday and after that you gathered, celebrated, then you will go home again for your daily use of the beautiful principles of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente church, all I can say to you is thank you and you are very decent citizens of our country. Thank you and you give inspiration to us officials to be decent officials as well so that we can be said by you to be your worthy representatives.

Thank you very much and happy 100 years anniversary to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Centennial Celebration of the Founding of the Iglesia Filipina Independiente (Aglipay Church). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412223029/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8379&Itemid=38