Many thanks, Jane, and many thanks for your good leadership of our SK nationwide. (Applause)

Our leaders of Congress headed here by Girlie Villarosa and the authors of the very important Youth Student Training Program, and as we heard earlier, principally sponsored by Congressman Edgar Chatto; our leaders of the province headed by Governor Aumentado and now here are all the congressmen and mayors here in Bohol, good noon to all of you; our members of the Cabinet those who will be helping to implement the law on student employment; our SK from the whole Philippines, thank you for being here, 6,000 of you, congratulations on this excellent attendance! (Applause)

And you couldn’t have chosen a better place to gather today. Not only because we are in the home province of your national federation president, but also because here in Bohol — the only province I understand with an Environmental Code being implemented — here is where you thought to launch the campaign “Together for the Environment.” Congratulations! (Applause)

“Sama-sama” is as important as the word “kalikasan.” Yung “sama-sama” now is the time for pulling together and focusing on family and the community. We must initiate a new era of volunteerism and community spirit. This should include the government, the religious and civic groups and non-government organizations harnessing our people to engage in coordinated volunteer activities. We should focus on initiatives such as cleaning up our environment, building parks and planting trees, and bringing comfort to the poor through food banks and bringing the dignity of literacy to adults who cannot read.

SK’s adoption today of environmental protection as your priority program is a declaration that you are ready to train your energies on activities that will slow down or hopefully even reverse the harmful effects that mankind has brought on our planet. And you have my support, as Jane said, the last time we were together in Cebu, I awarded your organization 10 million pesos for use in your environmental protection projects. (Applause) And I am glad that Jane said you will focus on cleaning up our environment, including solid waste management and also on planting trees.

During these trying times of the world, the Filipino spirit and commitment to caring should prompt each one of us to count our blessings and give back to those who are less fortunate. Our nation needs us all pulling in the same direction. Volunteering time, skill and resources that is a noble undertaking we should all take seriously.

In lean global economic times, we need to tap into national support for “volunteerism.” We need to promote citizen involvement to help friends, families, communities and the less fortunate, notably revolving around the poor and the environment.

In the Sangguniang Kabataan, you the youth have a vehicle by which you can achieve our shared vision of a Philippines that provides a high quality of life and protects our resources for future generations. I am happy that you have taken on the challenge of protecting the environment and mitigating the effects of climate change.

This is in line with the Task Force on Climate Change that I created, to address issues related to environmental protection. It has 14 Task Groups covering a whole range of concerns, from waste management to water and air pollution and energy utilization. Each Task Group is headed by a Cabinet Member who is assigned to draw up activities on an approved design or implement assigned tasks.

I hope the SK can align your environmental activities along with those of the Presidential Task Force on Climate Change. Your tasks can be as simple as educating our people about proper solid waste management or helping plant trees in logged-over areas. Or they may be as complicated as linking up with various government agencies to assist in the monitoring of projects. A laudable idea would be a data bank, as I understand Jane Cajes has proposed, which may be pursued in coordination with the DENR and your respective revenues.

How timely it is also that today in front of the youth of our country, I have just signed an Executive Order promoting a Youth National Service and therefore…

Well, that’s different yet from what Edgar did. Aside from what Edgar has done, I also signed an Executive Order for a Youth National Service.

This targets 18 to 24 year-olds, tamang-tama SK is in that age. This national service shall be composed of a National Service Corps and a Youth Conservation Corps.

The National Service Corps shall be like a domestic “Peace Corps.” It shall be geared to the unemployed or underemployed skilled youth or college graduates. It will focus on their contributions to education and community service programs. So, I ask the SK to help me recruit such youth to undertake a national service commitment with a modest stipend.

On the other hand, the Youth Conservation Corps or YCC shall be composed of the unskilled or less-educated youth. They shall focus on environmental and infrastructure projects. I also ask the SK to help me recruit you to likewise undertake a national service commitment with a modest stipend. Maybe some of you know the OYSTER program that will be subsumed into this new YCC.

OYSTER means “Out-of-School Youth Serving Towards Economic Resiliency.” The police implements that. That will be subsumed into the YCC.

And as what we did earlier, I was very happy to sign before the youth of our country the new law creating as sponsored by the Boholano, Edgar Chatto and the other congressman who are here today, a Special Program for Employment of Students. As Bernie Sayo explained earlier this law will expand opportunities for poor students to acquire hands-on training and earn some money which they will use to continue schooling.

The number of companies allowed to participate has been increased, and government partly pays for the students’ allowance in the form of vouchers that all schools are ordered to accept.

And that is so important because in today’s global economy, knowledge is the greatest creator of wealth. The government must pour all savings and revenue into programs that help the poor and the middle-class. This includes more investments in the economy, environment and education.

The social safety net programs of our administration are focused like a laser on expanding educational opportunities to enable the upward mobility of young men and women from poor families. Our administration readily addresses educational concerns.

Two concerns have been brought to my attention: One, the rigid tuition fee payment rules — where is Chairman Angeles? Yun — of state universities and colleges; and the second, the clamor to expand the coverage of the Student Assistance Fund for Education or SAFE.

The “no payment, no periodic examination policy” I understand is one of the main reasons why young students from poor families drop out of college. This has to change to ensure a decent graduation rate for college. Rigid tuition fee payment rules cannot be allowed to sabotage the great educational agenda of our Administration. (Applause)

Likewise, the benefits of our Student Assistance Fund for Education should receive the fullest of endowments. You know you have a president from Bohol, President Garcia. And I am also the daughter of a president, Diosdado Macapagal.

And being the daughter of a president, speaking to those who come from the province of another president, I think we can all agree that the most inspiring stories of the Filipinos as a people are the great stories of meritocracy, and driving, fueling and enabling those great success stories is one constant — education. For instance, my father was born into abject poverty, but because a philanthropist gave him a scholarship to finish school. He was number one in the bar examinations. He was able to work in a good law office. He was able to join the government. He became congressman, vice president and president. And I want all the youth of our country to have the same chance. (Applause)

So, inspired by his story and others like his, to make sure that as many graduates from college as one too, I have issued an Executive Order for the Commission on Higher Education to instruct all state universities and colleges to devise a flexible, socially-sensitive tuition fee payment plan, and reform the “no payment, no periodic examination policy” that is currently being applied.

(Applause)

That Executive Order also instructs the administrations of the SAFE or the Student Assistance Fund for Education to expand the coverage of the program.

On top of tuition, beneficiaries of the program should be able to borrow from the fund for a monthly stipend to subsidize the students’ transport fares and laboratory, research and book allowance.

My dream for the youth that you represent is that in the prime of your life which is today — no, not yet today — in the prime of your life ten years, twenty years from today, you will see the Philippines on the verge of first world. That in the prime of your life, poverty shall have been marginalized; and the marginalized raised to a robust middle-class. That in the prime of your life, we will have achieved all the hallmarks of a modern society where institutions are strong.

And by today, when you are not yet in the prime of your life, you are already strengthening the institution of the SK. I know that you the SK have the drive and the will to achieve a Strong Republic in the first world by the time that you are the adults and the leaders of our country.

Congratulations! And good luck to all of you! (Applause)

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) National Federation launching of its Environmental Program “Sama-Sama Para Sa Kalikasan” and bill signing of the Special Program for Employment of Students (SPES). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104130/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23022&Itemid=38