Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, Secretary Manny Bonoan. And congratulations! To you and to all of the DPWH who worked on this because technically, this bridge was very difficult to build but you were able to make it beautiful and strong.

Ambassador Yamazaki, we thank you and the Japanese government for giving us the loan that we used to fund the construction of this very, very important infrastructure; Congresswoman Anna York Bondoc queng caring kegana-ganang Congressmen Naning fourth district ning Pampanga, peka maragul a proyektong dinalang keti quing distrito na; kaya ara caring nga tao keti qing fourth district keting qing Pampanga iyana kanu ing eldest child ku aleya Mikee. Anyway, I greet also my biological eldest child, Mikey.

And I would like to greet board member Dong Gonzales; our various mayors who are here headed by Apalit Mayor Tirso Lacanilao; the two mayor Floreses of Macabebe and Masantol; Mayor Sagum, also the first gentleman of the district.

And I would like to greet also our Cabinet officers for regional development here in Central Luzon: our chairman of the Clark-Subic alliance, Ed Pamintuan; our Presidential Assistant for Central Luzon, Rene Diaz; let me also greet Hanjin, our principal contractor here, not only because you have built this beautiful bridge, Mr. Shim, but also because you opt your investment on the shipbuilding in Subic which is about already over 250 million dollars and going up to one billion U.S. dollars; caring kabalen kung kapampangan, mayap a oras kekayu uling iko ing.. Iko ing mag-benefit kaniting Sulipan bridge.

And Ambassador Yamazaki, may I tell you something about Sulipan. Pampanga is very well known for its cuisine. But Sulipan has a very special cuisine, it’s called Sulipan cuisine. And why do we have a special cuisine here in Sulipan. You see this beautiful river which incidentally used to be dirty but it’s very clean now, maayap a-oras qing kekatang Mayor Lacanilao. This river goes out into Manila bay. And in the olden times, the galleon ships between Mexico and the Philippines used to enter this river from manila bay and have their drydock and shipyard here in Sulipan. And so therefore in the many months that the galleon ships will be undergoing repair, rehabilitation, maintenance, the chefs, the Spanish and Mexican chefs of the galleon ships would be here and exchange in culinary culture with our own Filipino Kapampangan cooks. And so we have a unique blend of Sulipan cooking made up a combination of Kapampangan, Spanish and Mexican cuisine, in fact, propagated in some of the fine restaurants in Metro Manila by the most famous Filipino chef coming from Sulipan, his name is Gene Gonzalez.

So, just as Sulipan was a very important infrastructure area in the Spanish period. Today, Sulipan is a very important infrastructure area in today’s economy. And about that… It’s not only the Kapampangans who are benefiting from this bridge. It is from everybody who will have to travel from Manila to the provinces in the north, those who travel and cannot afford the toll road. It is cheaper but good, and the trucks, as Manny Bonoan said, can easily carry heavy loads. Before, they couldn’t pass on that small bridge, the big trucks couldn’t, so everyone would pass through the toll road. Now big trucks can pass, they won’t have to pay a toll, and the products and food that pass through here will become cheaper.

So congratulations! To the DPWH because you are putting in place important infrastructure that is the result of our tax reforms. This inauguration of ours follows the groundbreaking yesterday in Isabela, in a remote barangay to help our farmers. This groundbreaking also follows… This also follows the groundbreaking the other day when Ambassador Yamazaki and I presided over a five billion-peso groundbreaking of a Toyota transmission plant. Whose products will be sold not only in the Philippines but also in other countries including Japan itself. And that groundbreaking was followed by the inauguration the other day of a… The most modern pharmaceutical manufacturing plant. The expansion of Unilab which will be the most modern pharmaceutical manufacturing plant in the entire region. Not only that, it will be the first pharmaceutical factory to be FDA accredited. That means the Philippines can now sell medicine directly to America.

All of these investments – Toyota, foreign investment; Hanjin, foreign investment; Unilab, giant Filipino investment – are because of confidence in our economy because of our management of our budget. The closing budget gap is fueling the confidence that creates jobs. We are speaking of well-paying jobs like the welders at the Hanjin shipyard. Before, they were fishermen, subsistence fishermen, now they are highly-paid welders. Like the jobs at the Toyota transmission, there are many engineers, technical engineers and other technical factory workers. At Unilab, there are many chemists. All of that is evident… All these high-paying jobs are evident in the finding, in today’s newspaper, that Philippine salary growth is the third fastest in the Asia-Pacific. And we are proving that good salaries, as long as they come from decisions of management and employees, good salaries are not a bar to investment but a guarantee of more profits to the firms that are putting a stake in our country.

No one can beat the Philippines when it comes to fiscal discipline. And the Filipino people are world-class when it comes to productivity and excellence. But economic strength is more than fiscal stability and a good payback to our human resources. We have to pump prime the system. What does pump priming the system mean? Isn’t it that in places where the water pressure is weak, we put in a pump, we pump it. That is what pump priming means. And we have to pump prime the system and guarantee that its returns are felt in the countryside and grassroots level through better infrastructure like the bridge for farmers in Isabela and like this bridge in Sulipan on MacArthur highway that brings our countrymen from Manila to the provinces, our products from the provinces to Manila.

We also have to provide payback in quality education and a healthier people like the medicines being made now in the world class, most modern laboratory in the region at Unilab. And yesterday there were four agreements regarding herbal medicine that were forged at the silver anniversary of the Health Research Council.

At the same time this flow of economic gains must be reinforced by plugging revenue leaks, prosecuting tax cheats and smugglers, and nipping graft in the bud through less red tape and stricter controls on wayward spending. We are keeping pace with the world in all aspects of economic and social stability, shoring up the welfare of the people, expanding democratic space, and hitting hard on the threat of terror.

This bridge is not only an example of our important infrastructure for the economy, it is also an example of caring for the poor and for democracy. Because one reason why it took so long to replace that bridge is that there were many squatters here. We couldn’t just ignore them. But in the past few years we had money because of our tax reforms that helped them relocate. So when they relocated, with the help of our budget, we were able to start the construction of this bridge.

So… So, good time to all of you, my dear fellow provincemates. And congratulations! Again to everyone who worked and to all Filipinos who will benefit from the Sulipan bridge and MacArthur highway.

Thank you very much. Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of the New Sulipan Bridge. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151114/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1969&Itemid=38