Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much, acting secretary Brion. Secretary Brion is acting secretary now because Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas is there in Geneva because she was elected as president of the International Labor Organization, so we are proud of our Secretary of Labor.

Other officials of the government; Captain Oca and the other officials of the Bagong Bayani Foundation; Ambassador Rosting and Ambassador Escalona and the other members of the diplomatic corps; our awardees today; ladies and gentlemen:

I am very happy that we are all together in this auspicious gathering today. It is very fitting that in paying tribute to the overseas Filipino workers, who are today’s new heroes of the nation, the venue we have chosen is the Heroes Hall of Malacañang because you are truly heroes. And I would like to thank you and all of the overseas Filipino workers through you because yesterday in the cabinet meeting we just had a report that the amount of net factor income from abroad, a large part of which is the income of our overseas Filipino workers, increased by 25 percent this first three months of this year. And because the net factor income from abroad increased by 25 percent, our GNP increased by 3.6 percent. So thank you very much to our overseas Filipino workers. The 11 Filipino overseas working men and women as well as the Filipino crew of a Norwegian tanker who are being accorded the Bagong Bayani Award exemplify the best qualities of the Filipino workers.

These men and women to whom our administration pay tribute — and to whom our admiration goes — represent the world-class caliber our OFWs are collectively known for. They strive to bring out their best and excel wherever they may be. Different places where they work but they are all respected in the places where they work and we also respect them like today. They are the reasons why Filipinos are among the most preferred workers in any part of the world. What does the Bagong Bayani Award really mean? Many look upon our overseas workers as contributors to the national economy, particularly through their dollar remittances — that's what I mentioned, a 25 percent increase contributing to a 3.6 percent increase in our GNP. The dollars sent back home run up to billions and form a substantial portion of the country’s dollar reserves, as well as a substantial portion of our country’s growth rate. In fact, in several instances when the economy had a foreign exchange crisis, the consistent dollar inflows from our OCWs saved the economy from collapsing but beyond the billions of dollars in remittances which have built homes, sent children to school, and started small businesses, the Bagong Bayani Award acknowledges the OCW’s efforts to keep alive the Filipino values and promote our sense of nationhood wherever they may be.

It is also a test of their character and skills in balancing various roles. More than being OFWs, they are also mothers, fathers, husbands, wives, sons, daughters, brothers, friends and most especially, Filipino citizens.

So many mothers have left home for the sake of a more stable future for their children. Likewise, many fathers have had to become unmindful of the perils that they may encounter while working at sea or some far away desert to pursue higher-paying jobs. It is good to work hard for our loved ones. But it is better to earn a living in our own country where we can go home and be with our family after work. It is harder to be abroad than to be here earning a living. We all know that good jobs in our country cannot yet be attained by our countrymen because our economy is still weak.

And while we are doing our best to improve our economy, overseas Filipinos go on with their jobs abroad. And for now many of them have little choice for although our hopes remain undiminished — that someday, soon, our OFWs can work here in our country and still provide well their families with a more comfortable and decent life — I am saddened to hear about families who no longer receive regular financial support or even letters and phone calls from their OFW kins. Merong mga ganon. Whenever I come across cases of old mothers or very young children or angry and confused housewives at the presidential action center, I often ask myself if the Filipinos have cultivated enough values that will nurture not only love and devotion to family but our sense of the “other person” and his betterment.

Then I am told of some of our outstanding OFWs. For example, I will not mention all those who received the award today, but as some examples I am told for instance of Petronilo Bergantino, maintenance supervisor in Abu Dhabi, who is father to 3 professionals and who has successfully invested in a rice mill, a warehouse, a rice and coconut plantation and a four-door apartment even as he continues to look after the needs of his old parents in Sibalom, Antique. What a great example of an OFW.

Or I am told of an Elpidio Quitevis whose professional organization in Bahrain sends scholars in accountancy to the Polytechnic University of the Philippines.

Or of a Dr. Quitiquit who spends his off work hours providing free medical services and medicines to the sick and needy Filipino workers in the Sultanate of Oman. Then when I hear about all of them and all the others who have received an award today I realize there is hope, and that the Filipino OFWs indeed a family man or woman and at the same time a man or woman for others.

In return for their good deeds, their vital contribution to our economy and their personal sacrifices, the least we can do is to continuously find ways and means to help them better. For example, a few weeks ago — right? — we allocated funds to help with the legal problems of our OFWs. We must also strengthen the basic services that already cater to their needs.

And so therefore I’m looking forward to our overseas workers welfare administration to fortify the comprehensive workers education program. This is to correct long-held misconceptions about working and living overseas as well as plant the seeds from where strong moral values, an upright sense of family and citizenship, and excellence in work will grow and flourish. Because in my visits, these are our outstanding [workers], thank you and they are outstanding and respected in their communities but there are those who went there crying in the half-way house because they did not expect what they would encounter. So you need to have your eyes open when you go there, and you need to know where the decent places to work are and where the risky ones are that should be avoided. That is a very important job of our government, that education and information.

Even as my administration is determined to reciprocate the many good things that the OFWs have done for our country, we know that there is still much more work to be done. This is especially true for the workers who have returned home for good. The OWWA will hopefully continue with an integrated, practical, doable, and sustainable program that will ensure their successful psycho-social and economic reintegration in the mainstream of Philippine society.

I am also looking forward to the department of foreign affairs and the department of labor and employment that they will address the recurring gaps in the provision of prompt and reliable services and assistance to our workers and their families. Kaya nga ‘yung pondo natin tungkol doon sa legal problems ng ating mga OFWs ay dinagdagan. In paying tribute to our bagong bayani, we are showing to the country and to the whole world, that while there may be a few of our fellow Filipinos who have gone astray, there are certainly many, many more who are living examples of all that are good that the Filipino is and can be.

Let us always pray for the safety, well-being and success of our courageous overseas working men and women as they continue to epitomize the good values and work ethic of the Filipino race in their countries. May the grace of the almighty be with all of us especially our heroic OFWs.

Long live the new heroes of the year 2001!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the 2001 Bagong Bayani Awarding Ceremonies. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412235808/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8651&Itemid=38