RAISING LABOR PRODUCTIVITY THROUGH EDUCATION AND ICT

In behalf of the Executive Branch and the Filipino people, I am pleased to receive the report of the Congressional Commission on Labor. As I understand it, this is the first draft because under the new dispensation, we have to review what we have inherited from previous work. This important document puts together not only the recommendations for labor and business, but also the roles that the Executive and Legislative Branches must play, to attain our common goal of swift economic recovery and growth.

I recall that in my meeting with the Labor Solidarity Movement last January 25, I listened to the concerns of labor. I also asked labor to sustain the unity it had shown in the last four months. Then, in my meeting with the business sector, I emphasized unity again as we pooled our energies together to revive our economy. With the assurances of cooperation from both sectors that I have received, this Congressional Report on Labor will serve as a draft framework that can be betted among our different stakeholders.

I have said many times – including in my own speech after the oathtaking – that in the new economy, we need transparency and a level playing field in order for the Filipino entrepreneur to compete successfully in the face of the global order. Transparency and a level playing field must also be enjoyed however by labor. And I also said that in the new economy, because we have inherited poverty from the past, we need to have a sectoral and social bias in our guiding development plan. And this includes safety nets for sectors affected by globalization, and, certainly labor is among those sectors that need safety nets.

The Philippines can compete best in a setting of transparency and private enterprise. The proper business of business is business. Whereas government’s role is to ensure that a stable and predictable environment both for business and labor, and if the field is leveled for all players in all sectors, then, there would be no room for protecting vested interests. Neither will there be cronies who will enjoy presidential favors. As we rectify the mistakes of the past, all these practices – cronyism, vested interest protection – must be swept away.

As I understand it, the Labor Commission Report emphasizes that the creation of jobs, and an increase in national productivity are the country’s most urgent concerns. These twin goals constitute also the basic mandate of the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE).

Smooth and effective employee-employer relations are offshoots of the more important goals of increasing productivity, generating more jobs to keep up with our targeted productivity rate, and considering our workers are human beings and not just as economic resources. I have no doubt that DOLE, under Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas, will see to it that the department will focus closely on its mandate.

Raising productivity ultimately means using the tools of information and communications technology (ICT) and increasing our capital base. This means that we will look closely into our available resources and identify all possible sources of capital. To increase our capital base, we must increase our savings rate, which is presently ranked as one of the lowest in the Southeast Asia. And that is why we are seeking to have a smaller budget deficit, increasing savings by increasing revenues. We must endeavor to solve this perennial problem of a low savings rate, so that we can source our capital funds from the Philippines itself and not keep borrowing from abroad. We have to make our business climate more attractive to potential investors, given this fiercely competitive global environment today. Again, the climate of attractiveness is a climate that needs transparency and a level playing field.

We need a cycle that starts with an environment conducive to growth that creates confidence, which in turn attracts more investments that enhance the healthy environment for the creation of jobs.

We are starting to regain the trust of investors. We have arrested the free fall of the peso and the stock market is starting to rebound. These constitute the silver lining in our dark economic clouds. Because the dark economic clouds certainly are still there, we are still faced with a multitude of problems. These multitudes of problems include being hobbled by a Php225-billion deficit – the largest deficit in the entire history of our economy. That is why we need to tighten our belts significantly, to reduce this deficit even while government increases efforts to raise funds. We have raised our BIR and Customs targets. Customs is groaning that we increased our target from Php100 billion to Php120 billion, thus, they cannot leave no stone unturned, none of us can leave any stone unturned to check smuggling and other causes of inefficient revenue collection.

If you hear about our being able to conk Congress legislate some relief like tax exemption and the allowances of teachers, or like small increases in the pay of those who are killed in action, this is because their budgetary implication is relatively insignificant. But when we talk about large budgetary implications, then we have to really consider that this is maybe counterproductive in the long run, because the ballooning deficit will raise interest rates, reduce our competitiveness, reduce the viability of the business environment and will cause loss of jobs. So it is not easy for those in government to be able to work on a climate where we can create jobs.

It is easy to mouth the standard first prescriptions for a laggard economy, reducing spending and raising revenues, but these are really gargantuan tasks that require the full cooperation of government and civil society. Thus, I appeal for the full cooperation not only of the bureaucracy but of all our citizens as well.

Raising capital also means improving the quality of our human capital, our workforce, and preparing ourselves for the quantity and quality of manpower that will be necessary for our future growth. What we need to do now is to give the highest priority to education skills, training, and, may I add, information and communications technology or ICT in our national budget.

If there is something that I think might not have been thoroughly addressed in the Labor Com Report, to my mind it is that I think that we are in the 21st century, we must recognize the tremendous, almost infinite opportunities provided for employment by ICT. And, we must also recognize the almost infinite contributions to productivity that new ways of producing, selling, and working provided by ICT can bring about. So ICT will create both jobs and higher productivity. And I think that is something that is very important to address, as we vet this Labor Com Report.

We continue of course to recognize the invaluable help that our overseas Filipino workers (OFWs) have rendered to boost our economy. And while we put together the measures that will enable us to be back on the growth mode, and therefore, enable our OFWs to find jobs here where their families are, we will modernize our assistance to them as they work abroad. All these are urgent concerns.

I thank the Labor Commission that even while this administration tries to resolve all these issues, this report has been drafted to provide inputs to our economic road map. I view the submission of this report as a first draft, but a signal from Congress that both Houses intend to participate actively, in the crafting of policies that will enable our economic goals to be attained. In turn, I am asking Secretary Dante Canlas of NEDA, and of course Secretary Pat Sto. Tomas to review the recommendations in this report – to see what can be adopted in our new National Agenda.

In the spirit of true cooperation and in recognition of our shared aspirations for economic recovery and growth, I laud all those involved in this effort. I thank Congresswoman Luistro and all of her predecessors, I thank Senator Honasan and all of his predecessors, this Labor Commission Report has been the fruit of many fathers and mothers because there had been reorganizations in the House and in the Senate, and so I thank them and all who have done their work as chairmen of the Committees on Labor of the House of Representatives and the Senate, as well as all the members of the Congressional Commission. They worked hard to produce this report, and I assure them that this fruit of their labors – though it will not be totally accepted in its first pass – is being received and will be given due attention by the Government and, I’m sure, by civil society so that we can make this yet another venue of what we said should be part of new politics, the politics of institutionalized consultation with the people.

Thank you very much and good morning to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library