Thank you.

Thank you very much, General Esperon.

Members of the Cabinet; Ambassador Kenney; Undersecretary Hughes and the members of the American delegation — thank you for coming here to congratulate our Filipino soldiers — bereaved families of our soldiers killed in action; our gallant men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, congratulations!

I salute you for your courage and devotion to duty. You are the soldiers of the people in the finest tradition of the uniform. Thank you very much to all of you.

I also commend the leadership of the Chief of Staff, General Esperon and all our field commanders. Congratulations to all of you!

As we weaken the terrorist cells and bandit hordes and drive the revolutionary left to strategic defeat, we will continue to consolidate the Filipino people in the greater fight against poverty, disease, ignorance and injustice.

So what you are doing, fighting the enemy so we can have peace, that is a big thing for our fight against poverty. So thank you very much for that as well.

With the all-out support and vigilance of every Filipino, we can add on to our victories and ride the tide of the people’s confidence and hope, shore up the economy and work with our neighbors and allies for a safer world.

And we will be able to do all of this because of you.

You have laid and secured the road to peace and prosperity. You have repulsed the armed tormentors of the people by the gallant shield of the Filipino soldier.

And I’m very happy that tonight, we have a personal representative from President Bush, to join us in this celebration.

Our joint military training exercises with the United States constitute a spearhead against the spread of terror in the region. At the same time, we are closely coordinating with our neighbors in stepping up vigilance along our common borders to close the dragnet on the Abu Sayyaf remnants on the run. They are just remnants now. They are just scraps because of you. You got their leaders.

And what you have done, what you are doing, all of your victories that we have recognized with promotions are a big thing not only for the Philippines but for the whole world.

The security of the Asia-Pacific lies in a terror-free Southeast Asia. It lies in stability in the Korean peninsula. It lies in a stable environment in the South China Sea. That is your role not only in the country but in the region and in the world.

And in the recent ASEAN meeting, we tackled these issues to provide a comprehensive umbrella of peace and security to facilitate trade and development in the region.

The Philippines is committed its share of the work.

Many of you whom we have given promotions – young ones, platoons, young ones. I want to give a special message to our young soldiers spearheading the fight against terror, because you are spearheading the fight against terror, in the same way that our young professionals and young entrepreneurs are leading the fight against poverty while helping build excellence in the entire region. Your generation will wrap up the fight against terror and poverty in no time at all and lead our nation to the ranks of the first world in the coming decades.

When you are our age, I hope we are already in the first world. But we will not be able to do that if our country is not peaceful. So the most important thing is what you are doing. That is why we are having this celebration because I want, on behalf of the entire Filipino people, to thank you for your heroism.

So we held this celebration in Heroes’ Hall because you are all heroes.

To all of you, once again, congratulations! And carry on.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Recognition and Awarding Ceremonies of Military Personnel involved in the Anti-Terrorist Campaign and other Operations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151832/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1781&Itemid=38