Thank you very much, Secretary Puno.

Director General Calderon and all the officers and men and women of the Philippine National Police; Secretary Ebdane and all the previous heads of the Philippine National Police; Governor Singson and all elective officials who are here; Don Emilio Yap and all the benefactors of the PNP; members of the diplomatic corps; guests; ladies and gentlemen.

I congratulate the entire force of our police on your anniversary, the anniversary of the Philippine National Police. As Secretary Puno said, “you’re at your highest morale ever.” Thank you very much for such morale.

I also warmly congratulate all those who received honors here as outstanding members of the PNP. These medals and awards were conferred in recognition of your excellent and faithful service. I also commend the hundreds of police officers who participated in ensuring the safety and success of the 12th ASEAN and 2nd East Asian Summit in Cebu recently.

Thank you very much for your sacrifices for the summit.

As chair of ASEAN, I am perhaps not surprisingly bullish about the advances we have made as an organization. At Cebu, under your care, the leaders of 17 nations comprised of over half of the world’s population met and agreed on issues, on a range of issues to build closer economic, political and security relations. There were the leaders of India, the leader of China, the leader of Japan, the leader of Korea, the leader of New Zealand, the leader of Australia, and even the leader of East Timor — they joined the ASEAN 10 to celebrate the beginning of a new day in Asia.

The most notable achievement of that affair that you secured so well was the united ASEAN vote to move forward our goal for an ASEAN trading zone by 2015. Also our bold step forward to embrace a blueprint for establishing an ASEAN charter.

We realize it’s time for Asia to stand up and be counted.

At ASEAN — and you are very much involved in this — people are looking at the unique model we have developed in Mindanao as a blueprint that can be applied to other flashpoints around the globe.

We have a new paradigm for peace that is built on interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness, investments in economic development and basic infrastructure, and mutual security cooperation. These measures have allowed us — you and me and the armed forces represented here by General Esperon and the other heads of the top brass — to expand the territory of peace and narrow the lair of the terrorists.

You and the Armed Forces have been valiant partners in the fight against terror interdicting the movements of the enemy, interdicting its funds, interdicting its materiel. Thank you for your vigilance beside the people.

I also note the achievements of ‘Task Force Usig.’ Although created only eight months ago to investigate the killings of media personalities, and members of militant groups, ‘Task Force Usig’ of the Philippine National Police has made inroads in investigating cases as far back as 2001.

Yesterday, we received the first Melo Commission report on the assassination of political activists and journalists, and it used some of the findings of ‘Task Force Usig.’

I had asked Justice Melo last August to take a hard look at what’s behind our nation’s dangerous predilection to subvert democracy through the barrel of the gun. ‘Task Force Usig’s’ investigations, your investigations have unearthed some interesting facts such as 23 cases of killings perpetrated by the NPA against their own; the discrepancy between the number of cases reported by left-leaning groups; and the numbers in the police files; and two cases where the supposed victims were confirmed to be alive.

The investigation track on slain journalists shows that for 26 media people slain since 2001 for work-related reasons, 21 cases have been filed in court against suspects that include local leaders such as a mayor and barangay chairmen. But indeed, having said this, one reality that must be resolved is our sad history of political violence. And here once again, my dear policemen and women, the Filipino people are counting on you once again to safeguard the ballot and clamp down on guns and violence in the run up to the elections in may.

You and I can tell the people today that one thing will not stand — an election in May disrupted by violence or political intimidation. We must do everything in our power to crack down on political violence leading up to this May election to ensure that our citizens can vote free from fear. That our candidates can campaign free from the shadow of assassination. And our journalist comrades can cover the election rather than their head in pursuit of press freedom.

The fruits of economic reform are being plowed back to the Filipino people in the form of improved education, food productivity and distribution, clean water, micro loans to the unemployed, and a better transport and telecommunications infrastructure to bridge the entire nation.

Part of the savings gained from our economic measures will be used to modernize the Philippine National Police and improve the living conditions of our policemen and policewomen through housing and such programs.

I congratulate everyone involved for putting up the 200 houses in Tarlac. But let me remind you there are 400 hectares waiting for the policemen and their families in San Miguel, Bulacan. Please start developing it and building your houses there.

I’m also announcing that henceforth, every policeman or policewoman injured while on duty will receive 50,000 pesos for major injuries and 20,000 pesos for minor injuries. And families of those killed in action will receive a hundred thousand pesos from the president’s social fund.

We hope that with housing — and the fact that you have been participating — and all the bonuses that we give the civilian employees of the government since my administration started, and the increase in pay that you got way back in 2001 after 10 years that it was legislated and not yet implemented. And we hope that with all these benefits, you will continue to have your morale go higher and higher and higher every year.

Happy anniversary and mabuhay!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 16th Anniversary of the Philippine National Police (PNP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151811/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1775&Itemid=38