Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the opening ceremonies of the 9th Annual Asia-Pacific Group Meeting on money laundering and terrorist financing

[Delivered at Meeting Room 4, Philippine International Convention Center, CCP Complex, Pasay City, July 3, 2006]

Thank you, Secretary Teves.

Governor Tetangco and other members of the Anti-Money Laundering Council of the Philippines as well as the other officers of the Asia-Pacific Group on Money Laundering; Congressman Jaime Lopez, Chairman of the House Committee on Banking; delegates; ladies and gentlemen.

To all of you from Asia-Pacific, welcome to the Philippines! And to my colleagues in government who have been active in anti-money laundering, I would like to congratulate them that the Philippines is a strong player domestically and globally in the fight against money laundering. Congratulations to you, say and to everyone else!

All our political institutions are in the thick of this fight. Under the leadership of Congressman Lopez many years ago, we enacted the Anti-Money Laundering Law in 2001 and our Supreme Court has designated 56 commercial courts, I understand, as special anti-money laundering courts in all the 12 jurisdictions, judicial jurisdictions of the country.

The polity context of all these is that we’re working to reform our regulating environment, to invest in modern infrastructure, and to train our young people so we have a business environment that is as competitive as any in Asia. And the Anti-Money Laundering Law is one of the key reforms in our regulating environment.

I can’t help but think of what we have accomplished in anti-money laundering and what we still have to do as together with the rest of the world yesterday, we celebrated the victory of our boxing hero Manny Pacquiao. As the entire nation stood still in yesterday’s big fight at the Araneta Coliseum, I could not help but dream that one day we would see the same passion in the hearts of our leaders and all Filipinos in supporting the common vision of the future.

We’ve already won many struggles in our journey forward and one of them is the Anti-Money Laundering Law. And as we prepare for more challenges that lie ahead including the even more vigorous implementation of this law and other reforms, we draw inspiration from the great fighters like Manny Pacquiao who can knocked down the obstacles along the way and beat the odds. We are on our way to the championship of the Filipino in the world arena on the back of our innate excellence, enterprising spirit and courage as a people.

I’m very glad to hear the report from the Anti-Money Laundering Council that from the time the Philippine Anti-Money Laundering Act was enacted in 2001, the AMLAC has frozen more than one billion pesos in suspected dirty funds and other criminally tainted assets. Released close to 600 million pesos to victims of swindling or fraud. Found about a hundred money laundering and related cases, and the recent conviction of money launderers, one a criminal conviction and three forfeiture of the laundered assets, proves that our system works.

Now to supplement all of these, I have certified as urgent the passage of a bill calling for the enactment of an Anti-Terrorism Law which will criminalize not only terrorism but its financing as well.

We have to remain vigilant, united and committed. And I am confident to see from this group that there will always be people like you who will stand in the way of evil.

To all of you, thank you and Mabuhay!

Welcome once again to the Philippines!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the 9th Annual Asia-Pacific Group Meeting on Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212834/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2841&Itemid=38