Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the E-Services Philippines: 7th Global Sourcing Conference and Exhibition

[Delivered at the Isla Ballroom, EDSA Shangri-La Hotel, Mandaluyong City, February 15, 2007]

Thank you very much, Secretary Favila.

Leaders of the BPO and E-services industries; ladies and gentlemen.

I’m pleased to have… to welcome our business delegation from different parts of the world, from the U.S., Europe, Japan, India and other parts of Asia. And your being here is an affirmation of international confidence in the Philippines, and I thank you very much for that.

The recent international business report of Grant Thornton ranks the Philippines second among thirty world economies in terms of optimism on the economy over the next twelve months. And this event should further convince our potential investors that we’re ready and here to stay after taking a growing slice of the global BPO business.

The industry now employs 250,000 Filipinos, and to think that only six years ago, there are only 2,000 workers in that industry. And through BPO, we care and share our talents with the world. And BPO players who are pushing for higher-end products to create a million jobs in our industry to generate 12 billion dollars in revenues by 2010. We started out with call centers, now we’re moving to other kinds of higher value services.

Indeed, we’re committed to go up the value chain, and the influx of multinationals puts us several notches higher. We have editors, medical diagnosis. We have accounting, all kinds of higher value services, e-services. And we’re all happy that you’re here to look some more on how we can help.

One of the reasons why our industry has grown so much over the last six years is that in 2001, we committed and we complied to improve the telecommunications infrastructure so as to lower the cost of connectivity. We’ve done that. Indeed, infrastructure is a main driver of investor confidence in the same way that a balanced budget has the same effect on our creditors and the capital markets — both must be at the top rung of priorities.

In our country, in our administration, over the last six years, especially the last three years, we’ve struck a healthy balance among all aspects of the economy to maximize confidence, credibility and payback to the people. Because if I may share with you, we want BPO, we want e-services because they bring so many jobs, not only here in metro manila, but all throughout our country, and therefore so many benefit.

You know sometimes, in some of our focus group discussions, when there is the acknowledgment that the industry has grown from 2,000 to 250,000, and then some will say, “yes, but that’s for those who speak english well. What about the rest of us — the great unwashed — so to speak?”

But the e-services industry has spawned such a big multiplier. It has spawned the night economy for instance. And all around the e-services centers, you have restaurants, coffee shops working 24 hours a day. You have jeepneys having new and additional trips at night. And so it’s not only the young, educated, english-speaking or good writer or good doctor or good accountant that gets a job. It’s somebody who has the kindness and good manners to be a waiter. Or somebody who’s willing to work through the night to be a driver. So it is part of the social payback to the people.

And we’re able to do this because we’ve made tough decisions. To be able to improve our telecommunications infrastructure, we’ve had to work on deregulating the telecommunications industry. And to be able to do other infrastructure so that you can find it convenient to invest all over the country, we’ve had to raise taxes to fund that infrastructure.

The long-term effect of our tough decisions to raise revenues and move towards a balanced budget is evident in the stream of positive developments in the economy, among them your presence here.

I’m also happy that the biggest pension fund in the world — Calpers or the California Pension and Retirement System — has raised the rating of the Philippines, making it a more desirable investment destination for their giant funds than china or even India, Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia.

And in our water system here in Metro Manila, German and Singaporean firms are staking their interest in the water utilities firm called Maynilad, in a bid to be our partners to deliver clean water to the people of metro manila.

Our option of spending on infrastructure and social services for the year will spur growth in the countryside, notch up grassroots enterprises and build wealth in communities. More infrastructure and more schools will make it convenient for e-services to be located along our cyber… All along our cyber corridor, which stretches along the length of the Philippines from Baguio City in the north through Clark, just north of here, and Metro Manila — Clark and Metro Manila are in the urban beltway — to Central Visayas and Davao in the south. Infrastructure will also connect, aside from connecting you, they will also connect farms to markets; they will also bridge knowledge and they will unify the country aside from making it easier for you to go all over the countryside.

Next week, I’m going to open a Teletech Center in Dumaguete City. And I really have a great time every time I open an e-service or BPO center outside Manila.

And we can do all these and at the same time achieve a balanced budget in no time at all. That is why we can say that our growth today is sustainable.

Our strengths in e-services lie in our extensive digital infrastructure, our trusted business environment, our Class ‘A’ office spaces, and of course most important, the skills of the Filipino workforce.

The outsourcing boom in the Philippines continues to drive the property market. An example, in the sprawling Mall of Asia — that’s the biggest shopping mall outside China — it houses Dell’s Customer Service Operations.

We continue to sharpen our workforce by enhancing the english curriculum. English is back as the medium of instruction in our country. aside from that, we also have our bridging courses and skills. In our technical and skills development training system, we give out scholarships. For now a very limited number of skills because these are the ones where jobs are so readily available. And they are for call center english, for seafarers, for welders, and for butchers. For those who can’t, you know who say, “what about us, we can’t become a call center agent?” So they can become butchers because these are the ones where we have maybe like 30,000 jobs available.

So that is how… Though it’s varied, it’s limited in number because we want to make sure that when they get out of our training system, they have a job available. And you are providing jobs.

What we’re doing is for the near hires, for the near hires, we’re reaching out especially to them to give them scholarships, so that the next time around when they apply, they are no longer near hires, they’re ready to start.

We’re also honing the curriculum for medical editors. And I’m very glad that we’ve gone beyond just transcription — although transcription is not just, it’s high value — but we’ve gone beyond that to medical diagnosis online. And we’re building more I.T. hubs in our regions. Like as I said, what I’m going to inaugurate next week and that I also inaugurated last week in Bacolod, in Negros Occidental.

Our telecom infrastructure is stable and firm. During the great typhoons of the ‘Milenyo’ and the ‘Reming.’ you might have heard about the great typhoons we’ve had in the Philippines that torn down houses and sent roofs to the sky, our BPO industry continued to work, no interruption in telecommunications service. When the Taiwan quake affected international connections online, our telecom providers quickly deployed resources to make sure that our BPO services will not be interrupted.

I remember going to one of the BPO inauguration… No, not inauguration, anniversary or an extension… Yes, an expansion celebration and I asked the manager, “so, what happened during the typhoon?” This was three days after the typhoon. “oh,” she said, “the only… The only casualty was me. My house… My roof blew off, but work was going on 24 hours a day in our BPO center.”

We have a highly-skilled multicultural workforce who have a keen understanding of international business processes. We have a lot of our agents working with American customers. We have those working with Spanish speaking customers and many other cultural… Culturally diversified markets.

And so I’m very happy that once again you are all here.

I want to thank you for your confidence. And on my part, I want to let you know that we shall keep the economic ship on course and our political stability steady in a sea of optimism and hope.

Thank you for coming to the Philippines. And I hope your business will stay and expand.

Maraming salamat.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the E-Services Philippines: 7th Global Sourcing Conference and Exhibition. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151611/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1911&Itemid=38