I thank you all for the many weeks of hard thinking and earnest dialogue that you put into this summit. A good summit such as what we are having today is not a one day affair. It starts with many weeks of consultation, preparation, iteration, vetting. Finally, when we get together in the summit itself, it is a day when we affirm the agreements that we have arrived.

I thank especially the members of Congress starting with Senator Blas Ople for this idea. It was his idea to convene this gathering to address the challenges thrust upon the nation by the global economic crisis, particularly in the wake of the September 11 attack.

Allow me to start with candor and straightforwardness, for urgent matters are afoot and I do not wish to tarry. Some people have begun to criticize our meeting as just another exercise in hot air and propaganda. They say it is just a media event from which nothing substantive will ensure. They ask, will this bring more food to the table? Will this bring more shelter for the poor? Will this bring more schools for the children, and more jobs for their parents? And so on and so forth.

We can always dismiss these charges as the work of subversives or doomsayers. But today we will not do so. Today we will consider it not our job to answer our detractors with counter labeling or stereotyping. We shall determine what is most needed to fight poverty, provide focus and direction to all institutions involved, and get the job done.

Nevertheless, the air of public skepticism is real and foreboding. We cannot dismiss the hardships of the people from day to day, from hour to hour. Their problems are real, concrete and rending physically and psychologically.

The list of worries is long and arduous. Where will I get the money for the next meal? How can I pay for my son’s next tuition installation on Monday? How can I fill up this prescription for my baby? For any leader who has a genuine heart for the poor, it is sad and frustrating to contemplate these questions being asked by the poor everyday.

But these questions precisely point to the perspective that has been captured by this summit. This perspective is based on action, concreteness, political will, and national solidarity to fight poverty and to beat it.

In proclaiming our agenda today, we place it in the fountain of the masses, in the hearts and minds of the poorest people and communities in our country. This is no ordinary political exercise. We are going to do what we say. We are going to back up our priorities with resources.

They said that summits turn up with nothing good. It depends. If a summit is a one day thing, and everybody does the brainstorming just on that one day, then nothing will really come out of it. Then, it’s just an exercise for the media. But if the summit was prepared the way it’s been prepared today, it can work. And I would like to remind everyone about such a summit that was prepared this way and that has worked — and that was the social reform summit that was called by President Ramos during his administration.

I attended the final day. But prior to that final day, there were also weeks of vetting interaction, consultation, debate, until finally what was considered doable by everyone, the common denominator, the things that united rather than divided were agreed on on that day; the things that united and were united in the idea that they could be done.

Thus, came out the social reform agenda. And when we were fighting for what eventually became Edsa 2 in civil society, in politics, the politicians and civil society, when we engaged with one another, we examined that social reform agenda that came from that social reform summit. We examined what have been accomplished, and what had not yet been accomplished. And we said, that if we ever became the administration, we would begin to accomplish the parts that had not been accomplished.

And so today, our social reform agenda, a big bulk of the socio-economic part of our socio-economic program, the socio part of it still comes from that social reform summit that was put together many, many years ago. So summits can work. Let us make this summit work.

Let me highlight the essential tracts in the pact that we have signed. Recessions usually hit the poor hardest, by throwing them out of jobs and homes, wiping out their meager savings, and eroding state revenues needed for redistributing land and providing basic social services. As far as we can, we mustn’t let this happen.

Hence, I am very grateful that Congress agreed that they shall strive to index excise taxes to inflation. And the national government shall use its share of the increase in revenues coming from this indexation specifically for housing subsidies. By being able to earmark the additional proceeds of indexation of excise taxes, we will be able to devise the rent-to-own schemes to put homes within the reach of the working classes in these times of uncertainty. That is one concrete agreement that we have come to. And the question is: will it build more homes for the masses? The answer is, yes, this summit will if we can carry this out.

The distribution of land to the tillers and to the indigenous peoples, what we call asset reform, must also continue, for the great majority of the poor live in the countryside. Hence, the land bank shall return to its main mandate. The mandate of the law gave it when my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal, established the Land Bank. Its main purpose and its purpose today must be once again to finance programs for land reform. Will the summit give more land to the farmers? Yes, it will, if we will carry out what we have agreed on regarding the Land Bank.

The tariffs collected from the minimum access imports must return and shall return to the rightful allocation, the agricultural competitiveness enhancement fund. And so we ask, will this summit make the farmers able to produce more? Yes, it will, if we carry out this resolution to earmark the proceeds from the minimum access volume to the fund to make farmers more competitive.

Mass housing, land reform, human development services are essential to our battle against poverty as well as the war against economic uncertainty. Providing homes and land for the poor creates jobs, raises productivity and augments long-term savings. Education, micro-finance, health and other similar services empower people to contribute to economic growth and live a life of dignity.

In this light, the leaders who joined the summit committed themselves, ourselves, to work together, to bring more of the poor under the umbrella of the national health insurance program, to address legal and social impediments to the availability of waste disposal systems, to provide sites for school buildings in the barangays where there are none, to promote micro-finance institutions in every province.

For our part, the administration is delivering on my SONA commitments with focus. We shall cut in half the prices of medicines commonly used by the poor. We shall expand the outlets for low cost remedies and reorganize the bureau of food and drugs to bring more of these low-cost medicines to poor Filipinos.

The question then, will this summit help? Juan dela Cruz, answer the question. I think I can buy this prescription for my baby? Yes, it will answer that question if we carry out these reforms in the price of medicines that we have agreed on in this summit.

Retraining, on the other hand, will enhance the capability of our work force to continue to be relevant to the dynamic demands of a global economy. In this task, it is paramount to e-enable our workers and our small entrepreneurs. Where will I get my next job because I’ve been thrown out of work? Will the jobless worker find an answer from this summit? Yes, if we carry out the massive retraining program that we agreed on we should carry out in this summit.

We cannot prescribe autarchy, our closing our doors to the world economy. Instead, we have no choice in the world today but be guided by the signals of the market because we cannot legislate the law of supply and demand. But what we can do is to explore further reforms to lower cost and improve services. One priority identified by Senate President Franklin Drilon is modernizing our cargo transport system. This is a must if enterprises across the archipelago, including farms and fishing communities, are to compete and grow vigorously.

Will we have cheaper food on the table? Will the Mañileno have cheaper food on the table coming from a product produced in Mindanao? Yes, if we carry out our commitment to do the reforms in cargo shipping and air transport as Senate President Franklin Drilon said in this summit that we must do.

Our present day cargo system is plagued by inadequate infrastructure which turns off investors. Another big turn off is inadequate peace and order. Hence, we are grateful for the initiative of House Speaker Jose de Venecia occasioned by this summit, to earmark funds in the 2002 budget to enhance the reward system for information on terrorists, kidnappers, drug traffickers, coup plotters and other perpetrators of major crimes. Mindanao will continue to be a special focus for peace and development and the battle against poverty. And I am grateful to the summit for the affirming this.

On the first working day of the new year, I shall install the newly elected officials of the ARMM. This will be the beginning of a strong rally against terrorism, banditry and corruption. We shall pour in more resources into the region to support good governance and to uplift the lives of the people.

Just last night, I happened to call Paul Dominguez to talk about something in preparation for today’s summit. And just then, 11 o’clock at night, he was having coffee with a new ARMM governor Parouk Hussin to inform the new ARMM governor that as soon as the new government of the autonomous region is off and running, the usaid is ready with the initial $20 million of the $55 million that we were able to get during my official visit in Washington.

We shall resolve ideologically based secessionist movements, isolate terrorists and uproot crime syndicates embedded in the isolated communities of Mindanao, in addition to what we be will doing, of course, in the rest of the Philippines. In addition, we will redouble efforts to implement two other measures in the Eleven Point Anti- Crime Program that I announced last month. One is the close integration and coordination of intelligence activities and resources for which an intelligence summit will soon be held. The other is the training and deputization of community groups to fight crime. These community groups will be allowed to bear arms and make citizens’ arrests, even as we will be stricter with the illegal possession of firearms.

This action agenda, of course, will count for nothing less unless all join hands to implement it fully. Hence, I am gratified that business and civil society have put forward major steps that they will take as well, including in the case of business, the promise and the commitment that they will use one and only one set of financial statements, both for their banks and the Bureau of Internal Revenue.

Narrow partisan, sectoral and personal interest must yield to the common good. Let me repeat my call for a one-year moratorium on politicking. And I thank business, labor and civil society for now echoing this call. And I noticed that in all the speeches and messages prior to mine, the most applauded passages were all the times that our speakers asked for unity and the moratorium on politicking. Perhaps, indeed, one way to achieve this is the political summit proposed to be held within six months, although this socio-economic summit itself already signals a major step forward in legislative-executive coordination, as well as in cooperation between the administration and the opposition for the greater good of our nation. The poorest of our people gain the most from these strides in the political maturity of our institutions. Every initiative, every new measure or program to which we have committed ourselves, is a building block for the broader pillars of a national strategic consensus. These pillars, as I have many times articulated, are the following:

First, a competitive economy capable of building wealth for our people in a more interactive global setting;

Second, a caring society ensuring the building of wealth is interlinked with equity for our people;

Third, a robust agricultural sector matching the global benchmarks of efficiency.

Fourth, modern institutions of public and corporate governance maintaining globally accepted standards of accountability and transparency in a secure, rules-based society, free from fear and confident in the effective enforcement of laws. We are now looking to clear the hundreds of bottlenecks that get in the way of enterprise and effective governance in all sectors. Many inadequate policies need to be revamped, many procedures and ways of doing things need to be changed. Dead capital and unrealized potential must be reincarnated by new thinking, as Hernando de Soto tells us, and as many Latin American countries have already begun to listen. These are immediate challenges.

The process that culminated in this summit is a triumph of intense cooperation and great patriotism. It is only in being together that we can build an economy that is robust, competitive, capable of providing for our people’s needs. It is only in being together that we can build an economy that sustains growth rates that can dramatically reduce poverty. It is only in being together that we can build the society of peace and national community capable of applying forward looking solutions to our manifold problems.

I appreciate your sincere enthusiasm in this gathering. You not only made your voices heard. You sincerely listened to and learned from other voices. The global economy was slowing down even before the September 11 tragedy. The terrorist attacks piled even more uncertainty upon the already unpredictable trends we were seeing. Now we witness the deepest downturn in the world economy in over two decades.

I can only find comfort in the fact that the Philippine economy has proven remarkably resilient given the state of the regional and global economy. While our exports have declined sharply, our domestic demand has increased even more sharply so that the GNP economic growth rate is at 3.7 percent, better than most of our neighbors and trading partners. We were able to defend our peso against a speculative attack last July and stabilized it without asking for IMF support. Inflation is at 4.4 percent, the lowest rate in 16 months.

And last night, I called up Governor Buenaventura late into the night, long after my call to Paul Dominguez, to ask him what is our interest rate right now. And he said, our overnight interest rate has gone down to 8 percent, the lowest in six years while even the most industrialized countries suffered an increase in their unemployment rate. I called up Pat Sto. Tomas last night and said, what’s our comparative unemployment rate between last year and this year? Last year, our employment rate was 11.2 percent, this year is 10.1 percent. And we are spending well within our budget deficit ceiling. And this allows the government to give a modest extra Christmas bonus for our government employees. That said. The global uncertainty that has resulted from the tragic events of September 11 makes economic planning for any country very difficult. That is why we must use the momentum of whatever resiliency we have shown so far and chase the light at the end of the tunnel. The more optimistic projects our global recovery to be in the second or third quarter of next year.

The upturn could well be enhanced by what analysts expect to be a synchronized recovery. They attribute the synchronized recovery to the unprecedented policy coordination of governments and central banks world wide. In concert, the world’s nations have stimulated their economies through interest rate cuts, increased public spending, and other policies designed to encourage investments and consumer demand in the major markets of the world. As we among ourselves in the Philippines today are synchronizing what we must do for economic recovery, or rather continuing our economic resiliency, the Philippines shall also be part, an integral part of the synchronized recovery with the rest of the world.

We draw strength in our synchronization with the rest of the world from the emerging global consensus to fight terrorism, spur economic growth and eradicate poverty. We are gratified in having contributed to this emerging consensus by initiating a sub-regional path among five founding members of Asean with, I understand, Australia expressing an interest in joining in having a sub regional grouping to battle terrorism together.

We are gratified too that our reaffirmed strong strategic ties with the United States have yielded gains on both the security and economic fronts. To improve the climate for business, part of synchronized recovery is greater economic integration and cooperation within Asean, and within Asean and the giant economies of Northeast Asia. Thus, we can, and must, exploit our proximity and affinities for the e-expansion of trade and investment. China’s entry into the WTO is a challenge to retool, drive economically and capture a chunk of the mammoth Chinese market.

Our administration has, likewise, addressed a whole rate of issues at APEC and the WTO with a view to ending the scourge of poverty. Even as we ended a new round of negotiations in the multilateral trading system, Secretary Mar Roxas represented the Philippines, and spoke for the Philippines in deepening the discussion and lead in the call to enhance the development dimensions of trade. And as we traverse the economic capitals of the world, as to the cabinet to MOA out our policies and directions , as we work with our local governments to bring action to the grassroots, and as we stand with the legislature, the judiciary, the private sector in this summit, we have maintained our clear focus and our solidarity.

The pre-summit consultations drew forth the brightest ideas, the best practices , and the most workable proposals from all sectors. I am hopeful that this will further revive our enterprises, expand employment opportunities for our people, and attract investments to our economy. Our action agenda touches on the crucial aspects of our national life — not on all aspects — or the crucial aspects. We all recognize that the quality of governance, the stability of institutions and the credibility of leaders are all indispensable to our robust economic performance. And therefore, let me say once again, to you, to our people, to the world, I commit to maintaining the integrity of leadership. Because the integrity of our leadership has won international recognition of the seriousness with which we are trying to put our house in order. I am therefore, hopeful that this meeting of the best minds and most patriotic hearts will combine and multiply our efforts to liberate our people from poverty and violence and build a better future for our children.

I listened to the remarks of the honorable Mendoza representing the labor sector. We are gratified by the coming together of all sectors whose concerns we have all worked hard to address — even the difficult ones.

On the always contentious wage issue, we have strived to maintain the balance between giving workers a fair and decent recompense for their sweat, and ensuring the survival of employers in the face of the economic slump. And I thank mainstream and moderate labor for helping us in this regard. This process is necessarily subject to periodic review to fine tune the balance and reserve the social harmony necessary for the economic advancement of all. And I hope that organized labor, especially the mainstream organized labor, the moderate organized labor, the organized labor that seeks to have better terms for the workers rather than seeking the overthrow of our society, will always be with us in this endeavor.

We have also accommodated the broad spectrum of group subsumed under the rubric of civil society. While some of the basic sectors may have been inadvertently excluded — and I acknowledge the observations of Ms. Esmao in a number of sub panels. — their views have certainly shaped the key documents of this summit. We acknowledge the key role that boosting the domestic economy has played in our continued economic expansion. We pledge to continue the debate on development strategies and paradigms. And most important, I hope, to the basic sectors, the central goal of this summit and its action agenda is to protect our people, especially the poor, from the adverse impact in the face of the global economic crisis.

The poor, are the root of this meeting. Let us all come together because we want, within a decade, that the poor will no longer be poor. Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the National Socio-Economic Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212025/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8769&Itemid=38