Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Upon her visit to China

[ Delivered at Sichuan Province, Peoples ‘ Republic of China, June 6, 2007 ]

What RP can do for China

China is the fastest growing developing country in the world, also the most populous. China has unleashed the human potential of your vast citizenry by effective use of technology, science and engineering.

Your remarkable rise reflects the promise and challenge of the world in which we live. We see your dramatic growth lifting millions out of poverty and shaping the nation squarely onto the world stage as a new global power.

From the Philippine point of view, we welcome the surge in economic growth and development as a healthy development for our nation. The internal market demand and domestic consumption of China has a direct and positive impact on the Philippines in terms of job creation and balance of trade. Because of your consumption and your market demand, growth in Asia is transitioning from being export driven to domestically driven. And we hope it continues.

As China becomes a true political and economic giant, your obligations to your neighbors also increase, separate from your obligations to your own citizens. China has an important and strategic role to play in the economic development and security situation of the Asian region. We are hopeful that China will continue to pursue your foreign policy based on maintaining world peace and promoting common development. We also look towards China to lead in promoting good neighborly relations and regional cooperation.

In the Philippines, as I said, we benefit from the growth of China. China is now one of our top three trading partners. Our relationship with China is among the most important ties of our country. It can only lift up our nation as it lifts up other nations, too.

Major landmarks of our relations include the Philippines-China comprehensive economic cooperation partnership framework, also the Northrail from Manila to my home province of Pampanga, the national broadband network projects in the Philippines, and continued regular exchanges of high-level visits between our two countries. We are happy with China financing our Northrail and our national broadband network because transport and communication infrastructure development is crucial to our economic development plan for our nation.

So today, we have high-powered Filipino businessmen joining us because here in Chengdu, Filipino businessmen have joined the others in appreciating what Chengdu has to offer. Shoemart, the icon of Philippine retailing, has opened an 80 million-dollar mall in Chengdu, its third mall in China. One of our leading banks, Metro Bank, is hopefully establishing a presence in Chengdu, also the third in China. And Oishi, represented here by one of our special envoy, Mr. Carlos Chan is also contemplating an investment here in Chengdu.

But we all are here, the businessmen of the Philippines and the officials of the Philippines, to cooperate in various aspects — trade, investment, tourism and people-to-people exchanges.

We welcome the signing of the sister-province agreement between Sichuan and Cebu, which is one of our main tourist destinations in the Philippines.

Last year, one thousand tourists from Chengdu visited the Philippines. We invite more tourists from Chengdu. As an archipelago with beautiful beaches, the Philippines presents an attractive destination to the people of landlocked Chengdu and Sichuan, particularly during the summer and winter months. And we look forward to the day when Sichuan and Chengdu will substantially raise the level of investments in the Philippines.

The Philippines could help enhance the competitiveness of Chinese inland industries by doing procurement and pre-processing of the low value-to-weight product components in the Philippines. The Philippines could provide logistics services to Chengdu in terms of forwarding networks and procedures, supply chain services, and even local warehousing. It is especially positioned to be a supplier of logistics services to China because of its strategic position in ASEAN; because of its high-value skilled labor well-versed in international logistics, because of its existing economic zones, because of its ready supply of raw materials and intermediate products especially semi­conductors, agricultural products and mineral resources. In fact, the Philippines is already a major semi-conductor supplier to China.

And so to push the bilateral economic and trade relations to a higher stage, we hope that both the Philippines and Chengdu and Sichuan should push to further deepen existing cooperation between our two economies. We envision a day when the businessmen from Chengdu, when the Sichuanese and the Filipinos are trading more with each other, investing more in each other, and visiting each other more.

We’re committed to consolidating our gains in new revenue, as I said earlier, by making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure. This includes billions of pesos in education, health care and training — and we thank China for participating in our distance-learning project — along with billions in new bridges, roads and ports to upgrade the competitiveness of the Philippines. And we thank China for participating in these infrastructure projects.

Because of these investments and our strategic location, your companies from Chengdu will also become more competitive if you do business in the Philippines. By investing in one another, trading with one another, and visiting one another, we show that we have confidence in a shared future together.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library