Thank you, Congressman Acosta, thank you.

Mr. Abacan, Mr. Sans, members of the board of judges, General Abaya and other officers of the Armed Forces, our awardees, honored guests, ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, I thank the Metrobank Foundation and the Rotary Club of Makati Metro. I thank them for joining together to cite our outstanding Filipino soldiers. Awardees, I thank you, too, because you reinforce the people’s faith and confidence in our soldiery, especially after the failed Oakwood mutiny.

In this light, I would like to reiterate my instructions to the Chief of Staff that, henceforth, all privileges granted to the men and women of the Armed Forces, such as housing or educational opportunities shall be prioritized for those who exemplify excellence and valor in combat operations.

If a soldier gets a medal for gallantry in action, he or she will automatically be placed on the priority list to avail of housing, educational opportunities, and other privileges regardless of unit, rank or connections. The Outstanding Filipino Soldier awardees of Metrobank and Makati metro are lucky because their award brings with it a hundred thousand pesos. Outside of this kind of award other medals go with nothing except the medal itself. Yes, we have Medals of Valor. Only ten of them have gotten a Medal of Valor so far in the history of our Armed Forces and that’s the only one that brings with it a financial reward because of a bill passed into law by the present Congress — the present or the last Congress? — the last Congress but under the administration of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. The privates, the enlisted personnel can get a financial reward in the sense that they can be promoted, but the officer corps cannot be promoted automatically because the law circumscribes the number of officers within the Armed Forces. Therefore, the only way by which we can tie up something material with the honor of the medal is to give this kind of priority to them.

I gave this instruction to General Abaya because I cannot bear to see those who bear the brunt of the fighting being left behind when it comes to the benefits of the command. And it is our policy to reward the best and the bravest of our fighters with whatever our resources can offer.

The greater the valor, the more the rewards.

Having said this, I salute you once again, awardees for your loyalty to the flag.

Now, we must set aside the Oakwood syndrome and get on with matters that require earnest vigilance, especially the ever-constant threat of terrorism. I call on the public to erase and stop spreading rumors and speculations contained in text messages about false troop movements and armor deployments. Let’s keep our eyes and ears focused on terrorist threats, for these are ever present.

The executive’s willingness to help Congress in their inquiry regarding Oakwood should not be doubted. They simply need more consultation to ensure the safety and security of the officials scheduled to testify. There is no need to prolong this into another propaganda game. This is a matter of safeguarding lives and national security.

The State of Rebellion is not a political sword of Damocles. No political party or group operating within the ambit of the Constitution has been threatened or prejudiced by it. Court processes prevail, the media has free rein. Any of my actions may be challenged before the Supreme Court, to which I commit obedience. Nonetheless, the threat has abated, and though I was not scheduled to speak in this program, I decided to speak in order to announce that I’m hereby lifting the State of Rebellion.

And now that the State of Rebellion has been lifted, even as we speak, in camp Aguinaldo, General Rodolfo Garcia, our Vice Chief of Staff, is ready upon this signal to declassify the Coup Plot Andres except for the proper names of those who have not yet been arrested.

The peace talks with the MILF will continue under our policy of pursuing a just, comprehensive and durable settlement of the Mindanao conflict, consonant with constitutional standards.

The recapture of Al-Ghozi is vital to the cause of fighting transnational terrorism. He’s been identified with foreign terrorist cells training in Mindanao that must be neutralized at all costs to preempt their movement across borders. We issue a strong warning to any armed groups in the area that are aiding or coddling Al-Ghozi that they will definitely suffer the direst consequences. We look forward to the cooperation of the MILF in the manhunt under its commitments to the peace process. We have launched highly focused operations yesterday in Sultan Naga Dimaporo, Lanao Del Norte and today in Kabuntalan, Maguindanao solely targeted at Al-Ghozi and his group and have no desire to widen the arena of engagement beyond what is necessary. Forces within the purview of the peace talks must stand aside and allow legitimate enforcement and pursuit operations to proceed unhampered.

Here, in the midst of all this, to those who received these awards this afternoon, congratulations. You are praised by the Armed Forces and the entire nation. May you remain examples of courage, resilience, and loyalty of Filipino soldiers.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Conferment Ceremonies of MetroBank Foundations, Inc. Search for the Outstanding Philippine Soldiers (TOPS) 2003. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194743/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6516&Itemid=38