Thank you very much, Secretary Cruz.

President Ramos and the other former chiefs-of-staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; the newly-designated chief-of-staff, General Esperon; the immediate past chief-of-staff, General Senga; Speaker de Venecia and the other members of Congress; Senator Dick Gordon; governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Zaldy Ampatuan; the governors of the Philippines led by the president of ULAP and the Governors’ League, Governor Aumentado; the officers and men and women of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

General Yano to commander: give ‘Tikas Pahinga.’

Salamat. Hayaan ninyo magsimula ako sa pasasalamat: “To our men and women in the Armed Forces who are willing to give their life in defense of our nation, salamat. Whether it is fighting communist forces bent on destruction or the rightist allies or rebuilding Mindanao, our service in the cause of peace and stability deserves our deepest gratitude.”

Our military men and women are essential to upholding the constitution and the rule of law that are so important to democracy. You have once again shown your appreciation for our peace, democracy, and the constitution when you apprehended the soldiers in Fairview who planned to sow terror in order to establish an illegal government, thank you very much.

Kay General Senga who has not only upheld the loyalty and professionalism of the Filipino soldier but has shown that military justice works in an organization led by the great martial principles and values, courage, audacity, integrity, professionalism and decisiveness, maraming salamat.

I give General Senga credit for containing then neutralizing and finally demolishing the infamous February coup. Maraming salamat, General Senga.

Democracy thrives in strong leadership. That is what you got from your outgoing chief-of-staff and that is what you will continue to get from your commander-in-chief and your new chief-of-staff.

That is why I appreciate the decision of the Supreme Court on the national I.D. in line with its consistent service to the highest public interest. This paves the way for the full implementation of the national I.D. system which is a strategic linchpin of both national security and social justice. it will help us to secure our communities from terror and crime and at the same time, facilitate the delivery of basic services to the people.

The Philippines stands to gain from a national I.D system in terms of political stability, economic growth and global competitiveness. This is part of every modern nation in a modern world. We acknowledge the issues that are being raised regarding the system and we shall ensure that it carries all the safeguards to protect the rights of every citizen under the law.

I call on all Filipinos to stand as one behind the national I.D. system.

Within the armed forces, we will revive the office handling civil military operations, as has already been mentioned by your new chief-of-staff. And he said there will be a new division in the Davao area. But we will go beyond that, we will divide the southern command into two unified commands for more effective troop management and control.

General Senga recommended these reforms and I approved them without second thought.

Thus, today, we thank General Senga and welcome General Jun Esperon.

Jun is the first commander who grew up in the PSG, who rose to the post of AFP chief-of-staff. He was the deputy PSG commander of President Ramos and he was my PSG commander. And I believe that President Ramos will join me in attesting that his only partisan interest is the people. His grit and audacity are legend.

If we had Angie Reyes as the hero of Abubakar. If we had Roy Cimatu as the hero of Camp Busra. If we had Gene Senga as the hero of Buliok. We have Jun Esperon as the hero of Rajah Mudah.

And he shall wield the sword of military justice with an even hand and dispassionate command. He shall steer the Philippine defense reform agenda forward and across the sea of multiple challenges and constraints. He shall steep the armed forces in globalized doctrine even as they dog tail their mission with socioeconomic aspirations of the masses. With Jun at the helm, as he has committed, we shall destroy the armed capability of the CPP-NPA, remove their logistics bases and dismantle their support networks.

Military civilian inter-operability is the name of the game to wield the comprehensive weapons of fighting and governance to constrict terrorist, strike them down, liberate communities from the crutches of fear, bringing to bear the economic psychosocial, political and diplomatic components of strategic victory.

Those who cling to the failed ideology and impose their political will by force shall be met with counterforce. Our forces are true to the mission.

And so, as I preside over this turnover once again, may I say, General Senga, thank you for your faithful service to the armed forces and to the republic.

General Esperon, carry on.

Long live you all!

Maraming salamat.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Change of Command Ceremony of the Office of the Chief of Staff Armed Forces of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412212353/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2820&Itemid=38