Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin D’Honneur

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, January 20, 2009]

His Excellency, the Papal Nuncio; other members of the Diplomatic Corps; Vice-President De Castro; Senate President and Ambassador Enrile; Speaker and Mrs. Nograles; Secretary and Mrs. Romulo and other officials of the Philippine government; members of the Diplomatic Corps who are our main guests today; ladies and gentlemen.

Happy New Year to all of you!

2008 was a year for the history books. The global financial turmoil spread and jeopardized the well-being of billions of people across the globe. It was a crisis year for two-thirds of the world.

In the Philippines, we avoided the full brunt of the economic downturn. We kept our sights set on navigating the treacherous waters. We kept the crisis at bay — thanks to the fiscal, economic and structural reforms we implemented in the past — even while it was unpopular to do so.

As an economist, I also know that things can turn quickly. That is why we are planning for better days — even as we are developing contingency plans if things get worse. We have worked fervently — even before the crisis took root — to cushion the blow to our people.

We took the rice issue head on and wrestled it to the ground. We ensured supply for the foreseeable future and put in place a targeted distribution system to get subsidized rice to those who qualify for it. We stepped up enforcement to stop unscrupulous government and commercial interests from benefiting from the plight of the poor.

In addition to the food challenge, in 2008, we revitalized our agricultural modernization program and target self-sufficiency in rice within five years. We also strove for greater energy independence through intensified oil exploration and the greater use of geothermal, biofuel and renewable energy. We are nearing 100 percent self-sufficiency in using indigenous sources for electric power generation.

Moving forward: we are not complacent. An Economic Resiliency Plan in the amount of 300 billion pesos is in the offing to pump-prime the economy. The Plan aims to upgrade infrastructure, expand social protection and ensure sustainable growth in the midst of the global economic crisis.

We are upbeat that our sound economic management and our measures will see us through the tough global times. Nine out of ten Filipinos look forward with hope to the new year. The international financial community shares our confidence. Fitch underscored that our economy remains “reasonably healthy.” Credit Suisse announced that Philippine macroeconomic risk is lowest. Standard and Poor’s compared our country to an island of relative calm amid the stormy seas of global economic uncertainty. The Bank of New York Mellon said, “The Philippines is inherently strong, a potential beneficiary of these financial woes.” JP Morgan agreed, and I quote, “The Philippines is in a relatively strong position to weather the global downturn with the economy driven by private consumption and services, which are less vulnerable to external shocks.”

I assumed the Presidency in 2001 with no budget to spare. Our coffers were in the negative — I’d like to greet President Ramos, Happy New Year, Sir! — Because of our financial reforms and sound fiscal management since 2001, our economy has posted uninterrupted growth over 36 quarters — growth that has brought down the rate of poverty; growth that has brought up average annual new employment; growth that has supported seven million microentrepreneurs — and banker Chuching Tambunting told me that things are doing well for the SMEs — and revenue enhancement measures; growth and revenue enhancement measures that have given us 100 billion pesos more in financial resources each year.

Thus, we have been able to build the most roads, from highways to farm-to-market roads; the most ports, from modern airports to the RORO system spanning Mindanao to Luzon; the most barangays electrified; the most classrooms; three salary increases for teachers; the most scholarships by far for high school, college, and post-graduate degrees in science and engineering; billions of pesos for training — not just millions as in the past; the most land for our indigenous peoples; and decent homes for our workers at six percent interest — the lowest rate ever.

With the revenues from the expanded value-added tax and alcohol and tobacco excise tax, we have been able to expand access to healthcare as never before. Health insurance now covers 74 percent of the population, public hospitals are being upgraded, and the poor can buy their essential medicines at half the price of year 2000. Our social services now include a 10 billion-peso budget for targeted cash payments to the poorest of the poor, conditioned on their children going to school.

Likewise, local governments can avail of 40 percent of this new revenue as additional Internal Revenue Allotment.

Our efforts at maintaining a strong and growing economy always have one fundamental operating principle. We put the highest priority on eradicating poverty and ensuring that safety nets are in place for the most vulnerable.

New legislation — thanks to Congress — grants income tax exemption to annual earnings of as high as 150,000 pesos, a bonanza for wage earners and salaried workers. New legislation has also allowed Pag-Ibig, GSIS and SSS members to avail of longer loan terms and condoned penalties on delinquent loans. For our farmers, we have raised the buying price of palay from P11 to P17 per kilo and increased the volume purchased from 30,000 to a million metric tons.

We have new industries like BPO, a sunrise sector that will continue to boom as global cost-cutting is transformed into outsourcing and offshoring. Our increased budget for science and technology research and development is beginning to generate exportable products with high income potential when things get better for the world.

So far, overseas employment remains stable and strong. We are doing what we can to address the needs of those who have been displaced, but by no means has this become a crisis.

In 2001, I inherited a state of all-out war in Mindanao. Since then we made steady progress towards permanent peace until the setback of August 2008. I hope 2009 will be a comeback year for peace, progress and prosperity in Mindanao. The new government panel on the peace process is headed by Ambassador Rafael Seguis, who is familiar to most of you.

The panel has been directed to touch base with our facilitators and the MILF leaders to schedule the resumption of peace talks. The panel is poised and ready to embark on substantive discussions, including ceasefire-related issues, the International Monitoring Team, and accelerated development for Mindanao. We hope all parties are as committed as we are to resume negotiations soon.

Our new paradigm for peace includes interfaith dialogue, authentic consultation with communities, and the principle of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration for armed rebel groups.

To advance peace and progress in Mindanao, as in the past, we hope to be able to count on the support of our partners in the International Monitoring Team — Brunei, Japan and Libya — Malaysia who has been an ardent facilitator, our other friends in the OIC, in Europe, and the U.S.

The obligation and commitment of our government goes well beyond economic, security and global challenges. A civilized, democratic nation must also be vigilant in strengthening democracy and advancing human and civil rights.

Human dignity starts with alleviating poverty and it relies upon the sacred obligation of government to preserve, protect and defend the freedom of every Filipino to participate fully in society and politics without fear.

We are one of the vibrant democracies in our part of the world. Our commitment to human rights remains paramount even in the midst of active insurgencies and other threats to national security. Based on Task Force “Usig” data, there has been a marked decline in politically-motivated killings as a result of intensified government efforts in partnership with the community. In 2008, the number of cases dropped 90 percent compared to 2006.

Last year, the U.N. Human Rights Council conducted its periodic review of the situation here. The President of the Council lauded the Philippines as “outstanding” in our transparent, consultative and comprehensive report. The Council appreciated that our government frankly acknowledged the challenges, as well as outlined the steps it is taking, to address such areas as activist killings and the protection of women and children.

The positive review has not lulled us into complacency. There will be no let up in our campaign against human rights violations, including violence against women and children, human trafficking, abuses on Filipino workers abroad, and the killing of political activists and members of the media.

Finally, I would be remiss not to mention the installation of a new American President on the eve of his inauguration in Washington.

America plays a special role in the life and history of the Philippines. Our ties run deep. Over two and a half million Americans are of Filipino descent. We fought side by side with America in World War II and in virtually every other conflict since.

In my conversations with Senator Barack Obama before the elections, and President-elect Obama after his election, it was made clear that the special relationship between the U.S. and the Philippines will continue unabated. We look forward to working with the new President and we welcome him to the world stage.

Closer to home, the economy will be the central focus of our government, and advancing the peace process in Mindanao my personal commitment in 2009. I am cautiously optimistic about the new year, the way I heard many bankers say it in yesterday’s Central Bank reception.

I prefer to look to a brighter future for the Philippines, and indeed for the entire world. So please, join Atty. Arroyo and myself in a toast for more success in 2009.

Let us hope that this year finds all of us living in peace, prosperity and harmony.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s speech during the Vin D’Honneur. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412105713/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=18681&Itemid=38