Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Ronnie, for your kind introduction of me.

Congressman Villafuerte, president of KAMPI; chair of KAMPI, Tingting Cojuangco; Sec. Gen. of KAMPI, Ding Tanjuatco; our senators — Angara of the Philippines because of Ed Angara, but let's plant Pichay in the Senate, Butch Pichay, and ‘Tol Mike Defensor.

To all of you, various officials and members of KAMPI, it is very important and meaningful that you are holding this convention, this first day of the campaign for our national candidate.

On this first day of the national elections, I thank Louie Villafuerte for his message that you are here to rally behind our agenda of nation-building. And I also expect that, since today is the start of the campaign for senator, you are also here to express that you are rallying behind each and every one of our candidates for senator.

I mentioned Angara, as I said, Angara with his nine-point program that is closely linked and similar to our entire Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. I mentioned ‘Tol, Mike Defensor, the future of our housing and land. I mentioned the vegetable of our lives, Butch Pichay, who will work to promote the natural resources of Mindanao, our country's food basket.

The other candidates are still at the Comelec, filing their Certificate of Candidacy. They are Tessie Aquino-Oreta, the champion of our education. There is also the anti-abuse advocate, Joker Arroyo. I mentioned ‘Tol, Mike Defensor. One who will champion the strength of our local governments, Magsaysay is our guy, Vic Magsaysay. And another representative of our future, the future of the Visayas, our tourism center, the current governor of Leyte, Jericho Petilla. I mentioned Pichay. Another governor, who will also fight for the rights of our local governments and our farmers in the north, as they call him, Chavit Singson. And the original of KAMPI who fights for the health of the youth and ensures they are protected from the threat of drugs, Senator Tito Sotto. I think I saw, someone I want you all to get to know, our representative of the Muslims, the Sultan of Sulu, Jamalul Kiram. You should put Senator Sulu on the certificate, Sulu because you represent the oldest sultanate in the entire Philippines. And if we are here and talking about the beauty of our economy because Ralph Recto's reforms are correct. And in the future, the champion of our independence, with the very expensive gasoline and energy now but he gives us the answer to that, our bio-fuels champion, as they say “Boom-tarararat! boom-tarat-tarat! Zubiri! Zubiri! Boom! Boom! Boom!”

In their hands, in your hands, I have great confidence in the future of the country and in the well-being of the people. Our national aspiration or national agenda aims to advance the country towards greater political stability, ease and security.

The national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices, bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single Filipino. Our national agenda is pro-poor, pro-growth and pro-modernization. We have moved the nation forward on the strength of our partnership with barangay leaders, mayors, provincial governors who form the backbone of our government.

I trust the local officials to work with me, with us to continue on the path to reform, social justice and economic development. Our local leaders form the centerpiece of Philippine democracy. Our local leaders are on the frontline of change.

We are pouring our efforts into building a modern nation that one day will be among the developed countries of the world. Our dream is that a time will come when Filipinos will want to live and work here in the Philippines, close to family and friends, owning a home and having a comfortable life.

We hope for the day when enough good jobs are created in the Philippines so the hardworking Filipinos don’t have to go abroad to work. We see a day when going abroad for a job is a career choice, not the only option for work.

We have made difficult but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. These painful steps are bearing fruit — we now have funds to use for job creation, new streets, bridges, ports, additional funds for education and healthcare.

For the first time in a very long time, the government is doing what the ordinary Filipino household is doing — balancing the budget and without borrowing. This is good news for the country, especially for our youth who can expect that their government is providing for their future, not borrowing and borrowing to leave them with debt as was done in the past.

Through strong international agreements, we have created new relationships that have brought in billions in investment. A record in the entire history of our country, more than two billion dollars in foreign investment happened in 2006. And these investments that came in during the last six years of our administration helped create five million new jobs. And we have strengthened our military and security agreements in the region and around the world. This has delivered great benefits towards peace in Mindanao, the isolation and pursuit of known terrorists, and the reduction of violent crime.

Our neighborhoods, barangays and nation are more secure, more peaceful and more stable as a result of our administration’s leadership. But there is much to do if the nation is to work toward a more just, modern and prosperous nation.

And I am hopeful that with your support the May elections are about the future, not the past. The election should be about new ideas, not old complaints. And it should be about fighting for a stronger nation, not just about fighting. On my part, I will focus on the national agenda that includes more jobs, stable prices and peace and order. I will leave the politicking to the candidates whom we must all support especially our senatorial candidates.

Meanwhile, through all the noise of the political campaign, we will work to expand education and health care. We will take action to develop a green Philippines agenda to improve our environment and beautify our communities. And we will do so by working with our local and provincial leaders to see that the benefits of the new economy are spread to every corner of the Philippines and not just here in Metro Manila.

As I said earlier, I believe in the Philippines and its hardworking people. And with your support I will work hard until my term ends in 2010 to make economic prosperity, social justice, and peace and security a reality for a new modernizing Philippines.

So here, at the KAMPI convention, on this first day of the campaign for our senators, my request is that we all cooperate, all the parties in our coalition towards our success, the success of our country.

Long live! Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st National Convention of Kabalikat ng Malayang Pilipino (KAMPI) Party. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151643/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1928&Itemid=38