Thank you very much to Dr. Cordero, the president of the Philippine Nurses Association.

I would also like to greet Commissioner Antoinette Ibe of the Professional Regulation Commission; Dr. Yu-mei Chao, Vice President, International Council of Nurses, who looks like a Ffilipina — look at her; si Don Emilio Yap ang ating host; Ms. Linell Malimbag, the Chairperson of the Philippine Nurses Association; Marilyn Yap, the Overall Chairperson of the convention; Mrs. Ruth Padilla, the Vice President of the Philippine Nurses Association; other officers and members of the nursing profession; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: good noon to all of you.

My fellow Capampangan nurses, good day to you all. To my fellow provincemates of Ruth and my fellow provincemates, good evening to all of you. To our nurses from Mindanao, good afternoon to all of you. To the nurses who are relatives of my Ilonggo husband, good afternoon to all of you.

To all of you, I give my congratulations. Congratulations to the Philippine Nurses Association because your association is 80 years old, the 80th founding anniversary of your association and the observance of the Nurses Week in our country.

I’m happy to be here because my mother, the late Dr. Evangelina Macaraeg-Macapagal, was once an honorary president of your association. As president, of course, for me it’s hard to be honorary president of anything but it has been a pleasure and pride for me to have worked with nurses throughout my own professional career — perhaps some of them are here with us today. I have worked with nurses in community service especially in times of calamity in my work in social welfare.

And having worked with you, I have witnessed your compassion, your courage, your patriotism, your civic spirit in quiet acts of selfless service and heroism.

Indeed, heroism is what we need most today as our nation undergoes the trials of fighting terrorism, poverty and corruption. There are those who continue to try to push us back, to inflict fear in us, to paralyze our efforts through terrorism and corruption, which are both most inhuman deeds, but we shall not be cowed.

People of less temper would cower at the call of duty, but not the nurses. And dramatically, symbolically not one nurse that we know, the one who offered her life for the sake of the welfare of others. We have a symbol of nursing courage at its greatest. Who among us would ever forget the modern day heroism. We don’t have to talk about Florence Nightingale anymore, we have our own Eediborah Pamaran Yap.

Even in the darkest depths of adversity, Ediborah stuck to her professional oath. She is our model of devotion not just to her profession but of humankind. Gracia Burnham told us and her children many stories of how she was a true nurse and heroine for all seasons.

Indeed, the heroism of a nurse in a war-torn province has become a defining point of what it truly is to be of service to others.

It also defines terrorism as a universal fight and not the challenge of a single profession or a single nation or a single region. The tragedies of Bali and Zamboanga once again show that terrorism knows no boundaries. We must work together to fight terrorism. We cannot sit back and wait, we must take this fight to the terrorists before they undermine our very way of living.

We understand the challenge terrorism poses for all people that value peace and order. And certainly, nurses enter the profession because you value peace and care for one another. And for my part, from the moment I took office, I declared war on terrorism in the Philippines. Because I have inherited the terrorism especially from the Abu Sayyaf. A few of my opponents have criticized my decision, but I have to tell you: I make no apologies for aggressively seeking to root out terrorism in the Philippines and to putting considerable effort into seeking regional consensus on fighting terrorism.

These terrorists have proven once again that they are not guided by moral or religious conviction. They are nothing more than murderers of innocent people driven by an ideology of mayhem. We have experienced this mindless violence in the Philippines for sometime. Your nurses have experienced this violence. Ediborah is the one who made the greatest sacrifice among them. But there are many other nurses who continue to labor under the threat from terrorist. The only antidote is to have no fear and to crush their efforts.

The story of Ediborah Yap defines the nursing profession as the kind of profession where greatness beckons every hour. Greatness is not only there in her spectacular story. It is in the story of every nurse who leaves her family to work abroad, to secure a home and a future for them. Greatness is for the nurse who stays with her family to work here, to serve her countrymen in the most isolated far-flung places.

The exodus of nurses is an economic issue. Skilled nurses are being offered far higher salaries and benefit in other countries. While it is good for individual nurses, this quantum leap in the world demand for nurses puts a strain on nursing education and on the nursing profession in the Philippines. Thus, we must seek a balanced strategy of professional development and deployment.

As a result of the continuing dialogue with the nursing sector, reforms are moving forward.

And today, Ii am pleased to let you know that i have signed into law the Nursing Act of 2002. As you very well know, because you have been working with the government, with Congress and the Senate for this bill, the Nursing Act of 2002 makes the nursing profession more responsive to the ever-changing health needs of our country and the whole world.

I must, of course, thank both houses of congress for their leadership in this cause. I would like to make special mention of Senator Juan Flavier, the sponsor in the Senate and the author in the house, the husband of Ruth Padilla. also the committee sponsor in the house, Congressman Eladio Jala.

The Nursing Act emphasizes the expansion of the nurses’ role to include comprehensive specialty programs, it establishes a minimum base pay for nurses working in government and abroad; it expands the board of nursing membership and enhancement of their functions.

We welcome your efforts to promote your sectoral interests through the democratic process. You were the ones who pushed for this law. Congratulations to all of you.

By enhancing the functions of the board of nursing, the nursing act enhances the professionalism of your calling. The nursing license according to the law identifies you as a true professional and one of good moral character.

I am thinking of another kind of identification system. I wish we could have an effective system that will identify not only the professionals and those of good moral character but also identify the wrongdoers in government especially those involved in anomalies, and be able to prosecute them and send them to jail.

For example, there’s the alleged scandal at the Philippine Estates Authority or PEA particularly the allegations of overpricing in the construction of the 8-lane boulevard in the reclaimed area in Pasay City.

I read that the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee released a decision the day before yesterday that this contract supposedly went through the proper process, but the total cost of the road construction here in the reclamation area is still considered high.

That is why I am still not content. I still wish to go to the bottom of the controversy, determine the truth, identify the wrongdoers, if any, clear the innocent and possibly revamp the pea for being embroiled in many scandals.

In order to clean up this mess and regain the trust of the public in the PEA and other institutions and government itself:

First, I am ordering the state probers investigating the pea anomaly to speed up the pace of work, unmask the guilty parties, and submit a final report at the earliest possible time;

Second, as you know I have ordered the pea board to go on leave, and I am appointing an interim board of directors. I am ordering the interim board, the top officials and employees of the PEA to cooperate fully with the investigation and conduct a parallel inquiry into the road construction at the reclamation area;

Third, Ii have ordered the board to make its work fully transparent and above suspicion;

And fourth, I hereby suspend all pending and planned projects of the PEA, especially those requiring public bidding, until the investigation of the alleged overpricing of the road at the reclamation area shall have been completed;

Fifth, if there are members of the regular board of directors — the ones who are on leave — if there are any of them who wish to submit their resignations, I shall be pleased to accept their resignation without prejudice to the prosecution if recommended by the Department of Justice or the Senate Blue Ribbon Committee.

Therefore, I expect that these steps will help resolve the controversy involving the pea, some members of the pea board of directors and other officials of the Philippine Estates Authority.

I expect that all departments and offices that I have instructed and tasked to help in this case will act quickly and properly to punish the guilty and clear the names of the innocent.

I share these national concerns with you even though they are not specific to the nursing profession because I support broader political participation by our nurses. I urge you to consider fielding a candidate for sectoral representation in Congress, along with the others from the allied medical professions. There should be no limit to constructive political involvement by any group in our society.

Nurses of the Philippines, the nation needs you, it needs you to take care of the sick. It needs you to prevent having people get sick. But it also needs you to be concerned for its overall well being. The nation needs you to be involved in the schools, in the clinics but also in the community. Let us be allies not only in curing people, not only in preventing sickness but in uplifting people’s lives and in fighting poverty, terrorism and corruption.

On this note, let me express once more my deep appreciation for this opportunity to be with you, the professionals, among professionals. I hope we will always be partners for a strong republic.

Long live Filipino nurses!

Thank you and may God bless us all.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 80th Foundation Anniversary and 45th Nurses Week Annual Convention of the Philippine Nurses Association, Inc. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210829/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8410&Itemid=38