Thank you, Secretary Romulo.

Members of the Cabinet; Secretary Reyes; Secretary Alingod; Secretary Gonzales; General Abaya; the major service commanders; the J staff; the Medal of Balor awardees, and I will give their names again: Colonel Arturo Ortiz; Colonel Ariel Querubin; Major Estrella; Major Parcon; Major Sobejana; Major Bacarro; Captain Fajimolin; Lieutenant Dilag; Master Sergeant Granfil; Master Sergeant Cuenca; Master Sergeant Curig; Technical Sergeant Rubi; Colonel Escano of the Meralco Foundation; Tony Abaya who put this together; Francis Colayco of the hero foundation; Mr. Garcia; friends and supporters of the AFP; honored guests; ladies and gentlemen:

As Mr. Colayco said, this is a month of heroes — Quezon, Ninoy, the Pugad Lawin heroes — and now, today, we recognize the living heroes, the 13 living recipients of the medal of valor, the highest award that may be given to a Filipino soldier.

It is the heroism and sacrifices of the soldiers epitomized by our medalists of valor that drives our will to give the best we can to the protectors of the people, the will to reform the Armed Forces, the will to bring the benefits of the command down to the fighters in the field.

It is their bravery that inspires the government to be ready to act on the legitimate grievances of our soldiers, and to serve their rightful needs without being asked. And it is in recognition of their heroism that I must remind the rest not to be misled or deceived by wanton adventurism.

In this light, the truth is finally coming out that many of the officers and soldiers implicated in the Oakwood incident were, indeed, misled and deceived, intimidated or threatened by their superior officers to join the plot, or were implicated but did not commit any overt acts contrary to law.

I want these officers and soldiers to be speedily exculpated and released.

As a start, I am ordering the immediate release of officers of the Philippine Navy and the Philippine Army who have submitted evidence and counter-affidavits proving that they were not involved in, and in fact refused to join the power grab. Upon recommendation of the judge advocate general, the chief of staff approved the dropping of charges against these specific officers an hour ago. They may immediately report for duty.

For the rest, I have ordered the authorities to file the case in court forthwith so that the accused will have the opportunity to face the witnesses and the evidence. We will not engage in character assassination in the media. We will not speculate on evidence but we will deliver this at once at the doorstep of judicial scrutiny. Charges will be filed automatically and immediately when there is a suspected violation of the law. The court is the only proper forum to deal with these matters.

The senate is waiting for Senator Honasan. He has been elected by his supporters for greater responsibilities other than to play hide and seek. The work on his desk is piling up. His claim to innocence will not be helped by infantile games and excuses.

We will sift through the evidence judiciously. Due process and justice will be served. The innocent, as those that I referred to earlier, shall be spared and the truth will triumph. I ask the soldiers, I ask the officers of the AFP for their continuing forbearance and faith in the fairness of the commander in chief.

It is my administration’s policy, not only to punish the guilty, but especially to reward the best and the bravest to the limits that our resources can offer.

Thus, two years ago, two months after I became president, on March 22nd 2001, I signed a law increasing the financial benefits of the country’s Medal of Valor awardees or their dependents from 200 pesos to 20,000 pesos a month. The law also provided for other benefits.

And accordingly, I am directing all departments and agencies to ensure that the awardees or their dependents are given priority in jobs they apply for in any government agency provided they are qualified and meet the job requirements.

I’m asking Secretary Reyes, secretary of national defense, to transmit this instruction to all the departments.

I’m also asking him to transmit to the land bank and to the GSIS my instructions to ensure that if our medal of valor awardees should apply for loans up to half a million pesos, their papers should be processed immediately.

I am also asking Secretary Reyes to convey to the Commission on Higher Education that it should instruct the state colleges and universities that the Medal of Valor awardees and their dependents need not pay tuition fees should they decide to enroll in any of our state universities and colleges. I am also asking Secretary Reyes to convey to the department of education that it should likewise inform all public schools about school fee free privileges for our Medal of Valor awardees or their dependents.

And as Commander in Chief of all the Armed Forces, I am instructing the board of generals that the Medal of Valor accord the medalists the first priority in promotions.

I ask Secretary Reyes also to convey to the Health Secretary that he should inform all government hospitals that our 13 awardees and their dependents must be extended free medical and dental services. I thank Mr. Garcia for what he has said that the private sector is willing to do. And in particular, I also appreciate the initiative of the private sector to negotiate discounts for medicines for our awardees as well as the other initiatives that he mentioned to extend assistance to them.

Speaking of hospitals, I have also asked Secretary Reyes, and now I am also conveying this to the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, General Abaya, that in areas where there is armed conflict, the Armed Forces of the Philippines must assign a medical doctor to the regional hospital in those areas so that our soldiers need not wait for that absent helicopter to bring them to the nearest military hospital.

And to direct the DND and the DOH that there should be a Memorandum of Aagreement that when our soldiers who are wounded in battle are treated in these hospitals or even the dependents of our medalists of valor, it will be the Armed Forces who will pay for the medicines that will be used by the Department of Health.

I am moved by the plight of our heroes — and I am sure all of us are moved by them — our heroes who bear the brunt of battle to defend, in the words of major Sobejana, “our people’s peace.”

These 13 medalists of valor and the soldiers they epitomize are our inspiration for increasing the basic pay of our military men under republic act 9166 which I signed last year, making the soldier’s salary equal to that of the policeman and the teacher.

These medalists of valor and the soldiers they epitomize are our inspiration for instituting reforms in the procurement processes of the Armed Forces.

These medalists and the soldiers they represent are our inspiration for proclaiming lands where some 75,000 soldiers may avail of affordable homes. Related to this, I am instructing the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces and the flag officer in command of the navy to convert the navy golf course into a housing project for navy officers and enlisted personnel.

Nations are known by the heroes they choose and celebrate. And this month, we celebrate several of them: August 19, Manuel Quezon, who led the diplomatic fight for our independence from the United States; August 21, the 20th Death Anniversary of Ninoy Aquino, whose martyrdom sparked a peaceful revolution that dismantled a dictatorship; August 23rd, Pugad Lawin reminding us of the other heroes of our revolution; and today, the living heroes — the 13 living awardees of the Medal of Valor.

All these show and remind the world that we are a nation of heroes. From our revolutionary forebears to those who fought the diplomatic struggles for our independence, to the modern day martyr who proclaimed to the world that the Filipino is worth dying for, that the 13 living heroes who demonstrated with their actions that they consider the Filipino worth dying for. These are the heroes that we celebrate this month of heroes. And today, we honor the living 13. And as we honor the living 13, we praise the Lord that we have great Filipino heroes.

Thank you very much to our Medal of Valor awardees.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Presentation Ceremonies of Living Medal of Valor Awardees. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194614/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=6507&Itemid=38