Thank you very much, Secretary Mendoza for your introduction.

I asked Secretary Mendoza to be my Cabinet member in attendance for my trip here because in the vision that Congressman Rod Valencia presented, I can see that the most important role of the government is to provide the transportation infrastructure to make this vision come true. And that’s why Secretary Mendoza is here to help me make that commitment.

Congressman Valencia, thank you and congratulations for your very beautiful presentation of Mindoro 20-20. And I would also like to thank Governor Panaligan for your very kind words of welcome and expression of support and, indeed, what you have said about Mindoro Oriental, your province, is something that we can all see even from Metro Manila, congratulations!

Governor Nene Sato, thank you also for bringing your officials from Mindoro Occidental here and for your solidarity with the idea of an island development plan. And indeed, I think, Mindoro Occidental will have much to benefit from being an integral part together with oriental of one economy, the economy of Mindoro island.

Thank you also to our host mayor, Mayor Brucal and all of the different mayors of the province of Mindoro. Thank you, Mayor Ananas, for showing me your booth and the beautiful infrastructure projects you’ve been able to put there — your port, your important bridge and, again, the important thing is access.

Secretary Mendoza may be Secretary of Transportation but that’s not only sea transportation, because Mindoro is as Congressman Valencia and Governor Panaligan said, because Mindoro Oriental is a key bridge or a key link in the Strong Republic Nautical Highway, Larry Mendoza is here, not just to make sure that the sea lanes are open but also that the nautical highway is always there and functioning very efficiently.

This is a gathering that’s crucial to Mindoro Oriental, important to Mindoro Occidental as well as to the whole Republic of the Philippines. This gathering is a boost for economic activity. And I would like to thank our investor friends for being here. In fact, I would like to thank even KEPCO who is not here. We have still a few things to work out on the requirements, but way back from the time when the president of Korea came to make his state visit here in the Philippines, KEPCO’s investment in the submarine cable was also something we were already talking about.

And though the other investors are here, if I may say something about KEPCO, because their proposed investment is the biggest investment — 50 million dollars. I’d like to say that KEPCO has been such a strong investor in the Philippine economy. Their investment in Batangas is over a billion dollars worth. Their investment in Cebu is about 200 million dollars worth. Their investment in Quezon is about a hundred million dollars worth. Those are not prospective investments, that’s money down already. Not only money down, already operating, especially the one in Batangas.

And it suits their own corporate plans to have that submarine cable come to Mindoro, because their plant in Batangas is over a thousand megawatts. It’s one of the biggest power plants in our country. Maybe even the biggest. And it suits their corporate plans to have a cable here to Mindoro so that they can provide in the short run, your power needs from their power plant in Batangas. It suits their long-term plans because when you develop your own power generation sector here in Mindoro then they can also participate when we have already the open access and the liberalization of power. Then power can be bought here from Batangas, sold from here to Batangas. Indeed, it really makes Mindoro Oriental a very, very integral part of the industrialization of CALABARZON.

And that’s why if I may, I have been talking to the officials of Mindoro that maybe you should become a part of Region IV-A again. I’m not talking about the whole MIMAROPA, I’m only talking about Mindoro. Because you are so close to CALABARZON. With the nautical highway and with the power, with the power lines, I believe that it will be to the interest of Mindoro to be an integral part of that very bustling economic area there in CALABARZON. For example, you are the rice basket really of CALABARZON, because there’s already Iloilo selling to the rest of the Visayas and so your main market is CALABARZON.

And now that Batangas port is the focal point of CALABARZON industrialization, the Calabarzon firms are increasingly shipping out their products through Batangas port and no longer through Manila port. Well, Batangas port because of the RO-RO system is just as close to Mindoro as, maybe Lubang, just as close to Calapan.

So, when you have your power here, whether it’s bought from Bataan or whether it’s generated here, I think when you have power self-sufficiency or even power surplus, the next stage is that you are going to be very, very attractive to the setting up of industries right here in Mindoro Oriental.

And as Arnan Panaligan said and both Rod Valencia and Arnan said, one of the attractions of Mindoro is that you have political stability within the province. Our investor friends are sending us an important message. What they’re saying is: ‘stop the politics which is getting in the way of development.” And I am glad that Mindoro has already answered that call even before the investors made that call.

Our administration, which the officials of Mindoro have been so supportive of, has been on a path to reform. And the markets have given us a big boost of confidence in the actions we’ve taken to date — Rod knows this, he is a very experienced businessman — the stock market, the peso-dollar exchange rate, the interest rate, the benign inflation. And as Rod said, the development of the real estate sector and the housing sector. Rod says that he’s not seen an administration that is so friendly to housing, as far as policies are concerned, than this administration.

So, I’m glad that two of the seven investors that Rod introduced to us today, are indeed going to invest in real estate development here in Mindoro. And real estate development for residential and commercial development is something that really must go hand in hand with industrialization. And again, I make a call that Mindoro should be part of CALABARZON.

Why am I saying this? Why am I saying this? As Rod said, I had a hand in the drawing up of CALABARZON as an area development plan. When I was undersecretary of Trade and Industry, at that time, President Aquino formed the Cord System, the cabinet officer for regional development. And she put the Department of Trade and Industry as in-charge of Region IV. That’s why our department put together what is now called CALABARZON.

We started first with CALABA — Cavite, Laguna, Batangas — because these are the very, very obvious hubs for industrialization. They were not yet what they are now, but what they are now is the result of that planning.

And then Rizal asked to be part of it. So it became CALABAR.

We had to go back to the Japanese government for that, because it was the Japanese government that helped us do the master plan for CALABA. And then we had to have additional negotiations to make it part of CALABAR. And then Quezon wanted to join. So, we had to go back again to the Japanese government to add Quezon to the master planning and that one took about a year for them to approve the inclusion of Quezon and it became CALABARZON.

And so Region IV got divided into, economically speaking, to CALABARZON and the rest, which meant these islands and Aurora in the north. So, all the development of Region IV was happening in what became CALABARZON. Actually, the truth to tell, in the original three, the CALABA — Cavite, Laguna and Batangas. But there is some spill over in Quezon and some spill over in Rizal, because of the master planning of CALABARZON.

So, later on, when I became senator, because the other islands were being forgotten, the concept of MIMAROPA came about for planning.

And when I became president, I said, the MIMAROPA islands are becoming a second class citizen of Region IV; so with Aurora. So, I decided to make Aurora a part of Region III. And I dare say, it’s become more progressive now because the regional officers from San Fernando have an easier time going to find out the needs of Aurora than when they were coming from Batangas. They used to tell me when they were in Batangas or wherever was the headquarters because there are so many different regional centers of Region IV. They would tell me, “why didn’t you go, why didn’t you go this last month or so to Aurora?” because they said that for everyday that they have to spend in Aurora, the travel to and from there, they have more services to give if they go straight to the MIMAROPA islands because the travel is nearer.

So when I became president, I was the one who made the decision in consultation with the MIMAROPA governments that I should separate MIMAROPA and make a Region IV-B. So it was I who made that executive order hoping that MIMAROPA would have its own planning, not be a second class citizen of CALABARZON. But years after, well, I can look years after at CALABARZON, we started the planning when Mai and I were in the Department of Trade and Industry. Years after, what we envisioned became true. And not many years after, almost immediately after, just a few years after, two years after. For instance — Mai, remember? — one of our first projects was to revive the EPZA — then EPZA. Which when we started the planning of CALABARZON was only three factories. In fact, one factory was even just in the administration building. Two years later, there were a hundred factories.

So, when a plan is good, you can see a lot of effects almost immediately. But in the case of MIMAROPA, looking at it now– several years after I made that decision — what I’m seeing, sad to say is that, because you are planning among yourselves and the idea is to trade among yourselves, one integrated economy among yourselves, the poverty is just being… You are just reinforcing one another’s poverty.

So to me the ideal is, that Romblon should be part of Region VI so that they can benefit from the development of Boracay. So with Palawan, because it is a tourism island, that’s the main attraction of Palawan. But as far as Mindoro is concerned, you are only an hour away from Batangas port, and the factories of CALABARZON are contributing to put landing lights in Lipa so that they will ship in and ship out their airfreighted products in Lipa. And with your RO-RO ferry, just how far away is Lipa from Calapan city? So that’s the reason why, I dare say — I don’t speak for the other islands of MIMAROPA — but I dare say, that I think Mindoro Oriental is destined for industrialization and should be a part of CALABARZON.

This is the first time I say it in public, so it’s something for you to chew on. meanwhile, the world is watching and viewing our political system and wondering if we have the will to succeed. Uy! There’s Congressman Umali. Please join us.

We need a sweeping reform of our politics and governance — that’s what Governor Panaligan said in his speech — if we want to break into first world status in 20 years. In fact, Rod talked about his plan of 2020, that’s 14 years from now. Really, that is a plan that will have its end state just on the eve of when we should already become first world, if we are able to get our acts together. And I thank Arnan for what he was saying about charter change. We’re on the right side of history in working with the people to take back government.

Mindoro Oriental is a microcosm of the Philippines.

In energy, your goal is to eventually provide the people of Oriental Mindoro with an efficient and affordable source of power and electricity, whether it will come from Batangas, coming here because the cable makes it cheaper, or whether it’s coming right from Mindoro oriental itself.

On my part, I also want to continue to privatize our energy sector. And I’m very happy that the investors that Rod Valencia introduced plus KEPCO are all private sector investors in the power sector, including the submarine cable. Because, usually, the transmission has been done by NAPOCOR. But this time, NAPOCOR is not going to be part of the transmission. It will be the private sector through KEPCO.

And then, of course, in tourism, your objective is to reaffirm the status of Oriental Mindoro as the 9th tourism destination of the Philippines. Why 9th? Well, look at the competition. You’re talking of course Metro Manila, which includes Tagaytay. You are talking of Cebu-Bohol, where one million tourists went last year, out of the 2.6 million tourists. You’re talking Boracay, where 700 thousand tourists went last year: 300 thousand foreigners and 400 thousand Filipinos. Of the 400,000 Filipinos were all practically passing through Mindoro Oriental, incidentally. So, why not make them stop here longer?

You are talking Palawan, especially Northern Palawan, where we had about a 100,000 tourists who went there last year in Northern Palawan. And many more want to go but they need new resort. It’s the capacity of the rooms that is stopping the tourists, more tourists from going there.

Then you have Davao, that’s the most popular tourist destination in Mindanao. And then you have Clark-Subic, and then you have the rice terraces, and then you have Laoag, which is quite popular with the Chinese. So those are the top eight so far. And I think, you can situate yourselves. What do you have to offer either taking advantage of those who are going there already like Boracay or what do you have to offer, compared to others like — that are farther away from the center and you are nearer the center — like Davao, rice terraces, Laoag, Clark-Subic.

And indeed, you have beautiful destinations. Puerto Galera is already very, very famous. It’s about as famous as Boracay and Cebu and Donsol and Pagudpud. But going through your booths today, I saw so many others. Imagine, I didn’t know that Bulalakaw could have beaches that can give Boracay a run for its money.

And somehow, these well-kept secrets need not be so well-kept anymore, mainly because your province is now part of the nautical highway. In fact, it is the busiest part of the nautical highway in our country. Your province being a part of the nautical highway, I believe, is your key, your bridge to your being the 9th tourist destination. And I am very proud to say that this nautical highway was established during my administration.

But as you say, agriculture is still the backbone of this province. And I think, it should continue to be even if you become part of CALABARZON again and even in 2020. Because we must never, never run out of rice in our country, and you are the rice granary, at least, of CALABARZON.

How can we wed your rice production with industrialization? Well, first, there’s productivity. As Nene Sato says, this island is number one in hybrid rice productivity. So for every given hectare, you must produce more rice, because probably the lands along the nautical highway will very soon become industrial, commercial and residential.

And then, second, I’m pretty sure there is still land that can be developed especially in the upland areas. I think this summit is important as you intend to make agriculture a centerpiece investment area towards reaffirming your province as the food basket of Region IV.

We want to develop two million hectares of land for agri-business nationwide, and part of this is upland agriculture. I have just asked Arty Yap, who is my Presidential Adviser on Job Creation, to orchestrate D.A, DENR and DAR towards developing upland agriculture. And you have plenty of uplands. So, I’m sure that you can industrialize without reducing your agricultural production and that you will still continue to be the food basket of Region IV.

The transport of goods and passengers to and from this province has been eased, as I said, with the Batangas port. And I want you to use Batangas port not only as the road towards your market in Region IV, but as your port to the rest of the world. It is just as easy, as I said earlier, to export out of Batangas port from Mindoro as it is, let us say from Cavite or from San Juan, Batangas — Larry Mendoza’s hometown. And now that we are going to have Lipa as an airport for cargo, then it will also be just as easy for you to export the products that have to be airfreighted.

And so, I’m glad that you’re talking about your vision. I come from a macro-economic vision of the whole country. And what we’d like you to be in the year 2020. So, I’d like to share with you also our thoughts on this looking at it from the national point of view and I can see that there are many points of convergence that we could work together in order to make it a reality.

This summit you consider a turning point towards realizing your vision for the development of Mindoro by the year 2020. We, also, at the national level, are as determined to attain our vision of a modern Philippines becoming a first world nation in 20 years. So, we have our own long-term visions. I think there is plenty of room for us to wed these visions and do what has to be done in the next several years in order to make those visions a reality.

I will welcome the day when we all stand side by side, all shades of the political spectrum and share the victory podium of economic reform together.

So, let’s use this summit to call on everyone to be together in moving the nation forward, rather than jamming the gears of the nation into reverse. We have tackled economic reform, and it is working; we are tackling economic reform, and it will work; and with the help of you, the people, we will tackle constitutional reform, and it will work and it will make our nation stronger economically.

The people want a government that brings better service to them on a local basis. I congratulate our local government officials of Mindoro, because the people seem to feel your good service to them on a local basis. That’s why we should bring more power to the provinces, more accountability by the politicians and less power concentrated in Manila.

To all of you, here at the Mindoro investment summit, congratulations! Let’s fight poverty, but more than that, let us bring Mindoro and the Philippines into the modern world of the 21st century.

Many thanks. Congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Oriental Mindoro Investment Summit (ORMINVEST). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412214214/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2442&Itemid=38