Thank you very much, Secretary Lapus, for your introduction of me and for your explanation of what we are doing and why it is about the pre-school curriculum.

Thank you very much as well, Governor Lazaro, for your welcome remarks and don't worry, you are not late, we arrived early. Because our event was at 10 o’clock, it wasn’t even 10 o’clock yet, we were all early. We just arrived at 9:20, because SLEX is now very spacious because we fixed it, right?

Thank you very much as well, Mayor Chipeco, for your welcome remarks and congratulations to Calamba for being not only the birthplace of Dr. Jose Rizal, but also the home of many industrial estates and now the center of the entire CALABARZON. Congratulations!

Thank you very much as well for attending, Congressman Dan Fernandez, who apologized when he arrived for being late. You are not late, we are just very early.

And I want to greet my fellow cabinet members. I won’t greet them because we are together, I will just mention them so you can get to know them better. You already know them, Secretary Jing Lapus already spoke, our Secretary of Education. Secretary Jun Icban, our new Press Secretary, is also here. Secretary Tessie Aquino-Oreta, who is the Chair of the Early Childhood Development Council because she is also the author of the Early Childhood Development Law, is also here. And assisting me because there are so many agencies managing education: there’s DepEd, there’s CHED, there’s TESDA, there’s the Regulatory Commission, and there’s also DSWD because of the five-year olds, with Presidential Assistant Mona Valisno of Education.

We are here because we are continuing our hands-on governance until the last moment of our presidency. And for that, we are implementing the thorough initiatives that our government started or did since we took office. Our focus is on three paths:

First, to bring more power and growth to each region so that everything is no longer concentrated in Metro Manila. That’s why we have a tour now in the Urban Luzon Beltway and I said that Calamba is one of the key areas. Oh, let me greet former Mayor Lulu Lajara.

Second, to implement the importance of our 3 Es: Education, Economy, Environment, to create sustainable and equitable development.

And thirdly, the continued recognition of the youth of our country as our greatest hope for a more vibrant and better Philippines.

The foundation of opportunity is education. It is the key to a better life, it opens minds and opens doors. So it is very… that's why it is so big, a very large investment we have made in education.

Before our administration, the budget of state colleges and universities, DepEd, CHED and TESDA — was 19 billion pesos. Now, it is more than 180 billion pesos, we doubled it.

We built one hundred thousand classrooms. Congratulations to Governor Lazaro, he contributed 1,600 classrooms to what we built.

We added 60,000 teachers and increased salaries, right? The former 9,000 pesos for Teacher I, is now P14,000 plus. And we allocated more than 2 billion pesos including the budget for 2010, which I just signed, for teacher training especially in English.

The most difficult of the Millennium Development Goals is what they call universal primary education. They say, no country can achieve this except perhaps Cuba, a dictatorship that is a small country but we are still striving for it. The steps we are taking, one million of the poorest families, are given an allowance on the condition that their children go to school. That is what we call Pantawid Pamilya.

Have I greeted Celia Yangco yet? Did I mention you? Okay. Our DSWD Secretary. I remember because the DSWD runs Pantawid Pamilya.

And to encourage more to enroll, I told Secretary Lapus, let's remove the miscellaneous fees in public primary school, and wearing a uniform is no longer mandatory. If the uniform is cheaper, okay, wear a uniform; if a T-shirt is cheaper, wear a T-shirt. So I am surprised, why are they all wearing uniforms in Day Care, it's not necessary. Because you might use that as a reason for children not to attend.

We built schools, as I said earlier, right? 100,000. This includes classrooms in over a thousand barangays that previously had no schools.

I have a story for you. Once, I was in Barangay Villa Maria in the Zambales mountains. I inaugurated a classroom built by soldiers. There, I met an Aeta, 16 years old, named Joann. Sixteen years old but still in grade 5. Because when she was a little girl, there was no school in their barangay so her parents didn't let her go to school. She started when she was a little older because I learned from her that she and others like her stayed with relatives in Barangay Villa Maria where I was. Because if they couldn't stay with relatives, they would walk two or three hours every day to get to school, passing through rice paddies and mountains.

They bring ten kilos of rice, vegetables and whatever they can give to the relatives they are staying with — Sunday to Friday. When I learned Joann's story, I told her, you will also have a school. Six months later, because I said, we have built 100,000 classrooms — you were probably with me Jing when we went to Barangay Diaz — those 100,000 classrooms. A child approached me with tears in their eyes. It was Joann, the one I met in Barangay Villa Maria, she was very happy because she now had a classroom almost next to her house, she was from Barangay Diaz. I was also a little teary-eyed because it was a series of meetings with Joann, as I was leaving, she ran after me, carrying a sack of bananas as her thank you, she said she picked these, the best fruits to give to me because now the younger children in Barangay Diaz, will no longer have to wait until they are 10, 11 years old before going to school. They can study because according to the Millennium Development Goals, you are counted as primary school if you are 6 years old, you should be in grade 1. If you are 11 years old and in grade 1, you are not counted in universal primary education.

So that's what we're doing and as Secretary Lapus said, one reason why we send our children to school, pre-school, is because when a child is in pre-school, they have a greater chance of finishing their education. But we are not only teaching in public schools, in private high school, almost half of the students have a government scholarship. And even in college, including masters and doctorate degrees in engineering and science, we have scholarships for over 600,000 scholars.

In technical education and skills training, we have invested 36 billion pesos, this is as much as the last three administrations — all of them combined.

As a result of our investment, national achievement test scores have increased. In the past, in grade school, the average was 44% Jing; now it has risen to 65%. In the past, in high school, 36% rose to 47%. Better than before but still needs to be improved.

We have made a lot of progress in some areas but there is still a lot to do. That's why we have a Presidential Task Force on Education. Leading this is Father Bienvenido Nebres, president of Ateneo. Together they have built a framework called the Main Education Highway which aims to provide our children with seamless quality education from pre-school to college or tech-voc and guide them to courses where they will have jobs.

That's why it is important that we mainstream Early Childhood Development in Basic Education. Because our children, they are our most cherished possessions. In the early years of their lives, we need to ensure that they have a healthy start in life. They should have the right food for a healthy body, the right education for a right and inquiring mind, and equal opportunities for meaningful work.

So I signed EO 685 in 2008 to comply with RA 8980, which was the law of Tessie Aquino-Oreta providing for early childhood care. In this EO, I said that while we are expanding pre-school throughout the country, the day cares – because there are different ages – the 5 year-olds in day care should be given a pre-school curriculum so that when they enter grade 1, they already know… we discussed it earlier, 5 plus 3 equals 8. Our 5 year-olds should already know that so that when they enter school, they won’t drop out.

The Task Force for college said that not everything is suitable for college. They might just drop out afterwards. So they said there should be a mandatory scholastic achievement test, and the task force also said that private and state colleges should have the same curriculum and standards, and CHED should supervise even local universities and colleges.

And for professions that require international recognition such as engineering, architecture, accountancy, pharmacy, physical therapy – they said there should be ten years of basic education and two years before university before entering university.

Everything our government is doing is to ensure a brighter future for the next generation of Filipinos.

Our youth are our hope and inspiration. Everything we do should be to build a better life for every child in this country.

We want to see a brighter future for the hardworking people of this country. And it is important that we see that we have an interest in the children now, that they will come into their own, seize the value of education and use this tool to advance themselves and the nation.

So to everyone who is helping to ensure a good start to education, everyone who is helping with pre-school, everyone who is helping day cares, so that 5 year-olds have a pre-school curriculum. Thank you very much and let us continue this good work.

Thank you all very much.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Education Event: Introduction of expanded pre-school coverage to include children enrolled in Daycare Centers (E.O. 685). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232706/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27506&Itemid=38