Thank you very much.

Maraming salamat, Ambassador Albert del Rosario.

And to all of you a warm Aloha!

We’re all very happy to be here with you. Our delegation are here with us tonight and I’d like to introduce them to you: we have Press Secretary Ignacio Bunye. He used to be Congressman and City Mayor of Muntinlupa; head of the Presidential Management Staff, Silvestre Afable; and of course, you have met Ambassador del Rosario and you have met Consul General Rolando Gregorio.

Tonight, I am with my spouse, Atty. Jose Miguel Arroyo.

And may I greet our other guests here from the government and the spiritual leadership of Hawaii. Our honoree whom we have conferred the highest award the Philippine government can give, Governor Ben Cayetano and his lovely first lady, Vicky; we must also greet our champion in the U.S. Senate, Senator Dan Inouye; also a member of the house of representatives so-called Philippine caucus made up of the friends of the Filipino people in the U.S. Congress, Congressman Neil Abeilcrombe; the man who sends us all those marines and seabees in our Balikatan exercises, Admiral Thomas Fargo and Mrs. Fargo; thank you also Mayor Jeremy Harris for your very kind welcome in proclaiming this day as Gloria Arroyo day; I would also like to greet Lieutenant Governor Mazie Hirono; Mr. Nathan Oshima; the honorable state senators and congressmen of the State of Hawaii; our spiritual leader here, Bishop Francis de Lorenzo; and still very well known in the Philippines, the Honorable George Ariyosi, former Governor of Hawaii.

Every time you cry, you remind me of my mother who is an Ilocana from Pangasinan. Good evening to all of you. Thank you for starting the Philippine community in Hawaii way back in 1906.

My dear Kapampangan brothers and sisters, I deeply thank you for your support for our Kapampangan compatriots who were affected by Mount Pinatubo.

To my colleagues from Mindanao where I grew up, thank you very much for your city’s and generous projects in the areas of Mindanao.

And to the province-mates of my husband who are Ilonggos, thank you very much for your help in the Visayas.

To my Bicolano brothers and sisters, thank you for helping the unfortunate people in the Bicol Region.

And to all of you, thank you very much for your tireless help to those in need in our country.

Hawaii is very important to the Filipino people. It is also very important personally to my husband and myself because when we got married many, many years ago, we spent our honeymoon here in Hawaii. And this time, when I was scheduled to come here on the way to APEC and then the bombings occurred in Southeast Asia, I felt that I should cancel my trip as I understand President Putin has cancelled his trip because he has a hostage situation in Russia. I learned though that tonight’s affair was already sold out so, therefore, I would have disappointed you so much if I had not come. It was a great dilemma for me but the lord solved my dilemma because a few days after the bombing in Zamboanga we were able to catch the perpetrators of the bombing incident. And seeing you tonight oh! I would have never forgiven myself for not being able to be here with you to pay honor to you, to pay honor to our leader, the highest ranking Filipino in the United States, and through you to pay honor to all the Filipino-Americans here in the United States.

The Filipino-Americans constitute one-third of overseas Filipinos, but you contribute two-thirds of the foreign exchange remittances to the Philippines.

The Filipino-Americans represent the best in the Filipino. That’s why you are the most effective ambassadors of your mother country. Your contributions to American life are tremendous. And I am proud of all Filipino-Americans, whether well-known or anonymous. I am proud of the Ben Cayetanos, the George Garcias, the Loida Nicolases, but also equally proud of every Fil-Am who has made an investment in this nation and who seeks closer relations between the Philippines and the United States.

The Filipino worker has become a presence around the world because of your talent and industry. The Filipinos, for instance, are known as the “Musicians of Asia.” in fact, Ben Cayetano told me earlier that actually the first Filipinos in Hawaii were not the Sakadas of 1906. They were preceded by some Filipino musicians who played here in Hawaii. And today, we have an international star, Lea Salonga and a cast of Filipino talents, who are impressing audiences in Broadway for their superb performances. Lea is there starring in ‘Flower Drum Song’ in Broadway.

Here especially in Hawaii, let me pay tribute not only to the great outstanding well-known famous Filipinos like Ben Cayetano but also to the thousands of nameless but unforgotten Filipinos who first landed on these islands nearly a century ago.

Their story is one of hard work and perseverance, written in sweat and blood of the Sakadas from Ilocos, Cebu and other Philippine provinces. For you, I am sure it involved a great grandparent or forebear who left their rustic hometowns seeking a better life for their families.

For Ben, whom we honor tonight, it involved his own father who came here in 1928 to work in a sugar cane farm. This was long before the term “Overseas Filipino Worker” acquired any significance. Yet, the Filipinos of today, of Hawaii like many of today’s migrant workers in some other parts of the world, at that time, long time ago had to face miserable labor conditions, an unfamiliar environment, unfair treatment and homesickness. Thank goodness this is no longer true here today. On the contrary, the Filipino reigns supreme in Hawaii. But we must never forget the lessons of the past as we face today’s challenges.

Anywhere, our identity and dignity are important. And I am glad, as what the various speakers said tonight, that you continue to practice many of our customs and traditions that have found acceptance in Hawaii. These have been passed from one generation to the next, spreading to neighborhoods and communities, and reinforced by the succeeding waves of Filipino migration.

As has been said earlier today, too the year 2006 will mark the centennial of the arrival of the Filipinos in Hawaii. I am happy to learn that the house of representatives of the state approved the creation of the Filipino centennial celebration commission. This is an acknowledgement of the greatness of the Filipino community in Hawaii. We, in the Philippines also want even more to reciprocate your sacrifice and heroism.

When I was a senator, I had filed an overseas voting bill, but like many other overseas voting bills before me and even after me for a few years, my bill did not even progress beyond the committee level. So, when I became president, I certified as two of my five most urgent bills — one, the Overseas Voting Bill and two, the Dual Citizenship Bill.

And I’m happy that my efforts are bearing fruit. To make sure that I can announce something to you, the senate and the Congress sent me a message to send to you, the Absentee Voting Bill has passed both houses of the Philippine congress. Now, let us pray that the conflicting provisions of the house and senate versions can be ironed out so that the day they ironed it out and have it ratified in their respective chambers, within 24 hours I will sign it into law.

The Dual Citizenship bill has likewise passed third and final reading in the Senate.

Here in the United States, we are also working with the help of our champion senator and our member of the Philippine caucus in the house. We are working for the passage by the U.S. congress of improved benefits for Filipino World War the second veterans.

For many years, our friends in congress were filing these bills, but for many years various administrations were like the Absentee Voting Bill in the Philippines. Last year, when I visited president bush, I talked to him about it and he promised me last year a review of services and benefits for Filipino veterans. That review is now yielding results. There is legislation passed by the U.S. House of Representatives and being sponsored by Senator Inouye in the senate to expand benefit eligibility for health care, compensation and burial benefits for our Filipino veterans.

As I said earlier, the U.S. House of Representatives has passed this veterans health care procurement improvement act, which allows a package totalling 65 million dollars for improving health care of Filipino world war the second veterans living in the United States. And the Senator from Hawaii, Dan Inouye is the sponsor of the accompanying senate bill. Let’s wish him luck so that the bill can become a law.

Meanwhile, the bush administration is giving veterans assistance for the Philippines in the amount of 500,000 dollars per year, and the first payment of 500,000 dollars will be made during this month of October.

All these efforts are expressions of faith in the Filipinos who braved this land and who are remembered in the hearts of all Americans.

Indeed, the Philippines has been a partner of America in economic matters, in security matters. The Philippines is a member of the grand coalition against global terrorism and active in a regional effort to organize a special anti-terrorism program in the ASEAN community.as you know tomorrow, I will be on my way to Mexico to attend the 10th Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Leaders Summit in Los Cabos, Mexico.

I shall join twenty other leaders, including president bush, who are resolved to collectively reverse the lethargy in the global economy and perhaps build more concrete steps to world security and prosperity.

Now I am happy to be able to talk to you in detail for the first time since I was able to visit you as president of our country. I was invited to the inauguration of the Philippine Community Center in June. But on Independence Day, I needed to be in the Philippines. But when I saw it earlier, “Wow! It’s beautiful. The biggest in all of America, maybe even in the whole world. And as beautiful as the most beautiful country clubhouse in a golf club in the Philippines.”

A year and a half ago, as you remember, i inherited an economy with four million jobless Filipinos and a forty percent poverty incidence.

After a year and a half into the presidency, I have come to realize that for our country to overcome such tremendous odds, we must build a strong republic.

In my state of the nation address last July, I highlighted two essential features that mark out a strong republic:

The first is that the republic must stand for the interest of the people rather than of a powerful minority. A strong republic empowers the poor, feeds the hungry, protects the weak and oppressed, shelters the homeless, and shields those in the midst of peril. Hence, a strong republic takes care of its people and their future;

The second feature of a strong republic is the capacity, represented through strong institutions and a strong bureaucracy, to execute good policy and deliver essential services — the things that only governments can do. Good policies and empowered institutions speed up economic development and enable social reform.

Upon these twin cornerstones, we are building a structure of shared ethical values, a firm consensus to serve the common interest and a common vision of our national future.

Our main goal is to win the battle against poverty within the decade. And we must also seek permanent national stability. Our efforts are beginning to bear some fruit. Despite the desperate resort to hit and run bombings, domestic terrorists, particularly the Abu Sayyaf, on the run. And I heard the prayer about kidnapping, we have crushed at least five kidnap-for-ransom gangs. And the Philippine Chinese community itself has said that all is quiet on the Binondo front.

Inflation is at a 12-year low, driven down by stable food prices and declining power costs. Interest rates are at their lowest in 15 years.

International credit rating agencies upgraded us last year, last January from unstable to stable.

This is not painting a bright and rosy picture. This is the truth despite what the media sometimes report. Because figures tell us the story not perception. The regional GDP growth figure show that the Philippines is the best performing economy in Southeast Asia and even if we include the whole Asia like China the Philippines is the third best performing economy in Asia.

Our fight against poverty is substantiated by our being able to provide stable prices, 14 to 16 pesos now since I started my administration of rice for the poor. And it is also bolstered by the fact that more than 150,000 urban poor families now can buy the land that they are occupying. Schools are being built in barangays where there used to be none, some of them through your contributions. And health insurance is now available for more than 3 million destitute Filipinos. These achievements were attained only during the last year and half of my administration. But no president can build a strong republic single-handedly. My role as president is to serve as chief architect, to see to it that our plans and blueprints are carried out on time and correctly.

But I can do this well only if i can count on the support of the more than 2 million Filipino-Americans, including the more 200,000 or so Filipinos who are living here in Hawaii.

As you got together to build the Philippine Community Center, as you got together to put this lovely banquet tonight, let us get together ‘Bayanihan’ style, each contributing a meaningful embellishment to the plan of national greatness and prosperity.

Thank you, Filipinos in Hawaii for continuing to be Filipinos.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Dinner with the Filipino-American Community of Hawaii. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210730/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8405&Itemid=38