Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the e-APEC Module of the CEO Summit

[Delivered at the 2nd floor, Dalian Hall, Shanri-la Hotel, Shanghai, China, October 20, 2001]

Thank you very much Ambassador Romulo. Honorable Mujie Chuan; Mr. Levin; Honorable Ernesto Derves; Mr. Williams; members of the Philippine delegation; all of the friends from all over the APEC countries:

Good afternoon.

It is an honor to be with you today to discuss the challenges that we all face in adjusting to the fast-evolving new economy. All APEC economies are asking themselves: how can we position ourselves to most effectively participate in this new electronic era? It is an era where, increasingly, the economic dividends we reap are sown in the ground of the emerging global digital economy. It is an era where knowledge is supplanting commodities as the measure of wealth. It is an era where to pause or to prevaricate risks being left behind.

We in the ASEAN region recognize that information and communication technology or ICT — particularly the internet and electronic commerce — hold the key to economic prosperity and development across the board. Their critical role in adding value to traditional industries cannot be ignored. And it is especially critical at this time as we face significant economic security challenges.

Our longstanding companies and our small and medium enterprises must be online to compete in the global marketplace. Our rural entrepreneurs and our urban businesses must be online. We cannot leave any sector out. From agriculture to energy, from health to financial services, we need to integrate e-commerce and e-business technologies to streamline operations, access the global marketplace, and increase productivity and efficiency. The web of cross-sectoral networks that is the foundation of the new economy reaches everywhere, affects everything and will only become more extensive as this decade progresses.

Another important component of the new economy is our ability to deliver public services more efficiently: education, health care, agricultural extension services, environmental management, and knowledge about government. Access is the key to development. Through improving access we can empower our people and make them part of the governance process.

Developing economies have a long way to go before internet technologies become a truly integral part of our economic activity. The reasons are obvious. There is a lack of basic infrastructure in some places, there is a major skills deficit in other places, there is a lack of confidence in the regulatory framework that only a clear set of enforceable rules will improve. The challenge is getting widespread acceptance too by business and consumers of this new method of doing business.

ASEAN leaders have created an e-ASEAN initiative, which culminated in the signing of a framework agreement on e-commerce development. The strategy calls for a focus on three core cross-cutting areas:

One, enhancing our information infrastructure; two, creating a policy and regulatory environment that is supportive of the new economy; and, three, developing our human capital — all key objectives of e-APEC. The goal is to create, for ICT goods and services, a seamless market — now numbering half a billion people and with a combined GDP equal to china’s. The hope is that this will spur our own entrepreneurs, together with international investors, to expand their stakes in the region and make us a very significant player in the new economy.

What we are doing in ASEAN is similar to what is happening under the e-APEC umbrella where the key tenets are: strengthening markets and creating the right policy environment for e-technologies to flourish; and, developing the human capacity to harness the technologies and turn them to productive use.

The Philippines has been prominent in the regional ICT policy debate for some time. We jointly spearheaded e-ASEAN and our private sector took the role of co-chair of the ABAC Technology Task Force. This level of regional engagement will continue. And my goal is that, in the future, the Philippines will be prominent in global ICT policy debates as well.

My administration understands that it must act realistically and strategically. In the past our nation lagged behind some of our neighbors in harnessing the potential of ICT to drive development and growth. To rectify this, and to foster a digital culture that maximizes the benefits of ICT, we initially concentrate our efforts in three areas that are not coincidentally in line with the e-ASEAN goals.

The first area is the building of physical infrastructure. We are working to speed up building the telecommunications and network infrastructure. Interconnectivity is a must at no cost and I will be supporting wider public access to a minimum set of communications and information services through the establishment of operational telecenters and through the provision of broadband services in cities and identified growth hub areas.

The second area is ensuring an appropriate policy and legal environment. It is not the role of government to determine technological outcomes — that is the role of the market. Our role indeed will be to provide the environment to create the growth of ICT.

The new economy requires a paradigm shift in the way governments and private sectors operate and interact. To that end, I created a cabinet level group, the Information Technology and e-Commerce Council, to lead our ICT policy formulation and implementation. It also harmonizes and coordinates all public ICT initiatives and attends to cross-cutting issues that cannot be handled by a specific government agency. I served as the Chairman and Bobby Romulo and Mar Roxas serve as my Co-chairs — one for the private sector and one for the government sector. Following the council’s recommendation, I asked our Congress to enact laws to address internet privacy and security, allow for multimedia convergence, and create a Department of Communications and Information Technology. To be successful, the ICT sector must be driven by the private sector with minimal government intervention and regulation.

Finally, the third area development is the development of human capital to close the digital divide. The Asian computer directory notes that the Philippines is the second highest among Asian countries in the number of training facilities for computer programming and other computer-related courses.

A range of strategies is being employed to build on this advantage. We are working diligently to increase the training of ICT professionals and ICT-enable workers. We have an excellent basis on which to develop these skills. Sometime ago, way back last November 1998 President Fidel Ramos signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Oracle to launch Oracle’s academic initiative in the Philippines as the first overseas extension of this hitherto American-based I.T. Professional initiative.

We are already seeing returns. High-tech companies have made significant investments in the Clark economic area — for instance, A.O.L. has a major call center there, bringing high wage jobs into the community.

Yesterday Bill Gates and I witnessed the signing of Memoranda of Understanding between Microsoft and Philippine entities on the Philippine government portal, the Microsoft-Clark Development Center, and to explore the development of e-learning in the Philippines.

I would like to share with you three ideas regarding ways in which we can start to close the digital divide especially through the work of the private sector. My thoughts stem from the belief that the technologies that have created the digital divide are also the tools for bridging it. That far from being charities, they present real opportunities for business.

First, the business sector can help provide cheaper access to basic internet applications like e-mail and web browsing. Investments in computers tend to be burdensome to lower income groups and even to governments. Access to communications networks is also a big handicap. The business sector can help by developing new and lower cost products that provide these basic applications and that use alternative means of connecting to the net — for example, television and radio or simple internet appliances. Wireless communication is also becoming more affordable and easily deployed. This is what I plan to do to bring learning to the distant Barangays in our country.

Second, the business sector can help develop local content. Providing relevant content will motivate individuals or local government units to invest in access to the internet and it will increase the value of the benefits that they would derive from it. Businesses will profit because they will be able to tap a significant portion of the population who may not be engaged otherwise.

Third, business can assist small enterprises to get online and participate in global e-commerce. Here the problem is less of affordability but more of ability. We need to lower the cost of procurement as well as the servicing of orders from retailers. Let us not lose the sight of the fact that some of these small enterprises may well be potential customers in the future.

We share the same goal of making the dividends from ICT applications and e-commerce in particular, available to all. Now we must recognize that our individual and collective new economy policy challenges can only be overcome if our public and private sectors work together at the domestic, regional and global level. As we do so, let us make this new era of unprecedented technological development one of unprecedented international cooperation.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2001). PGMA’s Speech during the e-APEC Module of the CEO Summit. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409212642/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8750&Itemid=38