His Excellency, Dr. Jacques Diouf, United Nations Fao Director General; other officials of the United Nations who are here today; Secretary Romulo; Secretary Lorenzo; other colleagues in government; Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps; colleagues at work: in the D.A., attached agencies, DFA, U.N. Manila Office and attached agencies, ladies and gentlemen:

I accept this honor, which is the woman’s equivalent of the Nobel Prize or the Oscar awards for food and agriculture. I accept it with great pride as well as with deep humility.

I am humbled as well to be in the company of such luminaries who previously received this award like the late Mother Teresa, Queen Sirikit of Thailand, Prime Minister Helen Clark of New Zealand, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of Bangladesh, and Prime Minister Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka, among others.

And I have asked Dr. Diouf — because this is an award I am receiving for the sake of the Filipino farmers who provide food on the table, for the sake of our government workers who helped the farmers provide food on the table — I have asked him to deliver… Permission to deliver a large part of my acceptance speech in our own native language.

I accept this award on behalf of the countless partners who care to ensure that there is food on every table.

In my short presidency, I fought for change, together with you, to ensure the aspiration of the ordinary Filipino to have food on his table. The government is now spending twenty billion pesos each year for the modernization of agriculture. This includes the unprecedented expansion of irrigation. What I inherited was one million hectares with irrigation. Through the construction of new projects, completion of pending projects, and rehabilitation of systems needing rehabilitation, we have added half a million hectares with irrigation. This is just a down payment. If I am given the opportunity to serve a full term as president, we can irrigate the remaining half a million hectares in the next six years.

We also brought to the farmers a new rice hybrid they call Gloria rice. This is a result of our good foreign policy. When I made a state visit to China in November 2001, because the Chinese officials knew that I was one of those who established the Association for Philippines-China understanding back in the 1970s even before we had diplomatic relations with China, one of the help given by Premier Zhu Ronghi was sharing with us their trade secret on rice hybrid. We tried it on thirty-five hectares in 2002, and it was successful. So we expanded it to one hundred hectares in 2003, and it was even more successful. If before there was no Gloria rice, the average yield was eighty cavans per hectare. The topnotcher in Gloria rice in Mindoro this 2003 harvested 290 cavans per hectare. And the average yield is double the previous yield. But as I said, this is just a down payment. I want us to be self-sufficient in rice. That's why this year we will bring Gloria rice to five hundred thousand hectares.

There are those who ask, if the yield suddenly increases, it might not be sold at a good price. So I instructed the NFA, that instead of one billion pesos being prepared to buy palay, prepare four billion pesos. And as help to the farmers who will bet on Gloria rice, the harvest will be bought not at nine pesos but at ten pesos.

These and other changes in agriculture are part of our fight against poverty because the majority of our poor are in the countryside.

There are four basic components of our fight against poverty: first, job creation; second, the modernization of agriculture in a pro-farmer manner along with land reform; third, direct assistance to the poor; and fourth, good governance.

Regarding jobs. During President Estrada's time, only half a million jobs were created. So, among the chaos I inherited were more than four million Filipinos without jobs. But in my short presidency, we have created more than three million jobs. This was also achieved because foreign investment in our country increased by twenty-six percent. But let me repeat, this is just a down payment. There is still one million unemployed inherited from the previous administration, and there are still new entrants into the labor force. But we have proven that we can create one million jobs per year when the leader has experience and wisdom. So, if given another chance, in the next six years, we can create six million jobs to erase the widespread unemployment in our country.

Regarding direct assistance to the poor. Unparalleled distribution of agricultural land, city, and ancestral domain. Unparalleled construction of schools in remote areas. Unparalleled housing. Unparalleled health insurance. Unparalleled microfinance was achieved in our short presidency. But again, that’s just a down payment.

In the next six years, we will expand land rights, housing, and schools in remote areas. We will extend health insurance to all families. We will extend half-price medicine and microfinance to every barangay. Everyone will have clean water and clean governance.

Because we caught many big fish in the government: judges, undersecretaries, bureau directors, regional directors, and other presidential appointees, it was good, we greatly improved our tax collection last year. This collection can now be used for wider assistance to farmers, for wider infrastructure to attract investors who will provide jobs, and more direct assistance to the poor.

And so, ladies and gentlemen, our friends from the international community, I humbly accept this award as a form of recognition for our efforts to fight poverty, to provide food on every table. An honor I share with the many good women and men of my administration.

Again, I thank the FAO for this award. And you have my solemn pledge, in return, that I will continue to do what’s right, to do my best to help eliminate hunger and mass poverty in my country, in our region, in the world.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Conferment Ceremony of the Ceres Medal by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization represented by FAO Director General Jacques Diouf. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090532/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5644&Itemid=38