Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the inauguration of 3 Angels Broadcasting Network

[Delivered at the PICC Plenary Hall, CCP Complex, Roxas Blvd., Pasay City, February 21, 2004]

Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Ambassador Tejano.

I will confirm that I did recall many political ambassadors because I promised the career foreign service that I would increase the percentage of career officials in the ambassadors position. But I made an exception of Ambassador Tejano because of my great respect for the Seventh Day Adventist Church.

Officers of 3 ABN headed by President Danny Shelton and Mrs. Linda Shelton. Thank you for your very kind words, they make up for the many words I cannot say tonight because my voice is bad. Officers of Southern Asia-Pacific division headed by Pastor Albert Gulopan; officers of North Philippines headed by Pastor Nestor Dayson; Officers of the Central Philippines headed by Hemuel Tolidanes; officers of the South Philippines headed by Pastor Ultimino Rivera; officers of Manila Adventist Medical Center headed by Bibbly Macaya; officers of Mountain Provinces Mission Mr. Manny Villones, franchise owner; Pastor Larry Faire, Communications Director; mga minamahal kong Seventh Day Adventists, Happy Sabbath evening to all of you!

I am very pleased to be able to join you this wonderful evening for the inauguration of the 3 ABN in the Philippines. This is the beginning of what will be surely yet another of your valuable and significant contributions to Philippine culture. Through your programs on health, education, community service, science and technology, family counseling and Christian ministry, you offer Filipinos what we need most– a healthy mind in a healthy body anchored on faith in god.

I am personally an admirer of your health ministry. When I was a young girl growing up in Iligan City — Adunay Tiga-Iliganon Diri? Okay, maayong pag-abot kaninyong tanan — anyway, when I was a young girl growing up in Iligan City, one day we were having summer vacation in my grandmother’s house in Timoga, together with my Brother Arthur who was then fourteen years old. Apparently, in the middle of the night, my Brother Arthur was sleepwalking and fell from the second floor of my Grandmother’s house all the way to the landing. But this was in the middle of the night and no one of us knew about it when it happened. At dawn, the first household helper woke up and she saw my brother on the landing of the stairs, his mouth frothing, his eyes opened without the pupils. Surely that meant that his fall caused him brain injury. She rushed all of us to wake up, and what we did was we rushed him to Iligan sanitarium. And we are very grateful that after his emergency treatment in Iligan sanitarium, later followed by brain surgery, he is now a very successful businessman. No damage to his brain at all. Praise god!

And so my family knows what it is like to be grateful to the Seventh Day Adventist Church for a sound mind in a sound body. A healthy body anchored on faith in God.

And now, as public servant, I have always emphasized the moral component in our campaign of reform. And I always emphasized that we can build a better society by fighting poverty and engendering economic growth not just for a few but for the many as the Seventh Day Adventist Church does.

I thank you for your support to me, and I would like to believe that with the grace of God I have been worthy of your support. In a very short time as president, I’ve made a strong start. I’ve turned the economy around and stabilized the mess we inherited including more than four million unemployed that I inherited because sad to say in the administration of President Estrada only half a million jobs were created. But in my short presidency we created more than three million jobs. I have likewise made unprecedented gains in housing, in health care and anti-corruption. It is a down payment, but it is not good enough. I’m not satisfied, more has to be done. It will take resolve and leadership to overcome the forces trying to divide us. And I know the Seventh Day Adventist Church and your programming will provide for more unity rather than for more division.

I will fight for unprecedented change that makes us more secure, strengthens our families and stamps out corruption. We have made progress but I need a mandate from the people for fundamental change. I will fight to change the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs and wipe out terrorism. I will expand health coverage to all Filipinos, bring more housing, expand property rights, create more jobs with higher wages. We will have clean water and clean government.

I am fighting for not just change from without but also change from within. And in this we are united. I deeply appreciate your own efforts to nurture hope and faith among our people.

With God’s guidance and with your help. With the beautiful things that you would be spreading in 3 ABN, we will win this battle for change.

And again, I thank you all for your support and congratulations! And good luck to 3 ABN!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Inauguration of 3 Angels Broadcasting Network. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090525/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5643&Itemid=38