Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines At the Rotary Conference

[Delivered at the Shangri-la Hotel, Makati City, January 31, 2004]

CLEAN WATER, CLEAN GOVERNMENT

On jobs, the strength of my foreign policy gives confidence to nations to invest in our nation. And because I was a Rotarian before I became a public official, Rotary International has come to comprise that part of the international relationships I have developed as an economist. Senator, trade official and President, to run this country and attract huge investments needed to modernize our nation.

I have many beautiful memories of attending international Rotary conferences with our Club in Makati Central. With the other Rotarians, with the Rotarians, I remember being in Taiwan, being Osaka, being in Florida together bonding with my club members and their…..But also getting to know and developing that international network that have been able to help the Philippines attain this stature of being a welcoming place for investments.

The people to people international network that I have been able to develop – thanks to Rotary International – is also paralleled by our relationship on the official level with the us and other developed countries that is also part of the network of international relationships. For instance, our strong relationship with the U.S. has resulted during the short time that I have been President in and economic and security relationship worth 6 billion dollars, including American investments like Intel, which has expanded to 1 billion dollars during my administration. Sunpower Solar Cells 330 million dollars investment. Texas instruments about 70 million dollars and a Car Assemble Plant of Ford 50 million dollars, and numerous Call Centers and other business process outsourcing investments that are becoming the growth sector of our future. Call Centers and business process outsourcing employment in the Philippines have grown from 2,000 seats before I became President to a projected 40,000 seats this year. And doubling every year.

On May here, I called up the Administrator of the Economic Zone Lilia De Lima because I wanted to check with her the figure of Texas instruments. And she said, I also like to add that this January, Lilia said, in the economic zones we approved almost 10 billion pesos worth of investments compared to only 1.8 billion in January last year.

We want of course, to make the Philippines a safe place for investments, for the average Filipino. For the poor Filipino who has no means to provide to pay for his own security. And even on the security relationship, with the U.S. for instance when I first became President, I inherited a military assistance commitment from the United States worth 1.9 million dollars and counting. Including a giant naval cyclone boat that is arriving of February 23 rd worth 30 million dollars just for one naval ship.

In terms of this assistance, military assistance, the Philippines is No. 1 in East Asia. No. 4 worldwide, with more to come because we have been declared a major non-NATO ally of the U.S.

Last year we increase foreign investment in the Philippines by about 23 percent. In fact, in the short period of my Presidency we created more than 3 million jobs, compared to only 1 million created in the previous 3 years.

I have been talking about investments because the best way to fight poverty is to create jobs, spread wealth which Rotary does a lot and give the peoples the tools they need to succeed, which Rotary also does a lot of.

Many decades age, when my father was President of the Philippines, we were one of Asia’s most progressive economies. But after that, when the other economies around the Philippines were growing double digit during the East Asian economic miracle. Somehow the Philippines failed to fight for the fundamental reforms we needed to sustain our growth and our place in that community of economies in Southeast Asia.

That is why, I have started to fight for these fundamental reforms that we should have done a long time ago.

The result stability and robust economy – among Asia’s best performers a far as growth is concerned. For 2003, GNP grew 5.5 percent compared to an average of 2.9 percent in the three years before I became President. These has defied all expectations and a 3.1 percent inflation rate is the lowest in a generation. Again, this is just a down payment.

I will fight for an unprecedented change that makes us more secure. Strengthen out families, stamps our corruption because these are what we need to fight poverty. I will fight to change the culture of corruption, stop the scourge of drugs and wipe out terrorism because we need an environment that does not have these things need to fight poverty. And directly for poverty alleviation, I will expand health coverage to all, bring more housing, expand property rights and create more jobs that attract higher wages. We will have clean water and clean government.

I am aware that you Rotarians share many of the same goals and values I cherish. Your programs to promote micro lending to improve farm productivity, your Gawad Kalinga program with the couples for Christ. All of these attest to your commitment to positive social change.

And so I ask you to fight with me, to fight for a change, to be the average Filipinos champion.

Earlier I mentioned, we would have clean water and clean government. A symbol of governance and essential services. You know how to fight for a clean government because you are leaders in the community, you are active in electoral exercises, you are active as watchdogs of the community. And in your weekly Rotary meetings, you make public officials accountable to you, to the people with their explanations of what they are doing to serve the people. Your polio class is a very important contribution to the health of the nation which you served. Clean water is also crucial for health.

I specifically mention clean water because I have found in going around the people and even going around Metro Manila that, that still a crying need. In 2003, I did a survey of how many families in Metro Manila have access to clean water and have to go out and buy very expensive water, a 160,000 families in Rizal, I did a survey, a similar survey. 50,000 families. And in the countryside, because Rizal we don’t really considered that countryside anymore, it’s very urban. In the countryside, more than a hundred municipalities still don’t have access to clean water.

This is a major poverty alleviation effort that I am seeking, I am fighting to address. And I am very happy that my project manager for this is a Rotarian, Ram Agoncillo.

And so I ask you Rotarians, if there is something you would like to add that special for the year 2004. Yes! Go on fighting for clean government because we have elections coming up. But help me too, to fight for clean water, an essential element in poverty alleviation.

I thank you all for having helped me before I became President, before I became politician, and helping me even today. And to all our Rotarians from all over the world, thank you for helping your communities and thank you too for helping the Philippines in the international brotherhood of Rotary.

Thank you and welcome once again and to all of you, and Mabuhay .

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].