Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, for the celebration of Gloria for Women in celebration of International Women’s Day

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Secretary Dinky Soliman. They are mistaken, the two of them, because they think alike, but their thinking is also what I have been infected with.

I want to greet you all. I want to greet the convenors, those who established or built this meeting today. First, the convenors of Glo’s guidance, there’s Imelda Nicolas, she is also my leader in Sorsogon. There’s Evelyn Kilayko, she is also the leader of Concerned Women of the Philippines, she is also the chairman there of so many NGOs.

I want to greet Mrs. Conchitina Bernardo, she was a former vice mayor of Makati. My son-in-law, Mrs. Charito Montenegro. I want to greet Lets Glow! Representing you on stage is Gloria Golez. As I said, Gloria Golez, I hope she also takes care of the coconut traders for me so they can explain to all the coconut farmers what the Gloria Presidential Administration has done for our coconut farmers.

I also want to greet Mrs… Miss Maruhita Palabrika. Hi! Maruhita, thank you very much, thank you for being here. They represent on stage Let’s Glow!

Now, the women’s organizations, there’s Beth Yang of Abanse Pinay! Long live, Abanse Pinay! There’s Badette Lingo. There I am. Long live! There I am.

The Pro-Gloria Women, thank you very much for being here. And I also want to greet those who support the women, the men who love and guide, support, and respect women’s rights, they are here, represented on our stage by Secretary Sonny Alvarez.

All of you, six thousand women here today, I thank you for presenting that we will have the launching of women leaders who will campaign for President Gloria and our candidates.

What I ask of you – half of our voters are women – explain to our fellow women how we can promote the welfare of women in our short presidency.

There are three things I can say we have done. We have a 12-point agenda, right? That is our agenda. And that agenda, as was said earlier, many of them have already been strongly started and those twelve points can be clustered, built into three parts.

First, what is called women’s participation or the inclusion of women in important decisions relating to the welfare of women and society. And you can tell within our administration what is the most important symbol of women’s participation if not eleven Cabinet members, half of the Cabinet are women.

As proof, I will name them, one by one:

Number one, Foreign Affairs — Delia Albert. Number two, Finance — Nitz Amatong, from Zamboanga Del Norte. Number three, Justice — Mercy Gutierrez, from Bataan. Number four, Labor — Pat Sto. Tomas, from Mindoro and Davao. Number five, DSWD — Dinky Soliman. Number six, Cebuana, DENR — Bebet Gozun. Number seven, she is here, Science and Technology — Nina Alabastro. Number eight, Budget — Emi Boncodin, from Iriga. Number nine, Priority Projects and ODA, from Mindoro and Cavite — Mai Jimenez. Number ten, Peace Process — Ging Deles. Number Eleven, the newest, Anti-Poverty Commission — Veronica Villavicencio.

These are the symbols of women’s participation in the short presidency, the first presidency of President Gloria. What more if we have six more years to recruit many more women into our government and other bodies that decide our future.

Secondly, a part of the twelve points of our platform is the protection of the human rights of our women. During my short presidency, two laws that had been long awaited were finally passed: the law against trafficking and the law against domestic violence. If a decade's worth of waiting was accomplished during our short presidency, how much more of the other points of human rights can we fulfill in the coming next administration with the help of women for President Gloria and our other candidates.

Thirdly, economic rights. Many were mentioned in the 12-point program, the economic rights, and our biggest down payment on that was microfinance, which we extended to one million women in the Philippines.

You, the six thousand women here who will campaign for us, what I ask of you is to find these one million women. Tell them the story of how they were blessed with economic opportunities for the first time, because before they were incomeless, assetless. Now, they have income, they have assets, they have a future.

So, my friends, do not forget, campaign for women among fellow women. Women are good campaigners. As they say, at last – because Nina Alabastro of DOST – at last, science has discovered what can do the work of two men – one woman.

Thank you very much, long live the women!

Happy Women’s Day to all of us.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Ipagdiwang, Gloria ng Kababaihan in Celebration of International Women’s Day. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090344/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5661&Itemid=38