Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines Before the Global Filipino Teachers (Globe Telecoms IT Training for Teachers)

[Delivered in Cebu City, March 5, 2010]

Thank you. Thank you Secretary Lapus for your introduction. And thank you for letting our teachers know how much we have put investments in IT enabled education aside from IT education.

Mr. Cu, President of Globe, other officials, Dr. Labe and the other members of the partners who have put this together, the Cabinet members, our officials, Gwen Garcia, Neri Soon-Ruiz, Mayor Cortes, beloved teachers, congratulations to all of you!

Congratulations especially to those who have finished this Global Filipino Teachers Program! And who are ready to receive a certificate. And good luck for those who still have that last remaining component which is to demonstrate what you have learned from here in the classroom setting.

And of course, a big “thank You” to Globe for sponsoring this training.

The foundation of opportunity is education, and I thank our teachers for choosing education as a career. Pardon my partiality for the teaching profession. I was a teacher before I joined government.

Which is why as Jing Lapus said, that we realize and we acknowledge the role of the teachers in the whole comprehensive framework of education. And I am glad that during our administration we’ve been able to increase the pay of teachers about 50 % and you get another increase starting June this year.

Education is the key to a better life. It opens minds and opens doors. And in today’s world, a strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology. So, I thank Globe for helping us provide that backbone together with our other telecommunications companies.

To build the mind and to connect to the world. Education and technology are the twin pillars upon which the future of the nation rests. So, I congratulate GlobeBridgeCom for your contribution to these twin pillars. You have been a great help in reducing our people’s fear of new technologies by demonstrating how new instruments using these technologies can provide us with more accurate information at a quicker time, therefore giving people more time for other activities.

Actually computers are so much friendlier now than when I was a teacher. I remember when I was doing my PhD and I had to do I’ve to learn computer programming so that I could do my dissertation we had to learn with … that was our program and we had to use this index cards. But now, it’s so easy and it’s just that psychological barrier that we have to overcome.

But this is not the only program that Globe has done to be in partnership with our stress on ICT as one of the growth sectors of the future. We’re very grateful for GlobeBridgeCom’s technology-based youth-oriented special program in more than 3,000 barangays, particularly Text2Teach which uses the SMS I mentioned this because many years ago in the early years of my presidency I was also the guest of honor in the launching of Text2Teach Program.

And I am very grateful to Globe for the internet connection the internet in school program providing interconnectivity to schools because one of our programs one of our most important programs our reforms in education is to provide connectivity to public high schools. Because having your computer in a school or even 10 or 20 computers I think is not enough I’d rather have one computer in every high school that’s connected than 20 computers that are not connected.

So interconnectivity connectivity is so important. And as Mr. Cu said, in supporting our program Globe has helped us connect 1,500 high schools the biggest number the biggest contribution among all private telecoms company. In fact, you are helping us with 1,500 with the 4,000 public high schools that we have provide connectivity for… that’s a very big percentage.

And now, this training program which has turned out the first batch of 97 most of which are ready with a certificate today some of whom still have to prove to Dr. Labe that they’re ready for their certificate.

So, congratulations to our teachers of Cebu, Bohol and Negros Oriental.

With this training, you, our global Filipino teachers will now be able to help our youth seize the value of education and modernity to lift up their lives and lift up our nation.

Congratulations kaninyong tanan! Salamat gyud.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech Global Filipino Teachers (Globe Telecoms IT Training for Teachers). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080428/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27676&Itemid=38