OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS: THE JAPAN CONNECTION

Leaders of Filipino communities in Tokyo, Osaka and throughout Japan, various organizations and successful individuals whom I greeted earlier, my beloved countrymen here in Japan, Merry Christmas to all of you.

As Ambassador Siazon said, we meet every six months. This time I am here to attend the ASEAN-Japan Summit. Back in the Philippines, the campaign has heated up very early, so I am happier here with you. I leave to the opposition the task of threshing out their problems. Meanwhile, with your support, I shall forge ahead with reforms and changes in the system, and with unity and reconciliation in all aspects of our national life.

I had a very productive meeting with Prime Minister Koizumi yesterday. And, as I mentioned earlier, I will meet Prime Minister Badawi of Malaysia today, and tonight I am meeting you, our overseas Filipinos in Japan, first and foremost, to thank you once again for the sacrifices you are making for our country.

For me — Koizumi, Badawi and you — are the people who make our country move forward. My meeting yesterday with Koizumi, my meeting today with Badawi, and my meeting with you tonight are the events that are carving forward the path of stability and progress for our nation. And I’m determined to push forward in this path even through the campaigns and elections of 2004. My priority is good governance and I shall keep it with undeterred focus.

My pledges of moving forward are based on the experiences of what we have done in the past two and a half years when I have been visiting you as president: bring the deficit under control, clamp down on inflation, increase growth, increase tax revenues and expose government corruption.

That exposing government corruption, the World Bank is congratulating the Philippines because they say the lifestyle checks being done by my administration are effective. And the new law passed by our congressmen — that Electronic Procurement Law — also aims to reduce corruption in our government purchases.

Regarding the increase in growth, in the last quarter, our economy recorded a 4.4 percent GDP growth and 5.9 percent GNP growth, the highest since the Asian crisis of 1997, and we are sixth out of twenty-one economies in Asia and the Pacific. You know 4.4 percent is the GDP, 5.9 percent is the GNP, what is the difference? The difference is your remittances. Because the 4.4 percent increase, is production within the Philippines. Your production is added, including your remittances, which is why the growth of our country increased by 1.8 percentage points. This is because of your remittances. This means that the performance of our economy is improving also because of the increasing remittances sent by you overseas Filipinos to your families.

Therefore, I would like to thank you once again for your great help to our economy. Because of the money you send to your families, you can truly be considered overseas Filipino investors because your remittances serve as your investments in our country.

Your remittances are truly a big help because Japan is the third main destination of our OFWs last year. Number one is Saudi Arabia with a number of one million Filipinos. Number two, Malaysia with more than half a million Filipinos. Number three, the number of OFWs in Japan has now increased to almost 300,000 overseas Filipino workers here in Japan. And it is expected to increase further in the sectors of Health Care and Information Technology due to my discussion with Prime Minister Koizumi. We are conducting negotiations so that caregivers and I.T. professionals can enter Japan.

You who are here – you are champions of our country’s socioeconomic development.

The classrooms from Filipino citizens abroad are a good example. In a short period of time, hundreds of classrooms have been built in our country thanks to your help. Here in Japan, there are already forty pledges and donations that had been received for this project of classrooms for our people.

That Tourism Volunteer Program is also a good example. Because of your help, our tourism volunteers, many Japanese tourists continue to visit our country. We have already welcomed almost 300,000 Japanese visitors to the Philippines this year. And now Japan is our second largest source of tourists. Thank you to your volunteer tourists marketers here.

Because of your efforts here in Japan and your community spirit in helping our progress, I would just like to return the help to you through programs that you and your loved ones in the Philippines can benefit from.

So as you know, our congressmen have already passed the Overseas Voting Law, as well as the Dual Citizenship Law, where even if you are already a Japanese citizen, you can still be Filipino, you can buy land and houses and businesses in the Philippines.

Our congressmen have also passed the Anti-Money Laundering Law so that you will not have a hard time. If you remit money to the Philippines and the Anti-Money Laundering Law had not been passed, it would have been terrible, there would have been a lot of red tape. That is why it was necessary to pass the Anti-Money Laundering Law so that your remittances to our country are regular. So that is also for you.

We have also expanded our housing program for workers and included overseas Filipinos. I hope you will buy a house tomorrow for your loved ones in the Philippines. Pag-IBIG is here now in Japan to help you buy a house for your relatives in the Philippines or for your retirement. Ambassador Siazon told me that Paskong Pilipino is a two-day event. We have tonight and tomorrow for another party. Tomorrow, there will be a housing fair and exhibit. You will see the houses, they have very affordable installments so our overseas Filipinos can really afford them. We are doing all of this for you.

In the Philippines, our fight against poverty and crime continues. Perhaps you have heard that Commander Robot has been arrested. This is a major blow to the bandit Abu Sayyaf. We want and we shall pursue justice for the Sipadan hostages just like any other kidnapping cases. We are determined to show terrorists and criminals that such heinous crimes will not go unpunished and that there will always be an end of the road in the hands of the criminal justice system. Let the truth come out from all corners, so that the public can see who deserves just retribution among the criminals and their cohorts.

Moving forward, what do I want to do for our country? I want to build the infrastructure necessary for a modern nation, from roads: for example, the North Expressway going to Pampanga; the South Expressway going to Batangas — we are fixing them now. I also want to build high-speed Internet. I also want to improve health care access so that all your relatives have PhilHealth insurance. And I want to be able to raise enough resources and revenues to be able to redouble spending on education. We will spend the additional taxes we collect from the new laws there.

But it is also necessary for the deep divisions in our society to heal. Here in Japan, there are many associations but they are united. In the Philippines, the wounds in our country are very deep. There are the NPA, there are the soldiers, they are fighting. There is the MILF, there are Christians who are afraid of Muslims, they are fighting. And above all, there is EDSA 2, there is EDSA 3. In the middle of the NPA and the soldiers, there are the ordinary citizens. They no longer want fighting, they no longer want war. In the middle of the Muslims and those anti-Muslim, there are also the majority, who want nothing more than to continue their businesses, their livelihood. Despite EDSA 2 and EDSA 3, there is also our silent majority, they want reconciliation. And I read their message to me that I should be president not only of EDSA 2, I should also be president of EDSA 3. Therefore, despite the reforms needed to fight poverty, fight corruption, fight crime, we also need unity and reconciliation.

You, my friends here in Japan, I hope you will help me in finding reforms and changes in our systems, but more than that, help me also to talk to your loved ones in the Philippines so that we can achieve the unity you are looking for, for our future generations.

To all of you, it's just right that reconciliation is being discussed especially now because it is the season of Christmas, it is time for peace on earth to men of goodwill.

To all of you, my dear compatriots here in Japan, it is my pleasure to be with you again on yet another Christmas party.

To you all, Merry Christmas! The Philippines loves you.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].