I thank all the people of Cavite and thank you for your continued support of our administration.

We have a double celebration today, the celebration of Women's Month here in Cavite and the inauguration of this housing for the masses spearheaded by Governor Ayong Maliksi. It's so beautiful, “Pamayanang Maliksi”. In other words, energetic community, that's what “Pamayanang Maliksi” means.

Let's move on to women. We celebrate the theme of Women's Month, “CEDAW of the Nation: The Wealth of Women.” CEDAW, not a shout.

CEDAW is the U.N. Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women. It defends the rights of women around the world. But we are proud of our country, because we are recognized as being good at implementing CEDAW, which is the source of many livelihoods and the defense of women's rights, so we are the sixth country in the world in terms of compliance with CEDAW proposals. Only the four Scandinavian countries and New Zealand are ahead of us, and then us, sixth in the world.

Why are we sixth in the world? In the evidence that the judges looked at, we are the only country in Asia that has closed the gender gap in education and health, and one of only six in the world that has closed this gender gap.

For example, in education, the Philippines leads in equality in literacy rate and enrollment rate in school—according to Mayor Strike Revilla, he's here. Strike, I already mentioned your problem with Vice-President Noli De Castro, so you should talk. These are the fishermen who are having problems because of the construction of the new Coastal Road, or tomorrow, Strike.

In fact, women are equal to men in simple literacy rate. Sorry, Governor, that's why the people of Cavite are obedient here. Women also lead in school enrollment and have a lower dropout rate. Among honor students, women also lead. In health and longevity, the Philippines leads in equality between women and men. In fact, Filipinas live longer than Filipino men.

We have already praised Justice Herrera, Senator Helena Benitez, Vicky Bataclan, the women under the leadership of the Governor and the Mayor of Dasmariñas, the youth and women under the leadership of our Mutya ng Kalayaan, but if you will allow me, let me also praise a Caviteña, her name is Escolastica Romero. She is from Cavite City but married a Kapampangan and became Mrs. Macapagal. She is my father's grandmother. She was a midwife and a catechism teacher in a Catholic school. She delivered her grandson and gave him the name “Diosdado”, gift of God, because she was very religious. And when my father finished high school, before studying law and before topping the bar exams, he first took a civil service exam and also topped it. But even though he was number one, he couldn't find a job. It was the same way back then. But my great-grandmother, Escolastica Romero, because she had many patients as a midwife, she had a patient, Mr. Mills, a German mestizo who worked at the Bureau of Lands. He hired my father for his first job as a civil servant.

So, if I recall correctly, the difficulty of finding a job even being number one in the civil service, and our economic problems now, I really think that from then until now we are striving to create a strong and growing economy to help ensure the peace, order, and stability of our country. This is why we are becoming agile in our recovery every day to strive and focus, like a laser beam, to fix our economy. We made difficult and unpopular decisions to increase government collections and go after tax evaders so we can invest in our infrastructure and our people.

So, when Governor Maliksi requests a road to be fixed, with a clear entrance and exit here in this beautiful housing project, we can immediately instruct Undersecretary Aquino to address Governor Maliksi's request.

When we attract investments, and there are many investors in Cavite creating jobs, our people will have a more stable and predictable life. And with more investments comes more tax collection that can be invested in schools, roads like those requested by Governor Maliksi, and bridges like those requested by Mayor Ferrer, don't forget that. We should break ground on one of the three bridges they are waiting for, Undersecretary Aquino. And also for care, health, education, and the environment. In due time, everyone will benefit.

But we know that no matter how much progress is made on the economic ladder, many of our people still work hard. We are very aware that many hardworking women and men work every day just to put food on the table and provide shelter for their families.

Because of the growth of our economy, our goal is to spend forty-four billion to be invested in housing. Eight billion of this will come from the national budget, and according to Vice-President De Castro, there are thirty billion coming from PAG-IBIG with very low interest rates. And there is also funding coming from the private sector and banks, Vice-President De Castro also reported that the Asian Development Bank has lent Official Development Assistance to the Development Bank of the Philippines which can be used for take-out loans, so those who will buy houses here can borrow from PAG-IBIG, they can borrow from DBP for take-out loans for this house. Because that is the system when the private sector builds housing.

But here, although the private sector will build the houses, the Cavite government bought the land so the land is cheap, only 500 pesos then around P1,300 for the house, so the total cost of housing here is P1,800. And many people can live here, eight thousand, including former squatters or soldiers.

We congratulate General Obañana and our other officers here. So General, your soldiers can live here for P1,800 a month. Police officers, so we also congratulate General Padilla, your police officers here can also apply because there are eight thousand housing units here, three thousand already, right Governor? Although according to Governor Maliksi, fifteen thousand people are expected to look for housing here, and half of those in need will be accommodated.

Therefore, we thank Governor Maliksi for his continued support of the national goal to address the needs of our people.

This new housing in Cavite for more than eight thousand families from various sectors, as I said, former squatters, will be provided housing by Gawad Kalinga. So that isn't included in the P1,800, right? That's separate. Those P1,800 more or less are for teachers, factory workers, police and soldiers, everyone will benefit from the houses being built because it's fifty-three hectares, which is lucky, you know, in a very densely populated area in the Luzon Urban Beltway, the Governor was able to find more than fifty hectares that can be purchased for the people.

Congratulations, Governor Maliksi! It's a wonderful way to celebrate Women's Month in Cavite because the housewives will have new homes.

To all of you, congratulations Caviteños, women or men, and long live the Caviteños and Caviteñas!

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library