Thank you very much Secretary Bert Gonzales for your invitation and for organizing this peace and security assembly. You may all be seated.

I would like to greet… Governor Lazaro isn't here, he's out of the country, but continuing to host is our new Chairman of the Regional Development Council, Governor Raffy Nantes (applause) and our host mayor, Mayor Umali. Thank you very much. (applause) Actually, Villa Escudero is quite large, so our main host is Mayor Vic Amante. (applause)

I would also like to greet our representatives who are here today, Congresswoman Ivy Arago, our host congresswoman; (applause) Congressman Procy Alcala, the… (applause) because isn't Villa Escudero part of your area, that's why we have two hosts; and also here is Congressman Dan Fernandez; (applause) Congressman Mark Mendoza; (applause) Congressman Mark Enverga who looks just like his mother; (laughter) and all of our local chief executives who are here, there are so many. Our leaders from the armed forces and the police are also here, as well as the leaders of our important NGOs and people’s organizations. To all of you, my dear countrymen, good morning and congratulations! For your assembly. And thank you for the reports you gave me, Sister, this morning.

It is clear and without a doubt that peace and development are siblings that cannot be separated. That is why all our efforts to ensure the peace and safety of the people are part of the broad and continuous growth and progress of society.

We should aim for peace that is nurtured by development. Let us strive to ensure that the people are secure against terrorists who seek to impose their violent ways on us, and also against rebels who hinder development.

Here in all of CALABARZON, our armed forces and police continue to win against the rebels in this region. But our people want this problem solved as soon as possible. We should not allow a failed ideology to hinder the development and progress of the nation. (applause)

We aim to end the insurgency in this region in 2010, especially in the province of Quezon, where we know the most active rebels are located. But I am pleased to have heard from Raffy Nantes and Procy Alcala that we are already winning there. It's been a long time since we've heard the voice of their spokesman whose stronghold is in Quezon. So congratulations! To our people from Quezon. (applause) eh congratulations! To everyone, we congratulate those in Quezon because that's where the fiercest fighting is, but Raffy says we are winning.

Our soldiers will not stop pursuing the remaining enemies clinging to communism. But to the former rebels and their supporters who want to return to the side of the law, we offer open-armed peace through the broad amnesty that we declared in our new paradigm for peace. At a time when hard power has not proven its value in the world, our model for dealing with the insurgency has focused on a combination of soft and hard power to promote peace.

Our pursuit of peace and development should also bring food to the table, along with health services, quality education for our children and grandchildren, livelihood, the rule of law against crime, and social justice. That social justice, as I told Bert Gonzales while listening to Sister's report, is about human rights from beginning to end.

And I remember when I went to a similar assembly in Eastern Samar in Borongan, and before there was… Ah, no. It wasn't there. The assembly was in Tacloban, but before that, I passed through Eastern Samar and had lunch with the officials, and the new bishop arrived, having been installed as bishop just the day before. Our soldiers and our police didn't give a report on what they were doing against crime and against rebellion because Eastern Samar was also like Quezon in the past. But now Borongan has many influenced barangays, but in 2003 there were zero influenced barangays.

So, the bishop's story was that he heard that the reason why the left had weakened so much in Eastern Samar, he said, was because the soldiers were kind. (applause)

And also in Surigao del Sur, where that was also the most fierce place, the center of gravity of the insurgency, we haven't had a peace and security assembly there yet because the model for suppressing the rebellion is in the Butuan diocese. But I also went to Surigao del Sur and the… There, the main stronghold of the rebellion was, the commander also reported on his gains against the rebellion. And in their fight, they reach remote areas that the government had not reached for a long time, so our soldiers became the face of the government and they were the ones who listened to the complaints of the people. People in remote barangays told stories that they didn't have medicine, and I was surprised because we have a… Barangay health center in every barangay. But because this information reached us through our soldiers, it reached the most remote sitios, we now have a program in those far-flung areas, remote sitios of remote barangays.

In other words, our policy, the policy of our armed forces, police, and the entire government, is respect for human rights. Political killings are not our policy. In fact, at the U.N. Assembly on Human Rights, there were about ten countries, and you will be surprised at the list of those countries, that do not want to accept the United Nations rapporteur. We are one of the few that accept the rapporteur. We were even ahead of Myanmar, which is still having difficulty with the rapporteur on human rights entering.

Therefore, we are open to monitoring and open to assistance that can provide us with effective means of investigation and prosecution to reach conviction of the guilty. We do not condone soldiers or police involved. And we already have some imprisoned, some prosecuted, and I think some even convicted, so I told Bert Gonzales – and it's a shame Sonny Razon isn't here because he's the head of the task force usig – but if you can give the information, Jess Versoza, I want you to show the press conference, Bert, the data of the police and soldiers who were arrested and charged with human rights violations.

Because ninety-nine percent of our soldiers and police respect people and human rights. That small percentage, or percentage of a percentage, we do not condone, and we prosecute and punish them. So, your first, middle, and last recommendation, Sister, we are very, very much internally in accordance with you.

We also commend the initiative of the Department of National Defense to halt offensives during the recent storm and thus allow soldiers to focus on rescuing and helping the people recover after the storm. That… Because it is important that food reaches the people, our ‘Tindahan Natin’ (Our Store) is our most important system for delivering affordable rice to the poor. There are many ‘Tindahan Natin’ stores in the province of Quezon, because Quezon – and this is not surprising – is the main stronghold of rebels in CALABARZON, it is now the poorest province in CALABARZON because it is the most remote. There are reportedly two hundred and fifty stores in Quezon.

Now, regarding Quezon, I just want to share a little story. My recollections when I was undersecretary of trade and industry and I was managing policy and planning. When I was promoted to undersecretary, this project was called CALABA (Cavite-Laguna-Batangas) because Congressman Ding Tanjuatco lobbied for Rizal to become CALABAR. Then, the officials of Quezon approached me and said, hopefully, Quezon could also be included. I said, because these infrastructures, why are we creating a masterplan so that Japan can fund our infrastructures? Well, from CALABA to CALABAR, it took a long time to get to Japan, the officials studied it again, it took months or even years, but before I arrived, that's when Quezon was the one being requested to me by the officials.

So, I returned it to the Board of Investments, because I was a member of the board of the Board of Investments, I said, let's include Quezon in CALABARZON. They replied that if the addition of Rizal takes years, which isn't that far from the CALABA project, the study will be prolonged again before the funds come out if you… include Quezon. But I remember what I said, Quezon has been waiting for development for decades, maybe they can wait a few months or even a year. That's why it was included, that's why it's now CALABARZON. (applause) that's how they added the Marikina-Infanta road because that was the way Quezon would become part of this CALABA, which was supposed to be an industrial area.

A leader must be driven by a strong vision for the nation and the determination to deliver a better life. We’re driven by our faith in god and our faith in the people of this nation.

Our goal is for our country to reach the level of developed countries in the first world within twenty years. And Sister was right, CALABARZON is the most similar to the first world in the entire Philippines. They say the productivity of Filipinos is somewhat low. But investors say, from what they see, no. Because they see the workers in the factories of CALABARZON are as good or even better than workers in other places. Our problem is productivity in agriculture. That's what lowers our average, but that's more or less a problem of North Luzon and Mindanao because the industry here in CALABARZON is expanding.

And to count the Philippines among the first world countries, we need to spread a strong middle class, we need world-class infrastructure, so it's right that you put it in the proposals in your resolution, and we need strong government institutions.

Yet, in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affects us now.

It's true that CALABARZON is the most first-world-like. When I go to Tagaytay, when I pass through Santa Rosa, wow! I feel like a tourist, I look at the factories, they are so beautiful. But according to your paper earlier, there is also a very large gap between the rich and the poor. And here is also one of the largest unemployment rates because they come from all over because they read, hear, and watch on television that many investors are coming here, they will come here. Because of the many people coming, even if new jobs are created, they cannot all be accommodated, they are embarrassed to go home, they will say they did not find a job. So, they stay here, becoming informal settlers or squatters and becoming unemployed.

Therefore, reducing poverty is the overriding goal.

We get up every day and fight on behalf of the average, hardworking Filipino. That's why I could hardly sleep when Congressman Ivy Arago visited me one day, actually one night, we had dinner because Franklin Baker was supposedly leaving San Pablo. The only blessing there, the silver lining, is that they are not leaving for another country but are leaving for Mindanao. So, I hear from those in Mindanao, they are happy because they will have additional jobs there. However, it will reduce jobs here.

So, when I went to Singapore because the owner of Franklin Baker is one of the wealthiest Singaporeans, I brought Ivy with me and while I was having my summit meeting, Ivy had his summit meeting with the CEO of Chem Oil, which is the mother company of Franklin Baker. But Robert Chandran really told him that his arithmetic shows they will really earn more in Mindanao than here in San Pablo because the land in Mindanao is better, the coconut trees are more productive and everything. But perhaps because of Ivy's charm, Mr. Chandran said he would put another kind of investment here but no longer agricultural investment, but services investment. Possibly I.T. or possibly tourism, so he will return here to look for what needs to be done so that those who will lose their jobs will have jobs again.

So, later, if I have time, I won't socialize here after my speech. I will go to San Pablo at Franklin Baker and I will talk to… I will look at… I will really talk to the people, let's discuss it, let's see what preparations we need to make for them, for the new jobs that will come and how we will help them transition between the closure and the opening of the new investment that Chem Oil will make.

Because that's what we need to do and that's what we're doing all the time. That's why we have significantly reduced extreme poverty.

Those living in poverty have declined, but we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That is why during the holiday season and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices.

Rice is not only a staple for our people, it is symbolic of our ability to deliver on our promise to feed those less fortunate. We’re committed to ensuring that the needy throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season. And this Laguna, although we say that there are so many industries here, it is still one of the major sources of our rice. So it is still important that we increase the productivity of agricultural workers.

You mentioned the need to speed up infrastructure, that's true. Prioritizing infrastructure development in the CALABARZON region is high, because industry drives economic growth here. It is an industry center on par with the world, and one of the economic hubs of the entire country.

We are relentlessly building infrastructure and accelerating it so that this region can be on par with world-class industrial, commercial and service centers. Among the projects is an expressway from Metro Manila to Batangas Port, so your products can get out of Batangas and you won't have to enter the traffic in Metro Manila, which reduces competitiveness. There is also the Coastal Road to Cavite, and the Batangas Port is very important if we want trade to be competitive and this speeds up the delivery of cranes, the equipment to modernize the loading of goods onto ships, that's what Congressman Mark Mendoza's father is doing. And then I mentioned the Marikina-Infanta road which is very strategic if we want Quezon to really be part of the industry of CALABARZON.

And you also mentioned there in… Not just mentioned, a lot was… You also said a lot in your resolution about governance, transparency and fighting corruption.

The people deserve an honest, hardworking government just as they are honest and hardworking. And we do aim to stamp out corruption and set a new standard of governance for our nation. We recognize that corruption saps the lifeblood out of our political system and it must be stamped out.

The Presidential Anti-Graft Commission is conducting lifestyle checks, but we cannot just do simplistic witch hunting expeditions. Our systems may have been largely responsible for corruption with their many loopholes and their propensity to discourage personal responsibility in the discharge of official functions. That's why integrity development review is also being done.

We are building on suppressing corruption, resolving anomalies in the processes and structures of the government, and launching our systems as trusted mechanisms. Many agencies are already implementing reforms in their systems and processes to reduce requirements. Surely many locators here have benefited from systems that run more smoothly, as well as the DTI's one-stop shops which are praised even by other countries.

We created the Properformance System task Force to monitor and push through pending infrastructure projects. The LGUs have representatives on the Task Force from the cloud. So if there are delayed projects passing through your communities, immediately inform the Task Force. I think those of you here are thinking, ah, that road going to Quezon because it's traffic there, right? And don't we have projects there now, how fast it is, it's up to you to tell the task force how fast or how slow.

We also instructed the Properformance Task Force and the Procurement Transparency Group under the DBM to review all major road projects and provide a detailed report to me. Representatives from civil society are included in the Transparency Group to monitor the contracting of projects worth 100 million pesos and above. These are our responses because there have been many complaints about various large projects.

Public service is an honor that the people of our nation provide their leaders, expecting that those leaders will use that platform to deliver the programs and services needed to move our society forward. We need to lay a solid foundation for clean elections as the basis of our democracy.

We have long provided funds for computerization. We look forward to the modernization of voting, counting and canvassing. And after careful consideration, by February, we will appoint a head of the Comelec who is known for wisdom, competence and loyalty to duty, likely a former justice of the Supreme Court.

The people can be assured that we lead with a steady hand to guide the nation to a new election and new national leadership. And through the end of my term, we aim to provide increased political stability, continued economic growth and sustainable peace and order. We will not let the nation slip into instability. We want this to be an era of peace, reassurance and hope.

Our goal is to leave this nation stronger and more stable. We are also strengthening investment in the country and its citizens in the field of education, the foundation of a good life and free citizens, social justice and human dignity.

Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress. The people want to know, are we strong? Are we stable?

We hope that those who attended this assembly will all respond to this challenge.

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly (LPSA)-CALABARZON (Region IV-A). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135823/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2262&Itemid=38