Thank you very much. (applause)

Thank you very much Secretary Romulo for your introduction.

And we greet the other Cabinet members and national government officials who are here now at our business mission; I also greet our elected officials who are here led by Deputy Speaker Girlie Villarosa of Mindoro Occidental; (applause) I greet our Filipino officials who are here in Hong Kong and in China led by Ambassador Brady (applause) and Consul General Vicente; (applause) and I greet Jojo, thank you; (applause) and all of you Filipinos here, my beloved… (audio cut)… good evening to all of you. (applause)

… (audio cut)… I am happy to be with you again. (applause) Sunday is usually a day of rest, but you are here tonight so thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

And here is Secretary Romulo and Ambassador Brady all the way from Beijing because nowhere is foreign policy more important than in protecting and advancing the interests of our overseas workers — you are the very important objective of our foreign policy. (applause) And even in places further away than Hong Kong — Bert I’d like to congratulate you all. The DFA recently reported a seaman released after 14 years in a Bangladeshi jail. And if you remember when I went to Saudi Arabia we released 700 prisoners. Now there are 150 being freed from Middle East jails. And that is very important in the Middle East because there are two million Filipinos there.

But here in Hong Kong, Hong Kong is also very popular as a destination for OFWs. You are 120,000 Filipinos living and working here, and all of you are saluted by everyone here in Hong Kong. Congratulations! (applause) It is deserved, your diligence and the quality of your work cannot be forgiven, your good character, your loyalty to duty. So even though Sonia Brady is far away, there in Beijing, we have 120,000 Philippine ambassadors here in Hong Kong — You are indeed our overseas Filipinos. (applause)

And this is not only more important, you are more important to our country, the Philippines. Your sacrifice and loyalty to your work, to your family, and to our country are honored and valued.

Earlier, Consul General said that the number of emigrants from Southern Europe is decreasing, but if we look at Portugal, they are also quite rich, 10 percent of their population are Overseas Portuguese Workers just like the Philippines, 10 percent.

In New Zealand, they are wealthy, but 25 percent of New Zealanders also live overseas. The difference with New Zealand is that even though their yuppies work abroad, they are still sent money by their parents back home to their children abroad. Filipinos, you are the ones sending help to your families, not the other way around, so you are helping your families and helping our country. Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

But we aspire to the day, as the Consul General said, that a hardworking Filipino no longer needs to go abroad to find a decent job. We’re working for a strong and growing economy to pave the day when Filipinos no longer need to go abroad for a job, and being an overseas worker is just another career option, not the only choice one has to earn a living.

A strong and growing economy is the central pillar that we have labored to create to help guarantee peace, order and stability in our country. And it is paying off: 2007 was the best year for the Philippine economy in over thirty years. Only when the economy is strong is the peso strong.

However, it is also undeniable, truly undeniable, that the strengthening of the peso reduced the spending of OFW families. Only 80 million Filipinos benefited because they were not as affected by the full price increase of oil in the world. Because if the exchange rate was 55 pesos per dollar, as it was in the past, the price of gasoline and diesel would have been even higher by five pesos per liter. The government and corporations’ dollar-denominated debt was also reduced, so we were able to allocate more to the budget for mass projects. The country's borrowing rate also decreased, so interest rates on housing and business loans are still lower, only six percent for Pag-ibig. That has only happened because of the strong peso. If the peso hadn't strengthened, the price increases in the country would have been even worse.

However, to avoid the peso's strengthening from being too burdensome for OFWs, you saw the vigorous actions of our administration this afternoon. We instructed government financial institutions to create ways to maximize the benefits of OFWs from your earnings. If you remember in January, didn't Vice President Noli de Castro come here to launch the hedging program of the Development Bank of the Philippines? He was with Mike Arroyo, my husband, at that time, as well as… so this is to protect the value of your earnings.

In the hedging program, you can already decide, as Jojo said, what exchange rate you can change your U.S. dollars for your pesos in the future. Or you can get some insurance and have the option to sell your dollars for pesos in the future either at a certain protected rate or at the prevailing market rate, whichever is better for you.

This DBP Hedging Program — here is the President of the DBP. Isn't Rey David here, I saw him. There he is! He's even raising his hand… (applause) Rey, did you mention the incentive to the first 100 OFWs earlier? The DBP will give an incentive to the first 100 OFWs who avail of the peso insurance. They will be given a 50 percent discount on the insurance fee of the remittance. (applause) Just as long as you… just as long as it doesn't exceed HK$30,000 per month.

Meanwhile, there is also, as Consul General Vicente mentioned, the DBP’s i-Net Negosyo Program to help your families in the Philippines progress and start businesses. The DBP has a one billion peso loan fund for OFWs to set up small internet stations.

We also launched the programs of the Central Bank, there is our Central Bank of the Philippines Governor, Say Tetangco. You know Say, (applause) you can't order him around because he is independent from the national government, but he is here because he is teaching the Financial Literacy program for OFWs. And here are the stock exchanges so you can invest in the stock exchange, that's better than those pyramids. In the stock exchange you see minute-by-minute what the price of your stock is. These are to provide knowledge about money and investing for OFWs and your families. Because we want to give OFWs the opportunity to not just be Overseas Filipino Workers, not just be an ambassador to Hong Kong but to be Overseas Filipino Investors or OFI. (applause)

Another program, Tindahang Pinoy (Pinoy Store). When you came in, you saw a booth Tindahang Pinoy for those who want to sell Filipino products in the areas where OFWs work. Tindahang Pinoy brings together various products made in our country such as Cornick or Boy Bawang — it seems there are many from the north — broas and other native delicacies in the south, sardines from Sarangani Bay — there are so many from South Cotabato there, sell sardines from Saranggani Bay in Mindanao — and dried mango from Cebu. And not just food. It also includes business training for returning OFWs, implemented by OWWA, whose leader in the past was our new Secretary of Labor, Nitoy Roque. Congratulations, Nitoy! (applause)

The DOLE and OWWA will open a call center training program for OFWs here in Hong Kong. Aren't there many OFW teachers here? Oh, teachers, you are good at English. Well, your English in call center training will increase your income when you return to the Philippines. The training cost will be subsidized by OWWA through their scholarships for OWWA members as preparation for your return to work ….(audio cut)… in the Philippines.

Land Bank, on the other hand…. (audio cut)… is safe and affordable as long as you have 20,000 pesos minimum. In fact, this 20,000 pesos is smaller than many time deposits, with higher interest for five or ten year deposits than ordinary savings in the bank.

Regarding the fees for sending money, Land Bank has an OFW Cash Card that is easy to use and cheaper for remittances. And there's Manny Pangilinan, an OFW in Hong Kong, by choice not by necessity. (applause) Smart, right? Manny, Smart is also electronic remittance. So, that's Manny's service because he knows the life of an OFW even though Manny Pangilinan is a very, very rich OFW.

Anyway, I congratulate those who use these products. Congratulations! to those who have availed of these products. May others be encouraged by the benefits you get from the government programs.

Speaking of remittances, Congressman Danny Suarez is here. (applause) There he is. He has a bill, Reducing the Transaction Cost for Money Remittances from Abroad coursed through the Philippine Banking System and Remittance Centers to help our OFWs. (applause)

Let's go back to the Philippine economy. The flow of investment is strong. We’re close to balancing our budget. But in the past, we had to make tough and unpopular decisions to raise revenues and crack down on tax cheats, so that we could invest in our physical infrastructure and in our people. But we know the problems facing our country and what the people expect. And we are delivering on the economy, education and the environment. We want you to return to a beautiful Philippines, with jobs not only because of the reintegration program but because there are many opportunities in the Philippines.

Therefore, thank you very much for your sacrifices. Here in Hong Kong, I hope that when you return to the Philippines, your lives will be comfortable because of our efforts to strengthen the economy of our country, the Philippines.

Thank you very much to all of you. (applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Formal Launch of OFQ Savings Instruments of DBP and LBP at the Reception with the Filipino Community in Hong Kong. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412122432/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1056&Itemid=38