Thank you very much Cerge, not only the longest serving chairman of KBP but also my new Director General of the Presidential Management Staff. Congratulations!

Congressman Remulla; Mayor Tolentino; Chairman Nicdao, thank you for the beautiful things that you said. And thank you also for the cooperation of KBP to balance press freedom and national security; Butch Canoy, thank you very much for your leadership in the KBP; and to all of you, good morning again to all of you.

We are together again. Every year, even when I was still a senator, we are together, don't you get tired? I don't. I don't get tired because we value your support and service to the Filipino people.

We often say and will say again: we stand for the freedom of the media as a bulwark of Philippine democracy. We embrace the central role of responsible media. Responsible media, that is the stance of KBP. The stance of KBP is also our stance. The central role of responsible media in uplifting our politics, economy and society.

You are strong partners of the presidency in addressing the challenges facing our people. First of all, let me say that our partnership is really important as mentioned by Chairman Nicdao. He said there was a plot in February. There was a plot against the government, and there was also a plot by the responsible media to remain responsible. Because remaining responsible is also remaining free media.

And now, some of the events that led from that event — that attempted coup in February — are finally coming to a closure, I hope.

I personally commend the operatives who worked on the Honasan case. I hope there will be no more destabilizing in our democracy and our economy.

The people are tired of adventurism. They seek opportunities to move up and forward in an atmosphere of political stability. The confidence of the world in the Philippines grows firmer everyday. We must put coup threats in the dustbin of history. And we must put coup plotters in jail as we traverse the long journey to the first world in the next two decades.

It is time for solidarity and hard work, not messing up the lives of our people.

The ten who killed the media workers have been arrested. I am saddened that this has disturbed not only those here but also the whole world with bad news like the killing of media workers. The level of political violence is unacceptable and contrary to our democracy.

Let us clarify, we really do not like what is happening. We are taking some firm steps to control it. There have been successes, as I said, ten of the media killers have been arrested and are in jail. Hopefully, when they are arrested and imprisoned, the headlines will be the same as when they killed media workers.

It is very unfortunate that many radical groups against the government are taking advantage of the situation. They are purging their ranks, killing innocent civilians, and then blaming the government. However, we will not allow extremism.

Extra-judicial killings have been a long-standing illness of the Philippines. That is why we formed the Melo Commission. That is why we met with international human rights groups. That is why we are very determined to solve the problem.

We are not asking the media to report only good things, but to deliver the facts straight and accurate. I think that is really the essence of the KBP code. And there are many good things happening that are not as widely reported in the media compared to what the people need to know. Now is the best opportunity to bring the good news to the people so that we can reap their confidence along with the world. I don't need to list all the good news. Chairman Nicdao has already mentioned so many good news that we only see on the business page and not on the front page.

And we have so many people and entities that we must thank because of the good news. We extol our overseas Filipino workers who continue to be a strong driving force of our economy. Have you noticed that many of them are now buying houses and condos here? This is boosting our housing and construction industry. Because the mood of our people is becoming upbeat, our inspiration is strengthened to push and advance our roadmap for global competitiveness. You, KBP, are also looking for the competitiveness of your industry because of the advancement of technology in the world, as is the entire country.

We must be able to sustain the confidence reaped by Filipinos the world over and at home by our unswerving attention to economic take off, social justice, the rule of law and effective democracy.

The face of national unity and consolidation is coming into sharp focus through the responsible exercise of media freedom. And the responsible exercise of media freedom is different from the exercise of a license, of a media license. What we’re after is freedom but responsible media. Through the exercise of responsible media freedom, help me make our people understand the reforms we must pursue to move forward. As we said, move forward faster by staying in tune with our vision.

You have a vision of excellence and triumph for the broadcast industry. We have a vision of excellence and triumph of our whole country.

So together, let us work stronger, faster. Let us impart to our people our agenda of excellence and triumph. Congratulations!

Thank you very much. Hope to see you next year.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Ceremonies of the 32nd Top Level Management Conference (TLMC) of KBP member stations. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203437/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3035&Itemid=38