Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Grand Opening of Hilton Cebu Resort and Spa and Ceremonial Switch-on of the Leyte-Cebu Interconnection Project (CMIP)

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hilton Cebu Hotel and Spa, Punta Engaño, Mactan Island Lapu-Lapu City, Cebu, October 26, 2005]

Daghan salamat, Secretary Ace Durano, our secretary of tourism, a native of Cebu province. Congratulations for your work in making Cebu and the Philippine tourism grow by leaps and bounds. Congratulations!

Other members of the Cabinet and other appointive officials most of whom have already been acknowledged by our host; Governor Garcia and the other officials of Cebu; local officials of Cebu; Governor Lerias and the other visitors from the neighboring provinces; Mayor Radaza and the other officials of Lapu-Lapu City and the other mayors of the different cities and towns of Cebu, again, earlier already acknowledged by Mr. Osmeña; Congresswoman Nerissa Soon-ruiz, the congresswoman of this district, the 6th district of Cebu. And I think not all of the congressmen were mentioned so I will mention them — we have Congressman Tony Cuenco; we have Congressman Durano; Congressman Gullas and Congressman Badilles.

I’d like to greet also those that I especially asked to be invited here to this occasion, the Cebu chamber led by Robert Go, the president; and the Sangguniang Kabataan of the Visayas led by the Vice President for Visayas board member Geneda Salcedo; and of course to the many visitors who are here today both those whom I asked to be invited and those invited by the Hilton. Congratulations to all of us for this wonderful grand opening, Mr. Osmeña especially and the whole Hilton family.

I’m so glad that you asked me to join you in this grand opening. I had a sentimental reason for accepting this invitation especially. The Hilton was the very first five-star hotel to come to the Philippines, and that was when my father was president and he invited the Hilton especially to come to the Philippines because he wanted to develop tourism. As we heard from Mr. Maier during the turmoil, the political turmoil of 1983, Hilton pulled their stakes, but after 17 years Hilton is back not necessarily in Manila but I’m happy in the province which gave me the one million majority in the last elections. and I think the business community of Cebu, the young people of Cebu, the NAMFREL of Cebu, everybody will attest that that one million majority was a fair and square majority.

So, of course, I have to be here. And of course I know as Mr. Osmeña said, Hilton is back and perfect timing of the lord. He wanted to do this in 1997 — couldn’t find the financing, things were bad. Finally, during our administration the Philippine export-import bank agreed to guarantee his commercial loans and now tourism is exactly on a roll at the time when Hilton is opening in the Philippines and in Cebu.

We expect 2.7 million tourists to come to the Philippines this year. What’s that Ace? A 22 percent increase in tourism over last year. Last year, half of the tourists, the 2.4 tourists who came to the Philippines came to Cebu. This year, of the 2.7 million tourists we expect 75 percent to come to Cebu.

Indeed, Philippine tourism is on a roll. Cebu tourism is on a roll, in front of great destinations. Not only the beautiful white sand beaches, the diving spots, correct, among the best spots in the planet, I hear. The beautiful bird sanctuary of Olango island that we just visited when we were waiting for the crowd to come. And I’d like to congratulate the DENR because we went to Olango island because Olango island is one of the three most important bird sanctuaries in our country and is very important for us to continue to protect our country from the avian flu. Mr. Osmeña talked about the avian flu. It’s been in the region for the last two years. It is now spreading westward to Russia, Turkey, etc. But for the last two years, the Philippines has been saved from the avian flu. Let’s thank the Lord for that.

Our peace and order has also improved. Our infrastructure, thanks to lovely hotels like the Hilton. Our stable power, thanks to major projects like what we just switched on earlier — the Leyte-Cebu connection and the Leyte-Mactan connection. These two connections that we switched on today will make sure that Cebu’s power will have no brown outs for the next five years. Of course, if Cebu grows faster than we expected, and it might very well do so, then that guarantee will be good for three years. But then we’ll have the money to put up the additional transmissions. And the power rates here — correct me if I’m wrong, Secretary Lotilla of energy — are competitive because it is geothermal and vat zero rated. So therefore put up more tourism facilities here in Cebu.

And with all these new hotels, five-star hotels, now Cebu can host next year’s Asean plus 3 summit. It’s going to be a great summit, not only for ASEAN but for us because Cebu is what we want to showcase. Cebu is indeed a showcase of what the Philippines can be. Cebu is a strong island. Tommy, Gwen and all of the other officials here, Mayor Ouano, Mayor Radaza, the congressmen, the board members, the vice governor, the officials, all of them contribute to making Cebu a strong island. Cebu can be our model for a strong republic.

And today, I thought I’d spend this time to outline what we must do to make the nation as strong as Cebu is as an island.

First, we must begin by reconciling the nation with God. Look what Mr. Osmeña said, everything seemed lost, and there were even those who were persecuting him — I’d like to know more about the stories of the persecution later — but he turned to God. And we, we have avian flu around us, we have terrorism, we have destabilizers, we have high oil prices, we must turn to God. That’s the first thing, reconciling with God.

And then we must turn our focus to the ordinary people we must serve. Ordinary citizens and the businessmen who need a lot of things to do to the government. We must redirect the focus of government so that its bureaucracy will be more responsive to the call of the times.

Yesterday, when I had a speech before the… A launching or promotion of entrepreneurship at the basic education levels, I said, that we will reorganize or we will redo the executive order on reengineering so that we will look at a day in the life of the average entrepreneur or a week in the life and check all the frontline services that he has to deal with, and those are the first ones that we will attend to. I’m glad we have businessmen from Manila like Louie Sicat who’s here and I’m glad also we have people like Robert Go who’s here. And I invited you so that you can help the committee on effective governance which I will ask to be headed for this project by my Deputy National Security Adviser Virtus Gil to work out, identify these offices in the day in the life of the entrepreneur and fix the frontline services.

That’s as far as systems are concerned. Physically, we must have a clean up drive in all provincial capitols and municipalities. I have no doubt that the Cebuanos will do that and offices of government. Why do I have no doubt? Because when I had my inauguration in Cebu last year, oh! We spent so little because the officials of Cebu province and all the places we passed: Mandaue, Mactan and Cebu City — Tommy Osmeña, thank you, too — cleaned up the whole place and beautified the whole place themselves. And that’s why I have no doubt that we will be very successful and cost effective. When we have an Asean summit next year because I know that the people of Cebu themselves will do this beautification. But we need to do this not only in Cebu but in the whole country.

And that’s why I especially asked the SK to be invited here. Because I hope that the SK will make their major project after this convention the face lifting and the beautification of the capitols and municipal halls and government offices and buildings in your locality.

We must shape a physical environment, a bureaucratic environment that is conducive to wealth creation with the end goal of being first world in 20 years when our SK will already be the main players in society. And to do this I want to mobilize the whole of Philippine society starting with the pillars of business in Metro Manila — so I said some of these things yesterday — Davao and Cebu such as the Cebu chamber. I count on you a lot, Robert for this environment for wealth creation.

And speaking of wealth creation, we must define the major role of land in wealth creation. The way it’s being done in Cebu City, in Talisay City, in Mandaue City even in Bantayan island, reclamation projects maximize land as a source of wealth and they fast-track development of the rural countryside. We have to strengthen that system. I’d like to greet also Mayor Durano who is there with Congressman Gullas and to thank them too for all of the things that they have been doing in their part of the island.

We have to strengthen our republic not only bureaucratically, spiritually, physically, but also physically in the strength of muscle is which is what Mr. Osmeña talked about earlier, where does he get the muscle. He gets the muscle from the Lord but the Lord has instruments to use. The Lord use the Exim Bank of the Philippines as an instrument for him to acquire the financial muscle. The Lord uses also our physical forces as part of its instrument to strengthen our republic.

And because we need to strengthen our republic in this day of competition, terrorism, destabilization, high oil prices, I’ve instructed Budget secretary Romulo Neri to adopt a one-time mode for releasing funds for the nation’s program for the armed forces and the police. Because no matter how beautiful our beaches are if we have turmoil, like the turmoil of 1983 that drove Hilton away the first time around, we will not be able to strengthen our economy.

To strengthen our republic of course means not only muscle, it may mean establishing a government of national unity. And to do this, I shall initiate consultations on this idea to the meeting of major political parties. Congressman Tony Cuenco is one of the advocates of unity, internationally, domestically, him being the chairman of our Committee on International Relations. And they look, the rest of the world looks to us for this kind of unity that they have seen in the countries around us.

The proposal for a government of national unity is not meant to please the opposition but to consolidate the nation behind our economic take off. They talk about rejecting power sharing, this is not about power sharing. Power sharing is only applicable in a parliamentary system. So we wait for the change in the charter. But in the meantime, the word for it is not power sharing, it’s sharing public leadership and responsibility for the common good. While there are those who reject it, it remains an option for leaders like Senator Angara who want to pitch in and I thank them for that.

To strengthen our republic we shall also introduce through your help the policy makers, the movers and shakers of industry, our future of the land a more democratic, more participatory mechanism for maintaining dialogue with the people in lieu of militant street demonstrations and rallies and provide the foundation for creating a mass base for government.

A tall order, but if you are going to look at all of these things, Cebu has done it. If Cebu has done it, we work together, the Philippines can do it.

But I say this here in Cebu, because I especially ask the people of Cebu, you gave me the mandate to be President of the Philippines, help me to build the hopes and dreams of the young. Help me to do what has to be done so that all our people will become one Filipino nation.

Daghan salamat. Congratulations to the Hilton!

Thank you for this grand opening.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Grand Opening of Hilton Cebu Resort and Spa and Ceremonial Switch-on of the Leyte-Cebu Interconnection Project (CMIP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092239/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5195&Itemid=38