Thank you very much, Madame Undersecretary of Trade and Industry.

Honorable Lu Zhangong, Party Secretary of Fujian, thank you so much for your warm welcome and your great hospitality; Governor Huang Xiao Jing and the other officials of Fujian and Xiamen and the other members of the business community and party leaders; members of the Philippine delegation; leaders of the business community both from the Philippines and Fujian province especially the leaders of the Federation of the Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce who are hosting this luncheon today. Thank you very much for putting together this wonderful luncheon. To all of you, good afternoon.

I’m deeply honored to be visiting China once again. I cannot remember how many times I have been to China since I was a young lady, co-chair of the Philippines-China Friendship Association working for the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and China. Now this time, it is an honor for me to be here again especially because I will be co-chairing with Premier Wen Jiabao the Commemorative Summit to celebrate the 15th Anniversary of ASEAN-China Partnership.

All of the ASEAN leaders are travelling to China to celebrate this very important milestone, important for ASEAN, important for the region, important for the world. Open dialogue and trust between peoples and nations have never been more important than in today’s world.

Speaking as chairman of ASEAN, I can say that ASEAN takes some amount of pride and satisfaction in helping China become an economic powerhouse as a result of the economic, political and cultural collaboration between ASEAN and China.

China has surged onto the world stage and ASEAN has surged with it. The change has been profound. ASEAN welcomes the deepening of ties through the ASEAN-China free trade agreement. This agreement is built on respect, reciprocity and pragmatism. It will help all our economies grow and strengthen peace and security in the region.

So it gives me great pleasure to declare to you today that relations between ASEAN and China have never been better or stronger. This is an important state of affairs that can only help the region and the world.

I am also proud of the role that the Philippines is playing in the integration of China into our region. As I made this trip to your great country, I welcome this opportunity to communicate with the people of China in order to help forge stronger ties between China and the Philippines.

Relations between China and the Philippines are at an all-time high and are based on mutual respect. A golden age, in the words of President Hu Jintao when he said this to me in Chile in 2004. I visited China on a state visit in September 2004 and President Hu visited Manila on a state visit in 2005. These respective visits underscore the growing maturity of our relationship and the commitment we both share to strengthen our ties.

Our nation’s relationship with China is among the most important ties of our country. Relations with China are now more confident, mature and comprehensive punctuated with substantial and important projects aimed at deepening exchanges in a number of areas, including economics, trade and investment, and even defense and security.

From 2001 to 2005, trade with China grew at an annual rate of 42 percent. And during President Hu’s visit to Manila, the Philippines and China formalized an agreement for the early harvest program through an MOU signed on April 27 of 2005. This early harvest agreement includes 214 tariff lines or product lines for immediate tariff elimination.

The Philippines electronics industry gained access to a new market because of our friendship with China. As the demand for electronics slowed down in the United States and U.S. manufacturing firms outsourced to other countries than Southeast Asia like India, the Philippines found another huge customer with China. And today, China is the biggest electronics market of the Philippines. Philippine electronics firms were able to boost their export performance during difficult years. The top exports between China and the Philippines comprise semiconductor devices, machinery parts and accessories, electrical and electronic machinery, and electronic micro assemblies. Approximately one-third of total electronics exports of the Philippines are skewed towards the Chinese market.

China is now our number three trading partner all in all. Bilateral trade between the Philippines and China amounted to almost 17 billion dollars in 2005. And we are delighted with the financing of our north rail project, the train that will bring our people faster from Manila to Clark, one of our major industrial areas, my home province and the home province of our Senator Lapid who is here in our delegation. This is one of the most important projects in our infrastructure development which is crucial to our economic development plan for the nation.

We are also happy to note China’s support for the Philippines in the field of agriculture, especially with the establishment of the Philippine-Sino Center for Agricultural Technology in Nueva Ecija. When I first visited this Filipino-China Agricultural Technology Center, I thought I was entering a Ming Palace.

But I should not say only on the Philippines and China, I should think especially of the Philippines and Fujian. The people of Fujian and the Filipinos as we have heard from our previous speakers share a special relationship. This relationship goes back many years to when the first generations of Fujianese emigrated to the Philippines in search of green pastures in an open and hospitable land.

Today, the Filipino-Chinese business community — represented here by so many Chinese businessmen both members and not members of the Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of Commerce and industries –the many individual members of my delegation is an important integral part of the Philippine economy.

Dr. Francis Chua mentioned to all that my husband, Attorney Mike Arroyo, Mike Tuason Arroyo is a descendant of a Chinese from Fujian, from Xiamen in fact, His name was Son Tua and later on after several generations the Son Ttua became Tuason. That is the family name of my mother-in-law. I am happy to be a great granddaughter of Fujian and Xiamen.

And here in Fujian province, especially in Xiamen, several of Philippines’ Taipans have returned and invested in prominent businesses and facilities. We even have an SM mall here in Xiamen in Fujian. And Dr. Lucio Tan has a bank in Xiamen and I… And I saw Mr. Jon Ng somewhere and I said, “Jon, don’t you have any investment in Xiamen, too?” Yes, he has a beautiful building also here in Xiamen. Those are only a few examples of Filipino-Chinese Taipans who have invested here in Xiamen and in Fujian.

Tomorrow, we shall be going to Jinjiang, where we will visit the shrine of our national hero Jose Rizal. Yes, another descendant of Chinese from Fujian province. The monument of Jose Rizal is literally a monument to our close ties and friendship.

Both the Philippines and China, especially Fujian, should push to further deepen existing cooperation between the two countries. We hope that agricultural trade between the Philippines and China especially Fujian would increase because we have the Philippine-China Memorandum of Understanding on the early harvest program. Already I understand Philippine bananas are number one in China. Philippine pineapples are number one in China. I hope more and more from Fujian will buy our Philippine fruits and other agricultural products.

And most importantly, as our Filipino-Chinese have looked at Fujian province as an area of destination, China and especially Fujian should look at the Philippines as a destination for greater investment. Francis Chua mentioned some of them — mining. There is a very big demand for minerals in China — copper, nickel and other minerals. And I understand especially here in Fujian.

Infrastructure. I already mentioned the railroad to the north, to my province which is a very industrial area. We are also looking forward to China’s financing our railroad to the south all the way to what we call the Bicol peninsula.

Agriculture and fisheries, and housing. I hope that we will be able to conclude agreements — not this time but when premier visits the Philippines in December — on housing assistance from the People’s Republic of China.

I encourage Chinese firms to plan relocation of the assembly of agricultural machinery to the Philippines. The Philippines buys a lot of agricultural machinery from China and sometimes we need to have parts to service this machinery. It would all be so much simpler if the machines are assembled right there in the Philippines.

I would also like to invite Chinese fishing firms to participate actively in the Philippine-China fisheries cooperation activities under the bilateral memorandum of understanding on fisheries cooperation which we signed during my state visit to Beijing in 2004.

And the Philippines is the perfect regional partner to aid as a logistics partner and provider of high-value, high-skilled labor. As Francis said, “That is our best resource of all — our world class Filipino workers.”

And so, let me conclude by saying, that we look forward to the day when China and especially Fujian — the home of many of our families in the Philippines. The homeland of many of our families in the Philippines — when China and Fujian substantially raise the level of investments in the Philippines.

I hope to see the day that indeed the Philippines will be part of the Golden Triangle of Party Secretary Lu Zhangong — the Golden Triangle of Fujian, Taiwan and the Philippines.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Luncheon Meeting with Fujian Business Leaders. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409203747/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3001&Itemid=38