I am pleased to meet the organizations that provide support so that we can finally achieve the goal of improving the lives of our citizens.

In the new politics, it is not only personalities and politicians who lead, it is not only patronage that prevails. In the new politics, platforms are important and institutional engagement with the people is important. Part of the institutional engagement with the people is the role of NGOs such as the Social Housing Movement.

I am here at your celebration because of the inclusion of a sector related to the distribution of decent housing and land and ways in which the people can find immediate solutions to the expanding housing needs of our citizens, especially the poor.

The new politics must have a platform. The platform of our government now is very clear. What we are striving for is to eradicate poverty within the decade. This goal has four agendas: First, jobs that will come from investments; second, modernization of agriculture related to social equity; third, special attention to the disadvantaged; and, fourth, to raise the level of morality in government and society.

Thirdly, the special attention to the disadvantaged includes ensuring that the poor attain security of tenure.

I have learned that the Social Housing Movement has been around for a long time and you have already accomplished a lot in the field of housing. This includes active participation in relocation, community organizing, site development, socio-economic surveys, and others.

You serve the urban poor, as does my administration. The urban poor should not be considered a problem. The urban poor should be considered part of the solution. This is through people’s organizations.

A major solution is to help the urban poor attain security of tenure. We have already done this, in the first year of my administration, for more than 150,000 families. Most of the 150,000 who obtained security of tenure are those living on land no longer used by the government. I ordered that these unused government lands, such as those near the train tracks where there are no longer trains passing, be sold at low prices to those living there. We have also declared some alienable and disposable areas for purchase by the urban poor.

There are also some who live on private land but were included in the community mortgage program. Here, they have great partners in NGOs such as the Social Housing Movement.

Sometimes, we cannot avoid relocating those called squatters. For example, those living in dangerous areas, such as under bridges, along rivers, along train tracks, where trains even pass, and flood-prone areas. Here, we also need the help of NGOs such as the social housing movement.

Another requirement for relocation is those living in right-of-way areas. Also, those squatters who are demolished due to a court order, and usually this court order is because the landowner is private. These people need help finding a place to move to.

Therefore, I reiterate today that housing and land security are a central part of our government's platform.

The housing sector plays a very large role in expanding our economy.

When a citizen has security of land ownership, when they already have a document, this document can be used to borrow capital for livelihood. A transfer certificate of title is not necessary. Many documents are now respected by lenders. This is happening in many other countries and is also happening in the Philippines, according to a study by an expert in these matters, Hernando de Soto. We want this system to expand so that urban poor people can use the land they occupy not only to live on but also as collateral to obtain livelihood capital.

Thus, former squatters will have livelihoods and our high unemployment rate will decrease.

This is part of the reason why we are giving primary importance to securing land ownership for the urban poor. Perhaps, what we have achieved for more than 150,000 families within a year is a testament to your government's sincerity regarding this.

Based on the certainty of the land on which they are built, we are also looking for affordable housing for our poorest citizens. For example, I saw a house in Bulacan made of bamboo that only cost P18,000 to build. This is a good and economical halfway house for those who have been relocated.

The HUDCC is the primary agency managing housing and land matters. The HUDCC inherited many vacant houses from the previous administration and these are now being sold at discounted prices. This is just one proof of our effort to give special attention to our less fortunate in our economic development plan.

I hope the Social Housing Movement will take inventory of these vacant houses so that you can find beneficiaries who can buy them on a lease-to-own or long-term lease or easy-installment basis.

The HUDCC is also looking for funds for houses for workers. The GSIS is willing to fund this. However, the GSIS does not engage in retail because housing is not the GSIS’s job. It only invests its funds in housing but does not build housing itself. Therefore, the GSIS funds must go through banks. The banks will become middle-men for these funds. However, so far, banks are hesitant to be aggressive because during the 1997 Asian crisis and the post-BW crisis in the year 2000, banks were affected by many unpaid housing loans due to the economic downturns in those years. So I hope the NGOs, the socially-oriented entrepreneurs, will invest. There is funding available but there needs to be an investor, someone to operate, to develop. Including the Social Housing Movement, NGOs, I hope they will help the government here, especially those NGOs that have proven they are a good credit risk because many middlemen are needed to actually build the housing development.

Another reason why banks are hampered is that they are paid slowly – it takes a long time to recover capital in housing. There is also a lot of red tape before they can start development and sell houses. Perhaps the Social Housing Movement knows this because they go through this red tape. That's why a major thing the HUDCC did was to reduce the red tape in the housing permit process.

Previously, 188 signatures were needed; now, only 40 signatures are required. In the past, it took two-and-a-half years to finish the paperwork before development could begin. Now it only takes three months.

So, I hope that NGOs with the capacity, and businessmen with knowledge in development, will focus on low-cost housing because there is a lot of housing needed for our workers.

In the next two years, the HUDCC will establish several key directions for the housing sector.

It is now easier to borrow money for housing. The interest rate on loans is now the lowest in the history of our country. This is also due to the government's efficient handling of the national budget. Our budget deficit is small, so the government borrows less, and therefore does not compete with the private sector for loans. Competition for loans is one of the factors that increases the interest rate. So if a large borrower, like the government, is no longer borrowing as much, the interest rate goes down. Now is the time for developers and those who want to take out a housing loan to borrow money so that our workers can have housing.

Even before I became President, I was going around the urban poor, and during my tours, our countrymen always said that their main need is land security, or shelter security. This is why I want 150,000 families to have shelter security every year. We achieved this last year. I hope NGOs like the Social Housing Movement will help me achieve this again this year. Because last year, most of the land distributed was government land. Now that a lot of government land has already been distributed, we need to do more community mortgage programs to reach 150,000 beneficiary families. And I know that the community mortgage program is one of the activities of NGOs like the Social Housing Movement.

I also want our country to be able to build 100,000 units of low-cost housing for workers and 50,000 units of socialized housing for the poorest of the poor every year.

I know that if our poor countrymen had a choice, they would not want to be squatters. It is really sad to be a squatter in one's own country. But it is very difficult to get land in the city because the price of land here is high. Nevertheless, I understand the dream of every person to have a decent and secure home.

But there are also some who want to be squatters — they are the professional squatters. These professional squatters are the ones making our job difficult in providing rights to the genuine landless who truly want security in the land they occupy. That is why one of the requests of the Social Housing Movement to me is to create a task force, an anti-professional squatting task force, so that we can separate the genuine landless who are looking for a home from the professional squatters who are using squatting to make a living. We have already done this before. When NGOs report, we have already arrested some well-known professional squatters and we have filed cases against them. So we know we can succeed as long as we focus our attention. Let's find the syndicates that are extorting money from you and then arrest them, prosecute them. This is what I expect from the Social Housing Movement.

I have two messages for the people of Payatas: First, declare the entire area as alienable land and then just add a provision that if a private sector can prove ownership, we will respect it. Second, we will continue the President's bridge in Payatas.

In closing, I pray that on your anniversary next year, we can all say that this agreement, which came from good consultation with the people themselves, will succeed because we are together in action and in deed.

Thank you all very much.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.