Thank you very much Chair Juarez for your introduction.

I would like to begin by greeting all our awardees today and to greet also the officials of Northern Mindanao who have come to be here with us and the cooperative movement. We have the mayor of the City of Cagayan de Oro, Mayor Jaraula, thank you for your welcome; we have a congressman from Cagayan de Oro, Congressman Rufus Rodriguez; from the province of Misamis Oriental, we have Governor Oscar Moreno and Congressman Bambi Emano; from Agusan del Norte, Congressman Joboy Aquino and from Agusan del Sur, Governor Tina Plaza. And to all of you leaders of the cooperative movement especially here in Mindanao, congratulations for convening this very 1st Mindanao Cooperative for Peace Conference!

This occasion of ours is historic today, and it is also an important day because we have combined the spirit of cooperation with the foundations of peace. I am happy that the use of the spirit of cooperation towards peace has begun.

Because especially in Mindanao, I think we all know — those who are here today — the development must come hand to hand with peace, because the problem is rooted in economic exclusion. There is a lack of opportunities here for development, especially for ethnic communities and communities of different cultures, and this has been the root of wars for decades.

I lived here in Mindanao, in Iligan when I was young. I saw the unity of people from different sectors or different ethnic origins and religions. When I was young, my grandmother was with me here, so I lived in her house, her relatives were from Pangasinan, Pangasinan and Ilocano. My other young friends were Bisaya, the trainer who bought our copra was Chinese, the owner of the electric company was a Spanish mestizo, many of those selling in the market stalls were Muslim. We were all always together, there was no war, no conflict. But now our situation is different, I understand the pain felt by the people of Mindanao now that they are fighting! Muslims, Christians, Lumad are fighting. Therefore, I share the great hope of the people of Mindanao as we use the principles of cooperation for peace.

As Director Ravanera, our convenor — and you, didn't you invite me, wrote hoping I could come here — the principles of cooperativism can be used to improve various services and sectors. And here in Mindanao you have agricultural cooperatives that loan capital to buy farm inputs. This is important especially today because today is the anniversary of the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act, many of whose farmers.

Hopefully, cooperatives will greatly help with the reform of ancestral domain and our bigger reform, the bigger reform is the ancestral domain law together with land reform. And I am happy and proud of our administration for distributing millions of hectares of land throughout the Philippines, more than a million beneficiaries of CARP and almost as many indigenous people are now proud owners of their own land under our administration.

Throughout the country, since the start of our administration, because only our administration has given CADTs and CALTs, we have already given 3.6 million hectares for more than 800,000 beneficiaries. Therefore, the Lumad in Mindanao… therefore the Lumad now control their lands and their natural resources. Because here in Mindanao there are CADTs for 1.7 million hectares for almost 400,000 beneficiaries. Therefore, the Lumad in Mindanao control the lands and natural resources but they may need cooperatives to help them to be able to practice the rights that they now have according to law.

I understand that in Region 10, we have 40 cooperatives of Lumads and 15 cooperatives of Muslims including cooperatives of former MNLF combatants. And indeed, that is a concrete way by which we can say cooperatives promote peace. Several cooperatives of the Lumads are into Community-Based Forest Management Agreements with the DENR.

But there are some cooperatives that they were formed because they wanted to do business and these cooperatives organized for the business of the Lumads, some are having difficulty because the members do not have much experience in managing the cooperative. I would like to request from the large cooperatives, especially those experienced, those they call millionaire cooperatives, because they are very big, very long-standing, very experienced, very successful, I hope you can help these new cooperatives.

We see cooperatives as an important instrument to fight poverty and therefore because poverty and conflict go together, peace and progress go together, it also becomes an important instrument to be able to bring about peace. And it is important that we integrate our efforts to fight poverty in order to promote peace.

In the national government, we have been integrating the programs of the DSWD, the DOH and other Anti-poverty agencies into a National Social Welfare Program to protect the poorest from the global crisis, to help those whose earnings are limited whether by illness, disability, loss of job, old age, and also those who are poor because they live in marginalized communities just like our IPs who are the poorest communities in our country. And we seek to support them and help them through an integrated social welfare program that includes livelihood projects, skills and technology transfer, emergency and temporary employment, pension funds, food aid, cash subsidies, child nutrition, adult health care, medical missions, salary loans, insurance, housing programs, educational and other savings schemes, cheaper medicine — thanks to our congressmen who are here today and their colleagues — and microfinance and here again our cooperatives are important.

Cooperatives need to lend capital to microentrepreneurs. During our administration, there is an unprecedented P150 billion pesos unleashed for microcredit. And much of this, though it came from the national government, reached microentrepreneurs through rural banks, accredited NGOs and cooperatives. And there again is your important role in fighting poverty and promoting peace.

I am happy to know that 60% of the cooperatives here in Mindanao help microenterprises, congratulations to you. This is an effective livelihood for most of our people. Microentrepreneurs have already created almost three million jobs since 2001 until June of 2009 and many of them rely on cooperatives to help them not only from financing microfinance but also from… in order to learn the management skills that cooperatives, especially our millionaire experienced cooperatives, have a lot of experience.

Therefore today, cooperatives, leaders of our cooperative movement, our purpose today is the purpose of the national government in our part, so we joined this occasion today, let us continue the programs that will help all sectors and also help in promoting peace in Mindanao and in the country.

And I trust that the programs started by the cooperatives are truly your purpose, and that will also be your accomplishment — prosperity and peace throughout Mindanao and therefore throughout the country.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 1st Mindanao Cooperative Peace Forum. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133957/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26685&Itemid=38