Thank you very much.

Thank you very much to Secretary Angelo Reyes for introducing me.

And I would also like to greet the various guests who are here: our Congressmen who help the veterans, Congressman Bong Gordon and Congressman Joey Solis; as well as the various elected officials who are here today. And of course, I greet and thank him for his very good speech welcoming me, and expressing the support of the veterans and their sons and daughters to me, President Emmanuel de Ocampo and Mrs. De Ocampo. Our president of the Association of Generals and Flag Officers, General Ernesto Gidaya and former Ambassador; and all of you, friends, officials of the Veterans Federation, veterans, their children, their loved ones left here in this world:

A warm greeting to all of you, heroes who defended our freedom! It is an honor for me to be with you again, like a year ago, those who showed unwavering courage and skill so that your children, grandchildren, friends, and countrymen can continue to enjoy freedom.

I am also pleased to be with your relatives again, who keep the greatness of our veterans alive.

In any war, in the Spanish-American War, in the Second World War, in the Korean War, even in the Vietnam War, the Filipino showed his love for freedom.

I know this because, as President de Ocampo said, I am also a relative of a veteran. My father, as President de Ocampo said, my uncle Angel Macapagal was a veteran who participated in the Death March and when he was there in the Death March—when the Death March passed—because the Death March was from Bataan to Capas, passing through Lubao—when he passed through Lubao he was thirsty so he knew the wells in Lubao, he went to a well by the side of the road, he noticed that there was no Japanese guard watching him while he drank from the well, he escaped and many of his companions saw him and followed and escaped from Lubao in Pampanga. My uncle Angel Macapagal, in order for him to get the Veterans’ benefits in America, he lived in America in the last years of his life and he soon died. My late father, former President Diosdado Macapagal, as President de Ocampo said, was also a veteran; he was a finance officer of a guerrilla unit. And it was in his work as a finance officer of the guerrilla unit that he earned the nickname “Macapagal, the incorruptible” because of his honest handling of the guerrillas’ money.

Sometimes—you know this better than anyone because you fought for our country—you know that sometimes you have to struggle to enjoy peace. The Filipino race will not lack people who are willing to offer their lives to defend our right to live and be free.

More than fifty years have passed since World War II and more than thirty years have passed since our veterans last faced war, you.

And since then until now our world has changed. Our former enemies are now close allies. For example, if we look at the Philippines 100 years ago, who was our enemy? The Americans. In a few days I will go to Batangas to celebrate the end of the Philippine-American War—meaning 100 years ago, the Americans were our enemy a century ago. But now they—the American enemy we had a century ago became our allies during the Second World War, your allies—and now they are our partners in our fight against terrorists.

During the Second World War when the Americans were with us, allies, who was our enemy? The Japanese—they were our enemy during World War II. But now they are giving us the largest amount of official development assistance so that we can continue our development projects.

The face of warfare is different now. The face of the enemy is different. Before, America during the Philippine-American War; Japan during World War II; but now our enemies are no longer countries but the terrorists who are in various countries and sowing terror like in the south of our own country. In Basilan and there are also some in Sulu, our soldiers are being helped by American soldiers through the Balikatan 2-1 program to pursue and defeat these soulless terrorists.

Balikatan is an exercise of cooperation in training and all those involved in it, whether Filipino or American, have something to learn from each other.

The cooperation of the Americans does not mean that we underestimate the skill and courage of the Filipino soldier. The skill and courage of our soldiers are undeniable. You veterans have shown this many times and our soldiers today continue to show this courage.

We do not need to borrow courage from any race. Their courage deserves to be matched, only, with weapons which are being loaned and taught to us in Balikatan by the Americans. I hope that the Abu Sayyaf and whatever other terrorist group will be wiped out because of our cooperation. Our courage, their equipment, that is a good combination.

The fight against terrorism is part of the struggle against our greatest enemy, and that is poverty. Fighting terrorism is also fighting poverty. Therefore, it is the duty of all Filipinos to fight poverty so that we can continue to enjoy the freedom you fought for before.

Even though the battlefield has changed today, what the veterans like you have shown remains the standard of courage and loyalty of the entire nation.

The nation will not forget the courage of the Filipino soldier in the Battle of Balantang, the raid of Muntinlupa, the Liberation of Los Baños and other struggles. We must not forget names like Peralta — the hero from Capiz who was my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal’s, Angie Reyes — we must not forget Kangleon, Marking who had a movie made about his life, Alejo Santos, Lazo-Bueno — so I asked Ms. Lazo, “are you a veteran or a daughter?” She said, “tourism,” but she is here as the daughter of a veteran. Adevoso, Terry Adevoso who was the operations man of my father’s politics until he became president — Adevoso’s skill in war operations was the same skill in political operations that’s why my father became president. And when my father became president and found so many unemployed people, he created an emergency employment program, which was managed by two well-known veterans — first, the overall administrator was Terry Adevoso and his deputy was Emmanuel de Ocampo who now leads the Veterans Federation.

In our fight against poverty, I call on our countrymen to show the courage and love of country that you have shown. You defended our freedom, it is now the duty of our generation, the current generation and future generations to protect this freedom and nurture the ideals you started.

Only in this way can this generation and future generations show their gratitude and respect to our veterans.

Gratitude and the continuation of the great goals of the veterans are the reason we celebrate Veterans Week every year.

However, honoring your greatness is not only through words but also through (deeds). That’s why during my father’s time, the Veterans Bank — General de Ocampo and Romy Roxas are now running the Veterans Hospital during those times — especially the Veterans Bank was my father’s pet project, and a long time ago that bank collapsed. And perhaps, God willed it, when it was discussed what to do with the Veterans Bank, it so happened that two children of Diosdado Macapagal who established the Veterans Bank were seated in the Central Bank — Boboy Macapagal, representing the Department of Finance, and Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, representing the Board of Investments, what else could the other members of the monetary board vote for if two children of Macapagal proposed that the Veterans Bank should be revived? That’s why I am happy that the Veterans Bank is thriving again.

Now that I have become president, I am working to fulfill what Republic Act 7696 states, which is to increase your monthly pension by five hundred pesos until it reaches a total of five thousand pesos per month. They mentioned the veterans who were part of my father’s administration, if you remember the senate author of this law was Bert Romulo, now my executive secretary.

I remember Bert Romulo when I first campaigned for senator in 1992, wherever we went in the campaign there was a veterans group that would meet him. That was his main campaign managers, the Veterans group. I said, “Bert, I’m so jealous of you, the veterans are campaigning for you.” That’s why I’m happy that President Emmanuel de Ocampo said that you also recognize me as one of you.

The completion of the payment of the increased pension of the veterans will begin in July of this year.

I also did not forget to raise the problem of the veterans when I visited America in November 2001. I was with Colonel de Ocampo and General Gidaya. We were together, right? We talked to various government officials, I mentioned this in our conversation with President Bush about the equity rights we desire. I know that because you know, my uncle had to stay in America to get veterans benefits, he left his wife here in the Philippines, so we really worked on that in America and I told President Bush, I also told the leaders of the Veterans Affairs Office — and General Reyes, Colonel de Ocampo and General Gidaya can tell you how I scolded the Americans when they didn’t want to commit to helping our Veterans Equity Bill. Because the day before my meeting with President Bush all his agencies related to what I was going to agenda to President Bush gave a courtesy call so that’s where the nitty-gritty was discussed so that when it came to Bush everything was resolved. That’s why in my final meeting with Condoleeza Rice before the meeting with President Bush himself, Condoleeza said to me in English, “I heard that you said something strong to our veterans officials,” because it was well known in the National Security Council and the White House that I scolded their officials of the Veterans Affairs for the good of our Veterans.

Recently, we also asked for help from two American senators who visited here, Senator Inouye and Senator Stevens, these two were veterans in the Philippine theater — American veterans who fought here — and that’s why they readily accepted our request to expedite the passage of the law regarding the equity of Filipino World War II Veterans.

You know, since my visit to President Bush, many American officials have been coming here one after another, like a follow-thru to what we talked about when I visited him. And I am happy that one of those scheduled to come here is the head of the Veterans Affairs of America, Mr. Principe. I guess, I said to Angie, he probably won’t come here if he doesn’t have a good plan to tell us. So let’s hope and pray that when the head of the Veterans Affairs Office of America comes here, he will have good news for us from the American administration.

During our last meeting, I also ordered the Philippine Veterans Affairs Office to organize the procedures to speed up the payment of your pensions. Many reforms have been implemented by the PVAO, including cleaning up the list of veterans, to remove those who are not deserving on this list. It was a good job, a good reform, but from what I see now, it still seems insufficient because how much percentage can we save by cleaning up the list? Ten percent at most.

But since I became president, because you remember January I became president, April 6 we also talked, or not, but around April 8 I think, then when I had the list cleaned, between then and now I also discovered that the funds are insufficient. The lack of funds to pay all the arrears is approximately 15 billion pesos, that’s why the payment of many veterans has been so delayed — that’s just the debt I inherited, 15 billion pesos in arrears. So it won’t be cleaned up just by cleaning up the list. So I instructed Secretary Reyes, also a veteran — not of World War II because he is young — a veteran and hero of the Mindanao War and Edsa 2, I instructed him to coordinate with the Department of Finance and Congress — Bong Gordon and I were discussing this in Subic the night before my birthday, and Congressman Dumpit also, although he is not here, he is also seriously studying finding a solution to this. So Angie said this April 9 will be discussed in our Cabinet.

On April 9th, that is Bataan Day, it is also your Veteran’s Day. We will hold the Cabinet meeting in Bataan in consideration of the Philippines’ veterans, and the priority agenda item is how we will find a solution to this large shortfall – 15 to 18 billion – of funds to pay for the arrears of Veterans benefits. That is why we are inviting Colonel de Ocampo to attend that Cabinet meeting as a resource person to find a solution for the arrears of Veterans benefits.

My message to my generation and to the younger generations is that we should strive for our love for our country to be as intense as the love offered by our veterans. Let us strive to show this love through respect for our veterans, and by working together to promote the aspirations of the veterans for freedom, peace and development.

Above all, let us intensify our efforts to overcome the problem of poverty, the main scourge in our society today. Only in this way can younger Filipinos say that they are worthy of what our veterans have offered.

So again to you, our Veterans, during our Veterans week, long live from the grateful nation.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’S Speech during the Veterans General Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230051/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7650&Itemid=38