Many thanks, Secretary Ace Durano, our Secretary of Tourism who comes from here in Cebu.

I’d like to give a special greeting to our foreign guests headed here by the Ambassador Joao Caetano da Silva of Portugal, welcome!

Mayor Radaza and the officials of Lapu-Lapu City, Governor Garcia, Congresswoman Soon Ruiz, Former Senator John Osmeña, Congressman Cuenco from Cebu City. Our colleagues in the Cabinet, aside from Secretary Durano, we have Secretary Mike Defensor and Secretary Cerge Remonde. To all of you, brothers and sisters here in Mactan and Lapu-Lapu City, I greet you all in the city of Lapu-Lapu as we celebrate today the anniversary of the battle of Mactan. Happy victory day of Mactan to all of you!

This is a lesson on the importance and patriotism for all Filipinos. Including our generation today. As Gwen Garcia said, one of her father’s favorite jokes was that Cebu killed the first tourist in the Philippines. And Ace Durano said, but the beautiful irony there is that Cebu and Bohol together are the number one tourist destination of the Philippines today here in the Philippines. Congratulations!

Our former enemy foreigners are now our friends because our freedom struggle is over. In fact, Cebu is now a favorite of foreigners but we still need unity now to hasten lasting peace and progress in our country. Now, foreigners are no longer our enemies, poverty is our biggest adversary. And because of our congressmen and their help to me, like Congresswoman Nerisse Soon Ruiz and Congressman Cuenco, we have completed the economic reforms. And with taxes, the country’s funds have increased, so now our job is the most important programs so that our people can continue to receive the first fruits of your sacrifice.

The importance of our war against poverty is significant. Perhaps here in Cebu, because you are very progressive, this program is not so important in our consciousness because there are many other provinces that are very poor, very impoverished, but here in Cebu, our goal is how to make the province of Cebu even more progressive.

And here in our celebration of the battle of Mactan, we have seen how, here in Mactan, is the favorite of tourists, so there are beautiful resorts, almost all of them are still here on Mactan Island. And it won’t be long before 18 heads of state from ASEAN, from East Asia come to visit here for our ASEAN Economic Summit which will be held in Lapu-Lapu, Mandaue and Cebu City.

I hope you are all ready. But I am sure I don’t need to say I know that the people of Mactan in Lapu-Lapu are ready for your hospitality. The people of Mactan Island in Lapu-Lapu are very handsome and very friendly. That’s why I really chose that our ASEAN Summit be held in the three cities.

And I am looking forward to that time that even now there are many tourists. When the 18 heads of government come, their secretaries of foreign affairs, their economic ministers, their senior officials, their business leaders, their business community, their media… Top media representatives. Wow! Perhaps when the ASEAN Summit is over, more will visit Mactan Island and all of Cebu.

Therefore, thank you all for your continued support of the goals of our administration and I hope that the upcoming Asean Summit will be another opportunity for greater progress in Cebu, Mactan Island and Lapu-Lapu City.

Many thanks and congratulations to all of you!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the ‘Kadaugan sa Mactan’ 2006. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213938/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2431&Itemid=38