Thank you very much Secretary Romulo.

Secretary Camacho and the other Philippine participants in this Consultative Group Meeting; Mr. Pulley and the other members of the O-D-A committee; friends from Pampanga; Ladies and Gentlemen:

I would like to welcome the representatives of the International Donor Community, our partners in development, to the Philippines and to this conference. We are honored to host this meeting — the Philippines that is — for the second time. Thank you for your support and enduring faith in our country.

When I became President last year, I said that we want to win the battle against poverty within the decade.

Our vision of eradicating poverty within the decade is anchored on a comprehensive medium-term Philippine development plan. This plan revolves around four major components.

The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. We believe that this philosophy will create more jobs in the sectors and areas that count most to ease the burden of the poor.

The second component is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. This will bring economic development to the rural areas, where most of the poor live.

The third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. This will bring immediate relief to the longest-sufferers in the fringes of society.

The fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society.

We started implementing our development plan even before the document was printed.

We have been guided by real, visible and measurable targets, most of which are contained in my first state of the nation address before Congress last year.

Allow me to mention a few accomplishments.

Economic growth last year created more than two million jobs, reducing both unemployment and underemployment, and exceeding the targets in our plan.

While the economies of most of our neighbors suffered declines last year, as mentioned by Mr. Pulley, ours posted a 3.4 percent growth in GDP and of 3.7 percent growth in GNP. Our GDP growth surpassed all expectations, including our own. We actually posted one of the highest output growth rates in east and Southeast Asia.

Inflation was contained at 6.1 percent last year, very close to the lower end of our target. And inflation for February this year was at 3.4 percent, the lowest in two years.

Interest rates have gone down to their lowest in 15 years, and they can be expected to trigger an increase in economic activities. The peso has also stabilized relative to the dollar.

The budget deficit was limited to a 147 billion pesos. While pursuing our priorities and without sacrificing our core values, which include job creation, agricultural modernization, housing, and education, our message is clear — government will keep the deficit within reasonable range.

I targeted 20 billion pesos a year for the implementation of the agriculture and fisheries modernization act; but in actuality more than 28 billion has been spent so far.

I targeted security of land tenure to a 150,000 urban poor families and a 100,000 rural farming families; and they have already been granted that. More than 34,000 low-salaried workers have already been given financial assistance for their housing needs.

We have already identified the more than 1,600 barangays where we will construct school buildings so that all barangays will have a school by 2004.

We have exceeded our target for health insurance coverage for the urban poor by more than 85 percent.

We have moved towards greater transparency in awarding contracts. These have to be bidded out rather than negotiated. We have computerized the bidding in public works. We have exceeded the target set for the number of agencies to be registered under the electronic procurement system. The result from all these — honest and faster contract awards.

We have infused in government, to a great degree, common sense, discipline, and accountability in management and public service.

Civil society is in loop. Private sector groups have set up procurement watch, which has been sanctioned to check the integrity of government purchases. The report card survey project periodically measures public attitudes toward the delivery of services. Tax watch monitors the internal revenue service. The volunteers against crime and corruption monitors the transactions of the department of public works and highways.

We have stabilized the domestic political situation while continuing to mop up residual problems of law and order. We are putting in an additional 200 million pesos into an effort to bolster our capability against kidnapping. We will set up more operational teams exclusively focused in this threat. We shall back up these teams with better surveillance equipment.

Some sectors are trying to create an impression, quite erroneous, that the government is being wishy-washy in dealing with the political posturings of former President Estrada, who is under trial by the graft court.

I want to firmly dispel any impression that the government is engaged in any strategy of appeasement or compromise on this matter.

While I have said that the decision on any pending issue before the court is up to the court to decide, this does not mean that the executive will take a passive stance against any attempt to deliberately undermine the court, subvert allegiance to it, or impede its rightful duties.

My duty as president is to defend the constitution, and this extends to the defense of the great powers of government — the executive, judiciary and the legislature. We will not stand by while any or all of these institutions are under threat. The judiciary, in particular, has ample means to ward off nuisances and legalistic posturings, but when there is a brazen attempt to destroy the credibility and functionality of any court of justice — this calls for the concerted action by all institutions of democratic government; and for that matter, all the citizens of the democratic system.

Both the Supreme Court and the leaders of the legislature have called upon the former president to confine his cause or struggle within the ambit of the court. I have joined them in this call.

The presidency will not stand aside in the face of insidious machinations to take the struggle out of the courtroom and try to evolve it into a conspiracy to foment public disorder and undermine the people’s allegiance to the constitution and the system of justice.

The defense of the constitution and the rule of law are non-negotiable. These cannot be the stuff of popularity or partisan contests.

All subterranean conspiracies shall stand down, or face the full retribution of constitutional authority.

On the other horizon, the decisiveness by which we shall continue to enforce the rule of law is only matched by our consistency and unswerving determination to keep the economy on track.

But we have much, much more to do to enable the poor to catch up. The wealth gap must be closed. Growth statistics are meaningless to the jobless. Low inflation is irrelevant to the penniless. A reduced budget deficit cannot be an argument to butter up the morale of hungry people.

With this pressing concern in mind, we chose “Matapat na Pamamahala, Tugon sa Kahirapan” or “Winning the War Against Poverty through Good Governance” as the theme of this year’s consultative group meeting as it was the theme of our EDSA anniversary celebrations.

“Matapat na Pamamahala” is loosely translated as “Good Governance” but it means much more. It means caring, being accountable and being open and transparent. It connotes loyalty, honesty, and being true to one’s office.

“Matapat na Pamamahala” is the key to the door of broader prosperity. Without it, even the best-laid development plan is doomed to fail. But with “Matapat na Pamamahala,” government will devote its entire being, spirit and resource to deliver the poor from the clutches of poverty.

Yet, we have no illusions about the gigantic challenge ahead. All leaders from three continents I have consulted over the past year are one in saying that resolving poverty needs the combined resources of the entire planet to succeed. It needs the combined efforts of all the well-meaning governments and institutions of the world. And it brooks no delay.

A global alliance can be forged to wage war against poverty. And we should forge this alliance just as we forged an alliance against the scourge of terrorism.

I thank you all for being there to help us as we navigated our economy from troubled seas to calmer waters last year. I trust that you will continue to be by our side as we proceed our country through buffeting storms and uncertainties that have characterized the world economy.

We have used the official development assistance your governments and institutions have extended to help effect key reforms, and to finance the budget deficit and major infrastructure and human development investments. In all these, I assure you that we are spending on the right things and living within our means.

We are unlocking key bottlenecks that have hampered the use of o-d-a in the past year. This is what I did when I was at the helm of the department of social welfare and development before I became president, and this is what I am doing now for the entire government.

We are integrating process and action more sharply. We are meeting with project managers as often as we can. We are monitoring their prompt implementation of our decisions; and we are working under concrete time frames of compliance.

We need more legislation to unlock some bottlenecks. We will continue to work with congress to clear the track forward.

All systems are moving forward. We know where we are headed and we are trying to mark the milestones as we painstakingly traverse them. Our vehicle is in good running condition and judging from what Mr. Pulley said in his welcome remarks, I hope you believe that we have a competent driver behind the steering wheel. But we need all the extra fuel we can stock to go the full distance.

I trust that you will continue to extend us the much needed assistance, the extra fuel for the journey’s continuity, so that we can reach our goal of poverty-free Philippines and contribute to a poverty-free world within the decade.

On this note, let me thank you once again for the privilege of welcoming.

Greetings and may we all achieve success in this meeting.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Opening Session of the 2002 Consultative Group Meeting for the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230254/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7630&Itemid=38