Many thanks, Mayor Rudy Duterte, for your introduction and for hosting the city for this important occasion.

Archbishop Capalla; the bishops, ulama, priests, pastors, farmers, Lumad conference; Congresswoman from Davao Oriental, the largest coconut province here in Mindanao; Bishop Gomez and other bishops and Ulama; Secretary Teves; Secretary Gonzalez; Secretary Dureza; PCGG Chair Sabio; our regional directors of agriculture and coconut; all our officials; Danny Coronacion of the Coconut Industry Investment Fund; officials of the Solicitor General’s Office; and President Torres who is hosting us in his beautiful campus.

This conference of bishops, ulama, priests, pastors, farmers and lumads is our way of consolidating the fight against poverty.

Interfaith dialogue has been working for peace in Mindanao and now in this event, interfaith dialogue is also getting the various sectors together to help achieve development by helping the fortunate. Congratulations! To our interfaith dialogue bishops-ulamas.

I congratulate all the coconut farmers throughout the Philippines, and of course our farmers in the Visayas and Mindanao as well as Luzon.

Today, the fulfillment of the dream of the coconut farmers to finally have a more just and larger share of the benefits from the coco levy funds will begin. Our coconut farmers have been waiting for a very long time, the waiting of our coconut farmers has been long. Twenty years of resolving complex legal issues and many of these will only be decided in the courts.

First of all, this agreement needs to be with the Sandiganbayan and the Supreme Court. Then the giving of consent will be followed by the public bidding to be done by the Department of Finance. The San Miguel shares will be sold.

Included in the agreement is the establishment of a foundation that will manage, oversee and put control over the use of funds from the sale of its shares and will ensure that the foundation's expenses will provide greater benefits to the coconut farmers.

Initially, the government will control the foundation. But later, following the decision of the Supreme Court and the Sandiganbayan, it will eventually transfer control to the farmers groups. If that will be the Supreme Court and the Sandiganbayan decisions.

The Department of Finance under Secretary Teves is working with the PCGG and the Solicitor General. Everyone is really working hard to have a solution that is acceptable to all. And I invite that the consultation continue so that all coconut farmers can be included.

This agreement is very important. It is an important step to return to you what should go to you and we will continue to work for you. There are still many other government principles for helping our coconut farmers. For instance, the new biofuels act is good news for our coconut farmers. And under our administration, the price of coco has increased, benefiting our farmers.

I remember that during my first term as vice president, copra was six pesos per kilo. The coconut husk, the husk nuts mill gate price, was 1.75 per piece. But in our previous meeting last August, copra prices were at 18 pesos per kilo, even higher, and the coconut husk was five pesos each. What we have done now is more than what we can do for our coconut farmers. Because the price is very good, there are new demands like biofuels, which will really help this fund from San Miguel with your productivity, your delivery and transport, and increase the net income of our coconut farmers.

And why are we able to do this? Our steady growth has kept our peso at its strongest in many many years. Confidence and investors have returned, and our country last year realized savings of 37 billion pesos. And this 37 billion pesos we can return to the entire Filipino nation as more schools, health insurance, community stores selling rice and noodles at a lower price, and microfinance capital for small entrepreneurs, including our coconut farmers, agri-business farmers.

And in programs for infrastructure, there are many more farm-to-market roads, irrigation, roll-on/roll-off ferry connections, roads, cargo airports that we have built to further increase production and improve the transport of products, including coconut and copra products.

We are charging a future that will bring stability and peace, justice to the oppressed, comfort to the disaster-stricken and the sick, more food for the poor, lower energy prices and a safer environment for our children.

The important thing is that the collective will of our people will support a determined government and this will enable our nation to remain on the road to peace and progress.

I warmly welcome our coconut farmers and the BUPPFALUC and I’m also greeting the Department of Finance, the PCGG, the OSG and all the agencies, all… All agencies involved in the coconut industry — CIIF, PCA — in creating the agreement that we are celebrating today.

To all of you coconut farmers, congratulations! For a brighter future. And to our beloved Archbishop Capalla, thank you very much. You have worked so hard for peace and now you are working… You are achieving something so significant for development.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 1st National Coconut Farmers Convention sponsored by the Bishops, Ulama, Priests, Pastors, Farmers, Lumads Conference (BUPPFALUC). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151400/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1872&Itemid=38