Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the Sulong Batayang Sektor Coalition program “Assessment of the Basic Sector for Reform and Democracy”

Thank you very much, Secretary Dinky Soliman, who heads the department that helps local governments care for our poorest brothers and sisters.

I also thank our host city mayor this evening, Mayor Sonny Belmonte. And to all of you here today from various parts of Metro Manila and the entire country, but especially those from Quezon City, so I thank Sonny.

Thank you also to the head of the commission that discusses and bridges the policies needed by the poor in our country, Secretary Ging Deles. And the one who tirelessly seeks where to get more funds, whether from the budget, from foreign aid, from government corporations on how we can fund the many needs to provide relief to the poor, Secretary Mai Jimenez.

I would also like to greet our very important and listened-to and listening chairman of the urban poor, Percy Chavez. Look, I was right to say very listened-to. And our leader from the basic sectors of the National Anti-Poverty Commission, Oca Francisco.

Thank you for his very comprehensive report on what we have accomplished in the short two years for the benefit of the poor. Thank you for your comprehensive report, Ed Rancho, the representative of the urban poor.

I would also like to greet the various representatives you have chosen from the different basic sectors, Andy Bukirin of the elderly; Langli Segundo of the indigenous people; Richard Arsenio of the disabled; Vic Fabie of the farmers; Milan Ramos of the fishermen; Noel Joson of workers in the formal sector, and Mary Buangbog of informal workers. And all of you, various representatives of the basic sectors, friends:

Today we commemorate, as the speakers said, what should not happen again in our country, the declaration of martial law throughout the Philippines. Many of you, many here on stage, have personally experienced the hardships and abuses committed against them and the country by martial law. Many of you are witnesses that we cannot deny that the reign of martial law in our country was a terrible nightmare.

Based on surveys, large percentages of citizens disagree with the imposition of martial law as a way to solve the country's problems.

So I congratulate you who are here to join the assessment of the basic sector which we recognize needs reform but we recognize that reform was not done during martial law. And I think in these two and a half years of our democracy, more reforms have been done than in the fourteen years of martial law.

Although we can say that those who want to return to martial law, those who want to put a dictatorship or junta back in place, destabilization plans, although we can say that they have weakened, one basis for saying that they have weakened, right? They were not able to build their movement today. But we still hear reports about groups urging our soldiers, even our basic sectors, to join them in seizing the legitimate power of the government.

But you here are repeating, as Ed Rancho said, that the reforms we will fight for are through democracy and not through destabilization to return to martial law. Thank you for the statement and report from the basic sector.

Even our soldiers have expressed support for the chain of command and the constitution. The whispers of a coup, those are the remnants who want to belittle our government, those are dying, those whispers when reforms and justice truly take root, and that is our job — yours and mine.

True, we need — if we want reform, if we want work — we need true peace and order. But peace and order does not come from martial law. It comes from reform against poverty and comes from the ordinary day-to-day work of law enforcers, soldiers, and police.

So I have ordered the leadership of the AFP to convey the message of reforms down to the lowest rank so that every soldier strengthens their faith, their organization. Oakwood is over, let us forget it.

This feeling of the citizenry has been proven twice in the past — in the EDSA People Power revolution in 1986 and in EDSA Dos in 2001. Weren't we together in EDSA Dos in 2001, those of you who are here? And those who are a bit older now were also there in EDSA 1 in 1986. I wouldn't say they are old, Dinky and Ging, but they were very young then. Yes.

In the face of many challenges to our stability, let us keep the spirit of EDSA alive to overshadow the spirit of September 21. And promote the supremacy of civilian authority in our country.

The current times demand that we demonstrate patriotism and stand for democracy and change.

Let us continue our unity to maintain democracy and achieve reforms in our country not only for ourselves but for the future of our children and succeeding generations.

You know, many want to say that nothing is being done. But Ed Rancho mentioned a very important accomplishment regarding the coco levy, regarding the stolen wealth of the dictatorship, what is called Marcos wealth, and many other accomplishments regarding the provision or distribution of land that can be purchased by the urban poor. He said many other things, I won't repeat them, his statement was very comprehensive. I said we should convey this to the different basic sectors.

But it's not only Ed Rancho who says this, even others who monitor our country. You know, Maria Ressa told me in a letter, CNN, she said it didn't last, when she watches statements coming from the Philippines, it seems like we really like to discredit each other. It seems like some Filipinos want our country to fall. But if you look at the report from other places, the report in what is called 'The Economist,' it says the Philippines is among the countries that are resilient in the face of global poverty, in this growing… One of the growing economies in the world.

There are those who accuse us of corruption in our government, but we are doing many reforms that are being implemented to suppress corruption in the government which intensifies the suffering of the people — this corruption.

They say we are weak in peace. Well, Ed Rancho mentioned our peace talks — we want peace, we want reconciliation with justice. That's why our government lawyers fought for justice in the Supreme Court, in the Sandiganbayan, and that is being achieved by our people.

The work of peace is not done through martial law. It is done through the work of the police. For example, our police have already dismantled many large syndicates involved in kidnapping, in drugs.

So democratic institutions can achieve peace as long as we work together. And to you, my colleagues, for two and a half years, thank you, let's continue our partnership so that, really, it will no longer, it will no longer return those who want to bring back the nightmare of martial law.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Sulong Batayang Sektor Koalisyon Program “Pagtataya ng Batayang Sektor para sa Reporma at Demokrasya”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194320/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7109&Itemid=38