Thank you so much Dr. Rene Catan and congratulations to you!

To Dr. Daisy Camitan, to PAMS Treasurer Dr. Elmer Punzalan and Dr. Gerry Genuino, and all your officers and members for being at the vanguard of a healthy and energetic society at the forefront of a strong economy. Maraming salamat sa inyo.

When I was first invited, I thought PAMS stood for Philippine Association of Medical Specialists. But I learned a lot in the first few minutes of our meeting today, Academy of Medical Specialists, and that makes you very special indeed. (applause)

But before we talked about your uniqueness, let me first thank you for the medical missions and self-help programs of your academy. Notably those that support our goals to cut the cost of medicine and of bringing specialized training to the provinces. (applause)

Earlier, when we were talking about the academy and the “A” in PAMS, Dr. Catan explained to me that your group came about when there was devolution. And the doctors who were transferred from the national payroll, went to the payrolls of the local governments, it was smaller because… because the district hospitals were transferred, it became burdensome for local governments to cover the various expenses for local health services, especially specialization. That’s where your academy came in. It helped with the continued specialization of the devolved medical personnel.

A very noble purpose. (applause) And on top of that, because you are helping local communities, your medical and surgical missions also came to fruition.

And that is why, I would also like to… That’s why I have authorized PAGCOR, with President Butch Francisco just taking office. I have two tasks for you, Butch. (applause) Listen until the end of my speech because I will give the second one there. But first, I have authorized PAGCOR to release 100 million pesos to set up mobile clinics. (applause) This is in support of the outreach programs of your organization. (applause)

Let us thank Dr. Catan for the PAMS goal for medical advancement. (applause)

And let us thank Dr. Genuino for following up on the proposal to PAGCOR. (applause) As well as for initiating the “Heal the Nation Now” project. (applause) As I understand it, the “Heal the Nation Now” project aims for physical, spiritual and political healing.

‘Yung political healing. Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress. People want to know: Are we strong? Are we stable? Are we growing as a nation? Is everyone benefiting equally? Is there social justice in the land? Do people feel good about themselves and the society in which they live?

Unity of purpose is driven by a common desire to know where we are going as a nation. To know that our leaders are strong, honest, hardworking and committed to the best interest of the people.

Unity is about action not discussion. It is about working together, not just talking together. Within unity, there can be and must be room for dissent, even conflict as part of the process of moving the nation forward. At the end of the day, unity is measured by collective hope, commitment and confidence. At yun ang inaasahan natin sa “Heal the Nation Now” movement. (applause)

‘Yung spiritual healing. A leader must be driven by a strong vision for the nation and the determination to deliver a better life. I, as your leader, I’m driven by my faith in God and my faith in the people of this nation.

I get up everyday and fight in behalf of the average hardworking Filipino. We all share the same values of family, hardwork and faith. The people deserve an honest, hardworking government just as they are honest and hardworking. And so with your help, with the help of the “Heal the Nation Now” movement, we aim to renew our efforts to stamp-out corruption and set a new standard of governance for our nation.

Thank you very much for your contribution. (applause)

I’m not finished yet. (laughter)

And that physical healing, because you serve many poor people. The prescription of generic or cheaper drugs by your members has healed the sick and tempered the prevailing attitude that only expensive medicines can work. Your appeal, you appealed to the legislators.

Congress has demonstrated that when it sets aside self-interest it can produce legislation that improves the quality of life of all Filipinos. The most notable recent example is the bill that reduces the cost of life-giving medicines.

But much more needs to be done to improve human rights, to secure budgets for health care and education, to invest more in peace and order and to advance our national interests with other nations on trade, economy and security issues. And since you have made your call on legislators, indeed, continue to help me call on the legislators to stop political wrangling and concentrate on legislating. (applause)

As part of physical healing, thank you for offering specialization courses leading to diplomates and fellowships in the provinces. (applause)

Education is a core value of Philippine society and family life. The hardworking men and women of this nation, including you, put their family first. And the best gift any family can give a child, and any nation can give its people, is access to a good education.

Education is the foundation of economic prosperity and individual liberty, social justice and self worth. That is why we continue to invest in new school construction at the elementary school level, and to bolster our college scholarship program for those high school students ready for higher education.

And for those who have finished college, like medicine and have passed their board exams and are now practicing in local governments, what you are doing is good. And I hope the government program will help you, that we are upgrading primary hospitals to secondary hospitals. And those secondary hospitals where there are many populations but a lack of tertiary hospitals, we are upgrading them to tertiary hospitals. This will not only provide good service to the people but also provide hours where you can offer fellowships and diplomates to those you want to support. (applause)

I will give an example. When I was in Eastern Samar this weekend, there was a diarrhea outbreak in Gamay, on the eastern part on the Pacific side of Northern Samar. And the hospital in Gamay where they were taken had a capacity of 25 beds but 600 patients in total. From Tacloban, I ordered the PCSO to buy dextrose and other medicines. And because I had military and police helicopters with me, at 5:30 in the morning, because the… The news was received on Friday afternoon, the medicine was bought on Friday night. Saturday at 5:30 am, the helicopter with the doctors… And the medicines with the military doctors and the doctor who was there flew to Gamay. And thank goodness, yesterday, I called the governor of Northern Samar, and many have already been discharged because of the dextrose and other medicines and doctors who helped.

But the lesson here is Gamay, poor thing. Well, patients with diarrhea couldn't go to Catarman because many places there have no roads. We are building roads there now on the Pacific side. So it is better than fixing and making a tertiary hospital in a remote area, I told Secretary Duque, let's just fund the hospital in Gamay and make it a secondary hospital. (applause)

And I hope that in the secondary hospital, even if there is only one specialist surgeon, one specialist anesthesiologist, one specialist gynecologist because those are the needs for secondary. It will also be an opportunity for doctors in that area to get diplomate or fellowship training under PAMS. (applause)

Eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government and our society. That area, Northern Samar, is no longer in the top 10 poorest provinces but is among the top 20. So we need roads, upgrading of hospitals in remote areas and so on. But today, back here in Manila, I see that we are already putting up Christmas decorations on the streets. As we enter the holiday season, it’s essential that every person of means help those in need. The government is doing everything in its power to be a catalyst for this process.

We can’t say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and hungry among us. So here comes my second order to PAGCOR, Butch. I don’t know if Efraim knows this. He probably doesn’t know yet, so you take care to make sure it happens. Aside from the P100 million for mobile clinics, I am instructing PAGCOR to contribute 100 million pesos to help ensure that the needy throughout our nation will have access to affordable rice during this holiday season. (applause)

Sama-sama tayong magtulungan. Let’s be united and heal the nation politically, spiritually and physically.

Working all together, we will be able to heal the nation.

Long live the Academy of Medical Specialists!

Thank you all very much. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 13th Academic Meeting and Annual Convention of the Philippine Academy Of Medical Specialists (PAMS). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135954/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2284&Itemid=38