Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Vin D’ Honneur on the occasion of the 109th anniversary of the proclamation of Philippine Independence

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, June 12, 2007]

Vice President Noli de Castro, Archbishop Filoni and other members of the diplomatic corps and representatives of international organizations, Foreign Affairs Secretary Romulo and the other Cabinet members, leaders of the business community, other guests, ladies and gentlemen.

One hundred and nine years ago, a nation in Southeast Asia pushed the threshold of freedom to the limit for the first time, bravely and boldly defying nearly four centuries of colonial rule.

One hundred and nine years later, the struggle for freedom still rolls forward — freedom from want and freedom from fear — as we march together in the fight against poverty and terror.

But freedom and independence in the borderless world of the 21st century are no longer a struggle against colonialism but a closer, principled and mutually rewarding engagement with other nations.

With the help of sincere allies like you, we shall continue to break free from the shackles that pin us down — poverty, divisiveness, terrorism, despondency — until one day, perhaps twenty years from now, we shall join the ranks of the first world nations among you.

Last month, Filipinos demonstrated our political stability through the mid-term elections.

The Philippine economy is strong and stable. Our economy has reached a new level of maturity with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in a generation. And we offer one of the best values and best places to invest in Asia today.

We broke the back of our lethargic economic legacy by a combination of tough fiscal measures and equally politically difficult decisions to raise more revenue. In one bold stroke, we were able to stop our backsliding and move forward towards balancing our budget and more importantly towards making long overdue investments in human and physical infrastructure.

We will continue on the path we have set for putting people ahead of politics by focusing relentlessly on the economy. Our administration will focus on pro-growth, pro-trade and pro-investment strategies that help lift up our people from poverty and help the Philippines finally in contention as a real investment destination.

To keep reform growing, we are determined to engage all parties to move forward in a unified way to stay on the path of economic reform and discipline. It is our deepest hope that the various parties will set aside politics for now that elections are over and continue to vote for programs that have made our nation a new destination in Asia for business and investment.

The security situation has improved substantially, both in our fight against domestic terrorism and in our coordinated hunt for regional terrorists seeking refuge in some of our most remote islands in the south.

In Mindanao, with your support, your active support and participation, we are proving the value of a new paradigm for peace through the use of both soft and hard power. And perhaps most notable, we have worked with a broad range of international organizations and nations from across the spectrum particularly Malaysia and including U.S., Japan, Sweden, the European Union, Indonesia, Libya, Brunei, other OIC countries, Australia. So many countries in the growing cast of international allies. And I cannot mention all of them today, but many of them are represented here, and I thank you all.

It is now more important than ever to build alliances on a bilateral and multilateral basis to ensure greater political, economic and military security.

As current chair of ASEAN, we are optimistic about the unity of our region and our prospects for peace, stability and economic growth.

I thank you excellencies, all those who voted for us, so that we could be reelected with a very big vote to the U.N. Human Rights Council. And I hope that this is a recognition of the fact that the Philippines as a country, as a people value human rights and do not condone any violation of human rights.

On this note, Excellencies, please join me in a toast to international solidarity and the future of the Philippines.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Vin D’ Honneur on the Occasion of the 109th Anniversary of the Proclamation of Philippine Independence. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412150030/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2030&Itemid=38