Thank you very much, Narda Camacho. Thank you for your proposal to have this celebration.

To our honorees: Myrna Yao; Olivia Ferry; Precious Lara Quigaman and our Madrigal Singers, to all of you, ladies and the gentlemen who are here today. Congratulations to all of you! Congratulations to all of us!

In my State of the Nation Address last Monday, I said, we are a great nation with great people.

And today, we celebrate the achievements of eminent men and women such as Myrna Yao and Olivia Ferry, and Precious Lara Quigaman and our young men and women, the second generation of the Madrigal Singers. All of you have done us proud. Congratulations!

Now Myrna is my chairman for the Commission on Women but that’s not the reason why we’re giving her an award. We are giving her an award because the Global Summit of Women gave Myrna Yao its 2006 International Entrepreneur Award. And she won it not in the course of bureaucratic job functions, but it was for steering her company, Richwell Philippines into a giant in children’s toys and footwear. Congratulations, Myrna!

Olivia Ferry has been elected world president of Zonta International. I was telling Olivia not only is she the first Filipina to be… Not only in Zonta — although she is the first Asian in World Zonta, but although we already had a Philippine President of Rotary — but of any giant world women’s organization, I think Olivia is the very first from the Philippines. Congratulations!

And I’m happy to know that… To learn that Olivia used to work with my father. She must have been so young then, maybe 20 years old or something, because at a time though she was working at the program implementation agency which later was merged with the National Economic Council to become the National Economic and Development Authority. Congratulations, Olivia! You’ve been an achiever for so many decades.

And the Madrigal Singers. I still remember the very first performance of the Madrigal Singers. I was there. It was still the older generation. My father was president, and their very first performance was a performance for a benefit for my brother Arthur’s foundation — the scholarship foundation for the Filipino youth. And now what they have become? — world acclaim. So, thank you. Congratulations!

We’re not giving them an award today because they fall under culture and the whole system of cultural awards was already organized before I became president. And it goes through a process by a Committee of the Cultural Center and the Commission on Culture and the Arts. Nonetheless, we’re happy that their founder is already a national artist.

And of course, we remember the headlines that Precious Lara made by winning Miss International last year. It was a headline comparable to other headlines like Manny Pacquiao’s many wins; like the Mt. Everest climbers and like the South East Asian games gold medalists. And we want to honor that as well.

Going back to Myrna, Myrna’s success in business. When I appointed her head of the National Commission on Filipino Women, her success in business made me ask her to concentrate on micro-entrepreneurship as the main door out of poverty.

And I can tell you that a good part of the additional monies realized from our fiscal gains will be driven in the same direction — micro-enterprise, of which 95 percent of the beneficiaries are women.

So, I asked Myrna to make micro-entrepreneurship a major vehicle for women’s participation in the super regions that we announced and as super opportunities for every Filipino family.

Roads, bridges and ports are what I talked about in my State of the Nation Address. But they move trade as they move troops to strike down terror, and make the environment better for micro-entrepreneurs to flourish.

Linkages are just as important as leaders. So I’m asking Myrna now in her capacity as government official, to strengthen the connection between the programs of the National Commission on Women with those of the women’s clubs especially Zonta in the Philippines to respond to women’s issues — fight poverty at the family level, check violence against women, push the pro-life family planning strategy and get the women behind our grand vision.

And to help the women’s groups do that, and in honor of the great honor that Olive Ferry has given to us in order to help carry out the partnership of Myrna with Zonta and the other clubs, I’m going to give one million pesos from the president’s social fund to help in the micro-entrepreneur program.

As I said, I can’t give an award for culture to the Madrigal Singers until there is a recommendation from the joint committee of the NCCA and the CCP, but I can give them one million pesos also from PAGCOR to promote the momentum of their excellence. Congratulations!

The latest achievements of Myrna Yao and Olivia Ferry and the Madrigal Singers, and the headline-grabbing achievement of Precious Lara last year, all symbolize the great triumphs of the global Filipina and the young Filipinos.

I’m not speaking only of achievement at leadership and center stage level, but also of the valiant sacrifices of Filipino women all around the world in earning the keep needed to feed their children at home and send them to school. Lara’s mother is an example. She’s a very successful nurse in Bristol in England. And look at the international education that she was able to give Lara to give her the grace on top of the beauty to win a prestigious international award.

But I salute not only the executive women like Myrna and Olivia and the young women in the Madrigal Singers and Lara, the international celebrity and her mother, the successful career woman working outside the Philippines but also the ordinary working class women like the ones who were lugging and are lugging their bags home from war-torn areas like Lebanon.

For the sake of these working women so that we can create jobs for them right here in the Philippines, so that a job abroad is an option like for Lara’s mother and not a necessity, I reiterate the sincere call for national unity. In this spirit, I say mabuhay! Myrna, Olivia, Lara and our young Madrigal Singers!

Thank you. My best wishes for your continued success!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Testimonial Lunch in Honor of NCRFW Chairperson Myrna Yao and Ms. Olivia Ferry, and Conferment of the “Champion for Life” Award on 2005 Miss International Precious Lara Quigaman. Retrieved from https://web.archive .org/web/20100412212323/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2815&Itemid=38