Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the inauguration of the new building of the New Rizal Provincial Capitol.

Thank you very much Congressman Duavit. (Applause) Thank you for introducing me.

It is fitting that Congressman Duavit introduce me because that is true. The stories Congressman Frisco San Juan told, Bibet wasn't around yet because I remember Bibet started to become famous when she was with my father at the Constitutional Convention. (Applause)

So, I greet everyone on stage here and of course especially Governor Junjun Ynares. First of all, happy, happy birthday, Junjun! (Applause)

I will not mention all the VIPs on stage because Junjun already mentioned them earlier. But to all of you, congratulations on the new capitol! (Applause)

And a special mention of thanks to Ortigas and company (applause) because you donated the land for the first capitol in Pasig and you also donated this very beautiful building. (Applause)

I remember it was more than thirty years ago when the town of Pasig separated from your province. And I remember when I was a child my address was 157 Laura St., San Juan, Rizal because everything here was Rizal. (Applause) But as Ka Frisco said, the separation of Pasig, and not only that, the separation of the entire Metro Manila which was formerly Rizal. So it is just right that after more than thirty years the capitol of Rizal has been returned to your province. (Applause)

And it is fitting that your province should have its own capitol within the province because the province of Rizal. According to our data is one of the smallest poverty incidence in the entire country. So you are a leading province. (Applause)

I hope that what we did in the past eight years helped lower the small-scale poverty in Rizal. Because I don't know if Governor Nini Ynares remembers, when she was governor, I asked her, “Nini, how are the investors here?” And Nini said, “How will investors come here if they can’t even pass through the traffic?” So I don’t know if she still remembers that, but I haven’t forgotten it, that’s why we widened Ortigas Avenue and Marcos Highway. (Applause)

And now we see the progress that has happened in Rizal in recent years and as I said, I hope our infrastructure helped.

I also want to thank Junjun for inviting me to his birthday.

Actually, I remember last year, Junjun invited me but I wasn’t able to make it.

Now he invited me early so we were able to schedule it. (Applause)

And it’s important that we are together now, public sector-private sector represented by Ortigas; national government-local government, because in the current time when the global economy is falling, the cooperation of the national and local governments is even more needed.

The whole objective of our administration is to uplift the poor, to provide opportunities when the times are good and to provide protection when the times are bad. And in the midst of our ability to care for our poor whether the times are good or bad, the policy for the poor that we made several years ago to fix the national treasury and increase the income of the nation so that we can invest in our people.

So a special mention to our congressman, our congressmen, our Senator Revilla especially those who were there when we made the difficult Value Added Tax. Bong was already there and Jack Duavit was already there then. That’s what gives us the funds now. (applause) And what they did helped me even though it was difficult, even though it wasn’t popular, now it’s a blessing in the current global crisis. (Applause)

Because we are increasing our investment in social services to expand the safety net that is important for the poorest members of our society.

For example, here in Rizal, even though you are among the fewest poor people in the entire country, there are those who have lost their jobs due to the global crisis. I have a list: eight hundred from Walter Garments in Cainta, almost sixty at Panasonic in Taytay, more than a hundred at Miyano Machinery in Cainta, seventy-five at RNB Garments in Taytay, no less than forty OFWs, and twenty-three at KNJ International in Binangonan.

But with our Economic Resiliency Program, which will accelerate government spending in areas such as infrastructure development and agri-business promotion, we also intentionally created many new job opportunities for those severely affected by the current global crisis.

This includes more emergency employment. So I have instructed all government agencies, such as the DOTC of Secretary Larry Mendoza, who is the CORD for Region IV-A; and the DILG of Secretary Puno, the son of Antipolo, to set aside 1.5 percent of their MOOE budget for emergency employment in the next six months. We expect this to provide jobs for those currently waiting for the world economy to recover.

Secretary Ronnie Puno – since he is from here, he was formerly a congressman of Antipolo, now his brother Robbie is the congressman – Ronnie will manage the emergency employment of Rizal. (Applause)

Earlier I spoke with him, he has already started OYSTER – OYSTER is Out-of-School Youth Serving Toward Economic Resiliency – but I instructed him to give special attention to the workers from the factories I mentioned who lost their jobs. So I brought the list – do you have the list, Ronnie? There! that’s the list – they have names, they have addresses, those without addresses, the address of the factory so Ronnie can find them and see how to help them with their livelihood. (applause)

There are many types of emergency employment that can be provided. For example, earlier… who was that? Gerry Calderon mentioned it to me, the Ecocenter, the recycling, the waste turned into bricks or concrete blocks, concrete blocks can also be used for construction, that is one possible emergency employment.

Or we already have One Town, One Product, we can also help with that. Microfinance, of course, the maintenance of roads, flood control and green collar jobs such as brick-making. You have mountains that can be reforested or planted with jatropha. You have a lake, Laguna, which can be cleaned and guarded. And you have public utility vehicles that can be fitted with LPG to make them cheaper. You have barangays that still need electricity, you can employ workers there, and other initiatives in clean energy.

Yesterday, I visited a Teletech Business Process Outsourcing. This Teletech is the largest call center in the world and their biggest investment now is here in the Philippines. They already have around 23,000 employees and they want to add more. As I was leaving their call center yesterday, their resident vice president said, for example, Panasonic Electronics, he believes that the employees of electronics companies could be engineers and many know English, with just a little training they can be absorbed by the BPO industry. That's one thing I want Ronnie to do.

And in addition to emergency employment, Teletech shows that there are many jobs in the private sector. Earlier, Secretary Roque was interviewed on a radio station, he said truthfully that there are really 300,000 new jobs available. Half of that is in call centers and BPOs. These can be transferred to those who have lost their jobs if the qualifications are matched. So the big challenge now is to expand skills training for jobs that are in high demand, so we doubled the TESDA budget this year. That's why I thank Jack and Bong earlier. I also thank Deline and Lito and Robbie, whom I mentioned earlier, because of the budget you increased the TESDA budget which will now help (applause) match those who have lost their jobs to available jobs.

So, and regarding the priorities of TESDA, I made an Executive Order requiring that training in in-demand skills be included in the priorities, and those who have lost their jobs here in Rizal, especially women, are included in the priority. Why women? Because those who have lost their jobs are in electronics and garments and most of them are women. So they are the ones most at risk during this time.

Let us continue to invest in our most important asset, our own citizens. And I hope that the province of Rizal is also focused on… I hope to ease the burden of the people during these times of global crisis. As Bibet said, to become an all-weather economy, and I hope the provincial government of Rizal, Junjun, will be a partner in these programs to alleviate the suffering of the people and to prevent the global recession from becoming a Philippine recession. (Applause)

The law that Bong Revilla and Jack Duavit made before, the Value Added Tax.

Actually, 40 percent of that went to the IRA. But there's been a three-year gap in the computation. So the first implementation of the IRA happened in 2006… of the VAT happened in 2006, the VAT increased by 100 billion pesos. So, three years now, now 2009, this year the 40 percent of 100 billion or 40 billion pesos will start going to local governments as IRA. (Applause)

So the province of Rizal will feel a big increase in the IRA.

But Rizal is rich, there are many businesses, I don't know if the IRA is a large or small part, but nevertheless the IRA is a big increase.

Therefore, Rizal will be able to steadfastly face the challenges of the global crisis.

And I, I have faith in Junjun Ynares because he was my former chairman of the Lake Laguna Development Authority before he ran for governor. (Applause)

So if he was able to take care of the lake and expand the activities around that lake, especially with the help of our new mayor of Antipolo City, Mayor Leyble. (Applause)

Here in the large city of Antipolo, you can do a lot here in the capital city of Antipolo as well as in the entire province of Rizal under the leadership of our birthday celebrator, Junjun Ynares.

Congratulations! Happy birthday! (Applause)

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the inauguration of the New Rizal Provincial Capitol Building. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412104425/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=21773&Itemid=38