Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Joint General Membership Luncheon Meeting of the Makati Business Club

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hotel Intercontinental, Makati City, April 14, 2004]

Thank you, Mr. Balangue.

Thank you, Dick for your kind words of welcome and encouragement.

Excellencies of the diplomatic corps, members of the government, movers and shakers of the business community, ladies and gentlemen.

Our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty. Since martial law our economic development has been slow compared to our neighbors.

I am fighting for a change for the average Filipino. Together, you and I, we have made a strong start in a short time. Together with you, I have stabilized the mess we inherited. We now have low inflation, high growth and a surge of foreign investment.

And for the first time in the nation’s history, we have a money laundering program that combats corruption and terrorists money laundering.

I have brought millions of books to schoolchildren, healthcare to the majority of the people, clean water to over 4 million people, and new housing to over two million of our most needy.

And I have cracked down on drug kingpins and thrown the book at corrupt bureaucrats, we have worked with our allies and security forces here at home to eliminate terrorism and protect our homeland from violence.

Yes, I’m glad that Dick remembers what I told the club two years ago. And indeed in accordance with the goals I set out even before I became President before the Makati Business Club at the height of the EDSA 2 controversies. And early in my term, in accordance with what I said then, I developed a three-pronged economic strategy to make the free enterprise system work and undo the neglect of the previous administration.

First, increase investments that provide people with the education and training they need to get high-wage work, including more scholarships, English as the prime teaching language, and scores of other practical investments for equipping our people;

Second, strengthen our international ties and regain the confidence of international investors. And our efforts have resulted in a 26 percent increase in direct foreign investment and are directly responsible for millions of new jobs as a result of investments from companies like Intel, Toyota, Ford, P & G, Federal express and UPS, to name a few;

And finally, a major increase in support for the self-employed and small and medium-sized businesses that really are the backbone of our economy. But, we have a long way to go. These accomplishments are a mere down payment on what is needed.

In the next six years, I pledge a pro-poor agenda to end poverty and as quoted by Dick, unite the nation. This is not an idle promise. I have the experience to deliver on my pledges.

The challenge I make to you today is this: we cannot continue with a nation divided, a nation divided between rich and poor. We must unify our economic and social divisions if we are to lift all boats on a tide of equality and prosperity.

We must invest in our nation and our people if we are to succeed. The hard-working Filipino is the central pillar of the nation. The working poor deserve the right to a rising standard of living, fair access to the courts, clean water, affordable energy, a good education, high-wage jobs and economic incentives for our self-employed and entrepreneurial class.

We must tackle the problems of the poor with compassion, specific solutions and aggressive economic expansion.

I am proposing a new Philippine nationalism based on championing our most valuable asset, the people of the Philippines, who work hard and play by the rules every day.

Well, Dick alluded to it earlier. It’s not enough to have an affinity for the poor. A leader must present a specific platform for how to break the cycle of poverty and cynicism that pervades the nation. That means a leader must have a specific plan of action and the experience to carry it out — I am that candidate.

In behalf of the poor of this nation, I intend to lead the Philippines to a new era of unity and prosperity. I intend to make the hard decisions and to provide the new specific ideas to mark the beginning of the end of poverty as we know it. I intend to unite the nation based on respect for rich and poor alike. We are all in this together and must sink or swim together.

In the next six years:

I pledge to triple loans to self-employed and small business owners;

I pledge to build 3,000 new schools, grant a college or voctech scholarship to every qualified poor family and put a computer in every school;

I pledge to bring electricity to 1,500 barangays a year and reduce the cost to become the lowest in the region;

I pledge to bring clean water to all 45,000 barangays;

I pledge to reduce by half the price of commonly used medicine; and

I pledge to create one million new jobs every year I am in office.

And I will do so with fiscal discipline. Through the reforms I have made — and will continue to make — I will continue to increase revenue collection; clamp down on tax cheats; and cut waste, fraud and abuse in our government.

I further pledge to continue to fight for self-sufficiency in rice production; to fight for more roads, for new roads, bridges and highways to link our great nation; and to fight for more property rights and more legal rights for our people; and most importantly, I will fight for the people who have no voice.

This election isn’t about my family or me. This election isn’t about personalities or politics. This election is about the people. And the people are demanding answers — specific answers to their problems.

They don’t want slogans, they want results; they don’t want talks, they want action; they don’t want big rallies, they want a big paycheck.

Yes, we need to provide breakfast, lunch and dinner. But that won’t be accomplished by leaders and their backroom advisers who instead only provide a steady diet of political attack and lawsuits.

In these challenging times, the country has a clear choice between two candidates: to move forward with an experienced, hands-on leader who has a specific platform for change; or take a risk on an inexperienced actor who is too reliant on advisors to make important decisions.

The choice is clear: you can build on the strong start we have made with our pro-poor platform that is brimming with new ideas for the future; or the Philippines can start all over again with a cynical platform empty of ideas and stuck in the past.

The choice is clear: you can vote for a six-point plan of action and a record of accomplishment; or vote for someone who has no plan for education, no plan for clean water, no plan for job creation, no plan for healthcare, no plan for energy, and no plan for international relations.

Much is at stake in this election. I’m a hopeful person and remain very optimistic about our people and our nation. We must offer hope, not fear; sunlight, not darkness. We must take the hopes and dreams of the poor seriously. The poor of this nation deserve no less. We ignore them at our own peril.

I challenge you today to join me to work together to unite the nation — as Dick said earlier in my first talk with the u.s. About unity, healing — unite the nation around a platform that is pro-poor, fiscally responsible and forward thinking.

Movers and shakers of the business community, the future is in your hands, our hands. Let’s all secure that future together.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Joint General Membership Luncheon Meeting of the Makati Business Club. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090047/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5667&Itemid=38