Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 2nd Union Network International-Asia Pacific Regional Organization (UNI-APRO) Four Sector Conference (finance, telecom, commerce and postal)

[Delivered at the Cebu City Sports Club, Cebu Business Park, Cebu City, October 13, 2004]

Thank you very much, Undersecretary Imson, for helping to host this very important conference.

Mr. De Bruyn, President, thank you very much for choosing to have the Conference here in the Philippines. And may I also greet my compadre, compadre Dejon, the Philippine Chairman. Thank you for giving me your speaking time tonight. Mr. Jennings and the other officials: Mr. Ng, Mr. Boil, Mr. Murishima, Mr. Blantorn, Mr. Komoda, Mr. Omimoto.

I’d like to greet also, together with me, two of my Cabinet Members, Secretary Bert Gonzales and Secretary Dodi Limcaoco; Mr. Umali, Secretary General; I have Mike Rama in the list, are you here Mike? There you are Mike, good, good, good; participants to the 2nd Union Network International-Asia Pacific Regional Organization Four-Sector Conference, ladies and gentlemen.

Thank you for choosing the Philippines and thank you for choosing Cebu as your venue for this international conference.

Congratulations to Uni-Philippines for being able to host this… As has been said before by Mr. Umali, this is a first that the Philippines should host so many labor union leaders from 27 countries. It just goes to show that the Philippine labor movement is now a global class labor movement.

I agree with your theme that we put people first. In fact that was my… that was my campaign slogan, you know. It was ‘mamamayan muna’ which means people first and that we must protect their welfare against the rippling tide of globalization.

Putting people first — to me, when I campaigned on the platform of putting people first, I explained that to mean giving them jobs. And because the people of the Philippines elected me on that platform of people first, I aim to stake my leadership, as mentioned earlier by our international guests, on the creation of six to ten million jobs within the next six years.

Our goal is to optimize job creation in at least five sectors, namely: medium, small and micro enterprises; agri-business; mining; tourism; and information and communications technology and exports. These sectors represent 80 percent of the source of current employment.

In generating jobs, we are not going to fall into the treadmill trap where we continue to gather speed yet end up always in the same place. Yesterday, I had a cabinet meeting to focus on fundamental interventions to remove us from this proverbial treadmill, where we keep running just to stay in place, into a more expansive and verdant employment landscape.

In that meeting, we agreed on strategic measures to make it easier for the private sector and our exporters, many of whom are in Cebu, to create new jobs. Some of these concrete measures include:

Extending more support to pump-prime export-oriented industries;

Allocating at least 2 million hectares for agri-business ventures including such things as seaweed farming; and adding government scholarships for master’s and doctoral degrees to promote technical competency particularly among ICT professionals and also professionals in electronics.

Discussing jobs makes your choice of venue for this meeting very appropriate. Cebu provides the right setting and atmosphere for such a critical agenda because it stands out as a world-class economic enclave, mike, where productivity and profit rule. Congratulations! Cebu.

The timing of your conference is also impeccable. Our country is now in the grip of self renewal. We’ve come to realize that national complacency must give way to fiscal discipline and therefore a more austere lifestyle.

I’m grateful to the response of organized labor and the employer sector to my call for greater sacrifices and unity as we put our economic houses in order.

Last week, the trade union congress of the Philippines, to which Mr. Dejon belongs, together with other organized labor groups representing two-thirds of our organized labor, signed a social accord with the employers confederation of the Philippines for a ‘no strike, no lay-off’ agreement.

This historic pact does not in any way preclude our workers basic right to fight for a decent wage or humane labor standards. It’s a voluntary agreement between labor and employers to settle disputes amicably in the spirit of cooperation and fraternity in awareness of the national exigencies involved.

Our banking industry, which is represented here by Mr. Umali and the others that greeted me earlier, and its employees subscribe to the social dialogue for industrial peace. We have a banking industry tripartite council where the labor and finance departments as well as the Central Bank represent government; the Bankers’ Association of the Philippines represents employers; and sitting for the labor is the national union of bank employees headed by UNI’s secretary-general, Jun Umali. Congratulations! Jun.

The spirit of dialogue instead of confrontation has driven the lowest record of strikes in the Philippines in the last 21 years. Since September ended, the labor department has only recorded 19 strikes over this whole year. Labor and management have jointly come of age as an enlightened force for political and economic stability.

To be able to compete in a fast-moving, globalized regime, one must have capital, the right technology, adequate modern infrastructure and transport systems, and a skilled and hard-working work force.

We have the solid work force. We’re now working on the transport systems as well as the physical and digital infrastructure to move ahead. We’re constrained in capital and technology but working hard on these fronts. At the same time, we’ve also teamed up with the developing world in a struggle for a level global playing field.

I’ve never held back my sentiments on the kind of development we want. On the one hand, we believe only an enterprise economy can attract the investments and unleash the creative productive forces we need to fight poverty and attain welfare-enhancing growth. On the other hand, we believe that liberalization cannot be pushed without a clear sense of social responsibility.

As the UNDP puts it, globalization has enormous capacity to create wealth for all, but it also has the same enormous potential to perpetuate a highly unequal and deeply polarized world. We need and demand social and labor rules that distribute wealth and opportunities fairly.

In Cancun last year, the Philippines opposed the further liberalization of trade in agriculture and other sectors if there are no reforms in the trade-distorting subsidies provided by developing countries to their domestic producers.

When farm subsidies in the developed world reach one billion dollars a day while the poorest in the developing world are barely surviving on one dollar a day — fair deals in trade are impossible.

And I shall continue to fight for special safeguards for socially sensitive products. We cannot allow our staple crops such as rice and corn to be wiped out in the name of trade liberalization.

These special products represent the livelihood and jobs of a great number of our people. They also represent a way of life and part of our national culture.

We need a global consensus on how the core social, environmental and labor standards can be blended and harmonized to serve the imperatives of human survival and dignity. Yet to many Filipinos, globalization is a passport with a working visa and a free ticket to high-paying job overseas.

Eight million Filipinos live abroad. Two million of them reside in the United States, or work in the United States rather, half a million in the European Union and hundreds of thousands in Japan, Korea and the Middle East. Incidentally, may I congratulate Japan for being the biggest delegation to this conference. We even have 1,000 Filipinos working in the fishing processing plants of Iceland.

In the Province of Cavite, which is just next door to manila, we have our own little Italy, our little ‘Italian Village’ where entire neighborhoods have relatives working as domestic helpers in Italy. We also have seafarers subdivisions that are home to the spouses and children of about 200,000 Filipino seafarers.

Overseas workers shore up our economy through their remittances, and I thank you that one of your goals is to have more efficient, faster and cheaper remittance. But there is a high social cost we pay for fragmented families. I want to create more jobs here and bring in the foreign capital and technology needed so more Filipinos could have the option to stay. Going abroad should be an option not a necessity.

In the medium-term development program our government presented to the public last Monday, we identified several strategies to keep our workers home:

Make food plentiful at reasonable prices to make labor cost globally competitive;

Reduce the cost of electricity through power sector reforms;

Modernize infrastructure and logistics to lower transport costs;

Mobilize and disseminate knowledge to make workers and manufacturing processes more productive; and

Reduce red tape in all government agencies to bring down the cost of doing business.

We have a fiscal road map to improve economic stability, and a ten-point legacy agenda, which… The agenda for my legacy to the Filipino people, to fight poverty and spur growth.

Every effort is now being made to manage our debts better. To promote fiscal discipline, we’ve set an annual ceiling for our government deficit as well as a debt cap to prevent further unnecessary foreign borrowings.

We are pushing for tax measures that would levy more from those who can afford to pay.

Our foreign policy is driven by economic diplomacy. My first state visit, in fact only state visit this year, was to China where I witnessed the signing of agreements that would bring in a total of one billion U.S. dollars in investments and credits to the Philippines.

The Philippines is also a leading advocate for the protection of migrant workers. And I thank you that you took up migration in this conference. Towards this end, we hope to work with UNI-PRO or UNI-APRO in promoting an agenda to safeguard the rights of all migrant workers.

Our law enforcers are working with our neighbors to constrict the trafficking of women and children across borders.

Just yesterday, we signed an agreement with the U.S. government regarding that. Our embassies abroad have rescued Filipino women workers who were illegally recruited and sent to nightclubs in Asia, Africa and Europe.

A presidential task force against illegal recruitment and human trafficking has been created to obliterate this illegal and immoral human trade.

Sadly, the fight against poverty has been left behind by the march of globalization. As the chasm between the rich and poor nations widen, the poor end up in an abyss of disillusion and despair.

As a dynamic network of labor unions across Asia and the Pacific, your group is in a unique position to rectify the situation. Your theme is already in the right direction.

A few months ago, an overseas Filipino worker in Iraq was caught in a conflict, not of his making. He was released after a crisis team was able to negotiate his release with the hostage-takers.

That worker is Angelo Dela Cruz, a truck driver from my home province of Pampanga. Angelo is now home, safe, and leading a quiet life with his family because we in the Philippines do put people first.

I hope that you will continue to consider and alleviate the plight of vulnerable workers such as Angelo Dela Cruz in your advocacy to put people first in the global agenda.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 2nd Union Network International-Asia Pacific Regional Organization (UNI-APRO) Four Sector Conference (finance, telecom, commerce and postal). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133102/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5703&Itemid=38