UNITED ACTION AGAINST POVERTY

It is a great pleasure for me to be with you. Many thought this meeting of ours would not happen. Of course, they said, we wouldn't be allies. They said you were with the former president. They said you weren't at EDSA 2. Some even said there were some of you at EDSA 3.

Whether these accusations against you are true or not, I am still here, because I am president not only of those from EDSA 2. I am president of the entire Philippines. Therefore, I am also president of those from EDSA 3.

I always say that a strong pillar of our administration is having broad consultations with all sectors of our society. I, as much as my time allows, my door is open, and I am always open to listening to everyone who wants to say something to me, as much as my time allows.

If this meeting of ours has lasted until now, it is not because I am avoiding it, but your time has only just reached the opportunity. God chooses the time, perhaps He thinks this is the right time. The process of listening to the people is very important, especially in our fight against poverty.

When I became president, I stated my four fundamental beliefs, first of all, we need to be courageous in our national ambition. So our challenge should be that within this decade we will win the fight against poverty. Secondly, we need to raise the level of morality in government and society in order to have a strong foundation for good governance. Thirdly, we need to change the character of our politics in order to create a fruitful beginning for genuine reform. Our politics of personality and money should give way to a new politics of party programs and processes of dialogue with the people. And finally, I believe in leadership by example. We must uphold strong qualities such as diligence, a lifestyle of dignity, proving words with deeds, acting rather than posing.

What we are doing now is part of my belief in the process of dialogue with the people, and the belief that we must eradicate poverty within the decade.

When Mr. Marano gave me your resolutions, I glanced at them quickly and saw that these are the ones that are always being forwarded to me whenever I go to any consultation. So our government has really started to respond to this and we will still review what else needs to be done.

Today is a day to discuss the various needs of the basic sectors. I believe, as you can read, the government has not been remiss in finding ways to address those in your resolutions. However, you read it in the newspaper or watch it on television, but it's far away – you don't hear it directly from me, or see it with your own eyes, and you can't tell me face to face, and that's where the problem lies. That, I believe, is what we are addressing today. Not what the problems of agriculture are, the problems of fishermen, the problems of the disabled, not that. Because if we read what you say, it was already said in other consultations. So, I think what we are facing now is not what is in the paper you gave me, but the process where you have the opportunity to present your papers to me. And that is what we are facing today.

I have two fundamental beliefs: that there should be a consultation process and that we must eradicate poverty within a decade. This is why I am always the principal author in the Senate of the National Anti-Poverty Act. Others defended it, because it wasn't within my committee, but look at the principal author, look at who the first name is there, it is Senator Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Because even before, during my father's time, it was recognized that the fundamental problem of our country is the problem of poverty.

And because of my strong belief, especially in the problem of poverty, but also in other problems in our country – whether it's business, whether it's culture, there should be consultation, a process of consultation. That is also why one of the important results of the National Anti-Poverty Law is the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC). And because I am the author of that law, I know the content of that law. I know the process outlined in the law for selecting members of the basic sectors in the NAPC.

When I was vice-president, the job given to me by President Estrada, I gave to Dinky now and I supported that process, not just in words, but also the DSWD under my leadership funded that process. Look at how many departments funded that process, not just the DSWD. So the social sectors are moving, processing, some are not yet, what did I do, we can justify that we will organize, I said to my undersecretaries, we can host meetings to organize the others. We will also fund the other sectors. So almost all the expenses in the process of selecting representatives from the basic sectors were not just from the DSWD's wards, but because other sectors spent, hosted on paper just to justify the DSWD's spending. Because I, I strongly believe in the process of consultation in fighting poverty and the importance of the NAPC.

And because the DSWD is funding it and to justify it, many of them are hosts on paper, DSWD, I am monitoring the process. And I am a witness to how complicated the process became. So please don't be surprised by me. That's why I am very honest, more than diplomatic. That's why I need to tell you the truth that I saw.

I saw with my own eyes that the former president was impatient with the complexity of the process. And he decided who he would appoint to the National Anti-Poverty Commission, who would be the members of the NAPC. Now, I am the president, it is my duty as president to follow the law, especially the law that I myself authored. If we say the president, the former president, he might not understand because he didn't make it. But I made it, can I justify myself to society that I don't know the process that is needed? So this is really my duty. That's why I am repeating the process that was stopped before. But I want to emphasize that in this process, no one is excluded. Whether you are from EDSA 2 or EDSA 3, if you are a genuine people's organization, a legitimate people's organization, you are part of the process.

So what I am asking from you is to unite. Participate in the process that I have approved as president. Cooperate with the government so that we can succeed in the needs of the basic sectors of our society. Now, stopping the conflict is more needed than ever.

When I delivered my State of the Nation Address, that's what was asked for there, that instead of conflict, let's not fight for a year, let's help each other first.

The events in New York on September 11th have changed the global landscape. Global business conditions are no longer as certain. Now, more than ever, we need to rely on our own efforts. We need to rely on our own economy.

If, in my State of the Nation Address in July, I called for cooperation instead of conflict, let us work together for the good of our country for one year. I asked the politicians for one year, but you are not politicians. If I only ask for one year from them, the help I ask from you is to help me throughout my term as President of our country. So let us unite. Let us unite in the process, let us unite in the blessing I gave to the currently appointed to convene this process. And I, they, assure you, ensure you that we respect the rights of the basic sectors, at least listen to everyone. Even you, on the other side, comrades, whatever it is, the important thing is that you are legitimate people’s organizations. All legitimate people’s organizations are included in the process, in the selection of members of the National Anti-Poverty Commission which will finally be presented to the President. They will say, President, these are the names that emerged from the process. Now that you have the power, if you accept the nominees of our process, that is what we will do. And then I will appoint based on that process. But let us not wait for that time to unite. Even now, let us look at what we can do together to find solutions to the problems, the difficulties of our poverty.

You know, earlier I said about the pending businesses, the large infrastructure projects, the large rehabilitations. Rehabilitation of the PNP, National Steel Corporation, housing, Batangas Port, LRT-3, I said it was necessary. Let's really continue them, let's speed up the processing. Let's remove the bottlenecks, let's remove the red tape. That's it. If in large projects like before, bottlenecks need to be removed. If red tape needs to be removed, then even more so in the direct fight against poverty. So let's remove our conflicts. Let's work together in the process of selecting who should represent the various basic sectors in the NAPC. And whoever is chosen and whoever I sign the appointment to, I also have something to say. It doesn't mean that just because there are twelve people, sitting in that meeting that I will only listen to them. I always suddenly go to the squatter area, suddenly go to the province, suddenly go to the office, everywhere, because it is important that I myself hear from the ground what is happening, I hear the complaints of the people.

But my time will run out if that is my only way, if I only find out the stance, beliefs, and feelings of the people, so we have institutions that are put in place. And what I listen to, that is a good check and balance on what emerges and passes through the processes that take place in the institutions.

So I am happy that we are here. It is important that we are honest with each other. It is important that we reveal the hidden feelings. So even before you say it, I said it. Because it is important that I know what is on your mind, and you also know what is on my mind. Instead of you telling me what I want to hear. If I tell you what you want to hear. It is important that we unite, clarify our positions. And from there let us find a way to combine our respective positions.

I guess there are some things we won't agree on. Well, if we don't agree on other things, let's put those aside. You do what you have to do, I'll do what I have to do. But let's look for the things we can agree on and concentrate our work together there.

So I thank you for the opportunity to meet today.

Other groups sometimes say what I said earlier. We have disagreements, we have agreements. I even tell other groups, well, I think, in fact, where we disagree is more than where we agree. Let's just focus on where we agree, let's work together there. But here, I think, I can say that we have more agreement in thinking than where we disagree. So let's focus there on the hardships facing the world, because the world has turned since September 11. Let us recognize the needs of the times. Fighting poverty was needed before. But even more so now, because the challenges, the obstacles are more serious. So we need to unite even more. And I hope that from today we will find a way to always be together in the fight against poverty.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines Diliman Library