Thank you very much, Secretary Bert Gonzales.

Troop commander give “Tikas Pahinga.”

AFP Chief of Staff General Esperon; PAF Commanding General Lieutenant General Tolentino; other officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines; the ASEAN Air Force chiefs; former commanding generals of the Armed Forces; AFP wives; other government officials; ladies and gentlemen.

To the Air Force, happy 60th anniversary! and welcome to our special guests on this special anniversary — the Air Force Chiefs of ASEAN!

I thanked Lieutenant General Tolentino for reminding us of my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal. I remember that he sent an air force plane in 1963 carrying a medical team to help the victims of a volcanic eruption in Bali, Indonesia. That initial act planted a seed of friendship among the air forces of the Southeast Asian region. And today, especially today on this anniversary celebration, we are all together as our motto says: “Bridging Gaps, Overcoming Obstacles, Enhancing Cooperation for a Secured, Progressive and United ASEAN Region.” Mabuhay to the ASEAN air forces!

Today also, we are in a period of bold transition in the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

In the next three years, we shall deal a strategic defeat to the insurgency; modernized the military in its twin roles of defense and development; advance the protection of human rights; push terrorism back and build peace in Mindanao; and expand our alliances for regional and global security.

The human security act signed last march which shall be effective this July 15 shall be the basis of more effective anti-terrorism measures that will not only crush the terrorist movement in the country, but also keep it away from our shores and also make us more effective in fighting terrorism together with our ASEAN brothers.

Ladies and gentlemen of the Philippine Air Force, we each have a stone to lay in the foundation of a modern Philippines.

And in the 60 years since the creation of the air force, never has a year passed without an outstanding contribution from the air force for the national cause, exemplified by this year’s awardees, and we congratulate them.

Some achievements were much heralded like those of Captain Villamor after whom this base is named or the blue diamonds who were the very glamorous heroes when my father was president of the Philippines. But many have achieved much as well without fanfare such as the combatants in the field, the brave pilots who fly the troops or deliver the might of our armed forces to the terrorists lairs, the personnel in countless rescue and mercy missions during natural calamities, or the technicians and airmen who keep the planes airworthy.

When I became president of the Philippines in 2001, I inherited what General Tolentino calls an aging air force, not the men and women, but the equipment. And I remember that we were then beginning the Balikatan exercises and the commanding general of the PACOM would come and inspect and see how our troops were. And they felt that the most important thing we needed was to be able to maintain our air assets. But they had nothing but praises for the men and women and our pilots. I remember what they said watching them in Mindanao, riding those old, old helicopters or flying them. They said they can practically land a helicopter on top of a coconut tree. That’s how good our air force pilots are. Congratulations! And I know that for a fact because the pilots who fly me and my official and personal family to various provinces deserved special mention and I want to take this opportunity to thank them as well.

Lieutenant General Tolentino mentioned that my father made an air force officer, Pelagio Cruz, Chief of Staff of the armed forces. I also made an air force General, Benjie Defensor, Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. at that time, the highest ranking officer in Malacañang from the armed forces was the senior military assistant because the presidential guard was a battalion then. And the senior military assistant was also an air force man — General Victor Dizon.

In my time now, the highest ranking is the head of the PSG and the head of my PSG is also an Air Force man — General Romy Prestoza.

So I am very grateful to the air force for the loyalty and competence that I have been able to observe at close hand.

Our Philippine Defense Reform Program moves forward under the teamwork of our major services and the leading beacon of the defense department. And as I inherited an aging air force — not the men and women, but the equipment — when we had success in our fiscal reforms no sooner did we achieve success then we started to implement once again our Philippine defense reforms.

Over the last two years, we authorized the allocation of 17.5 billion pesos for the capability upgrade plan which is a crucial part of our defense reforms. Most of these are for equipment, but a part of it is for benefits for our soldiers such as housing. The part for the air force was just groundbroken a few days ago.

On the other hand, lest our critics once again criticized us for overmilitarization, let me point out that what we have spent or allocated — we have not spent it all yet because it’s a multi-year program — what we have allocated for armed forces modernization is much less than what we have allocated for agricultural modernization in these last two years of almost 30 billion pesos.

Agricultural modernization and armed forces modernization going hand and hand is a message. We are proving the value of a new paradigm for peace through the use of both hard and soft power. What we are doing is quite unique particularly against the backdrop of troubled spots in the world where hard power alone has been struggling.

In the Southern Philippines, we have been able to meld together confidence-building measures grounded on strong interfaith dialogue and cultural awareness, investments in economic and basic infrastructure development, and mutual security arrangements to keep the peace in Mindanao.

This is a model setting a positive example. It is something we wish, all wish, to share with the rest of the world. By continuing with this new paradigm for peace, we will be able to achieve permanent peace in Mindanao. And permanent peace in Mindanao therefore is to be gained both by modernizing our development efforts and modernizing our armed forces.

As Lieutenant General Tolentino has said, we’ve already begun once again the first phase of our Air Force Modernization Program. We acquired 20 UH-1H helicopters from the United States. This was a result of my state visit to the United States. I remember, as I told you earlier, in the beginning in 2001, what the U.S. PACOM wanted to do was to concentrate their assistance on inventory of spare parts and maintenance. But I insisted that we need a new squadron. And I thanked president bush that he complied with my insistence.

Part of our modernization also was the service life extension of OV-10s. And I would like to take advantage today to help… To also to thank the Kingdom of Thailand for having provided us with ten OV-10s during our administration.

We have also refurbished six UH-1H from the United States. But all that refurbishing while we need to do it — and by the way, I think General Santillan is in the audience. I’d like to thank him for giving me the hint about those available OV-10s in Thailand so that we were able to acquire that for the Philippines — but all these refurbishing and all these goodwill that we are able to mobilize in order to expand our fleet still left me quite uncomfortable. So I instructed General Esperon and Lieutenant General Tolentino that before we buy more second-hand helicopters or almost first-hand helicopters, I want to see a bidding for first-hand helicopters.

And that is why part of the 17.5 billion pesos that we have allocated in the last two years is five billion pesos for brand-new helicopters. And I hope that our young men and women in the air force will feel safer and braver when they fly these brand-new helicopters.

But we will not only improve the equipment, we will also improve the benefits of the men and women who put their lives on the line for the security of the Filipino people. We talked about what we just groundbroke the other day. So we want to provide more on-base and off-base housing facilities. We want to provide more scholarships and livelihood opportunities for families of military personnel. And I am happy to announce that the members of the AFP will receive increases in their hazard pay and subsistence allowance starting this month.

These are parts of the first benefits of development. And now that they are at hand, let us work harder to lift the wings of the nation.

We will remain focused on growing the economy. But we will also remain focused on the course of nation-building which needs a strong armed forces for a strong republic. We will leave no stone unturned to realize the Philippine defense reform program and support the major service commands in the combined pursuit of your mission.

And so on the 60th anniversary of the armed forces, the rejuvenating armed forces, let us advance the fight for national and regional security.

Fly higher Philippine Air Force on to the next 60 years!

Greetings! Greetings to all of you!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 60th Anniversary Celebration of the Philippine Air Force. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412145921/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2063&Itemid=38