Maraming salamat.

Maraming salamat, Ambassador del Rosario. And to all of you, good evening to all of you.

May I greet all of you, dear friends. To my fellow provincemates from the region near my mother’s home, who are Ilocano from Pangasinan, I thank you for being here tonight.

Warm greetings to all of you Kapampangan. I deeply thank you for attending this evening.

To my companions from Mindanao, where I grew up—yes, Iligan—thank you very much for coming tonight.

To the fellow provincemates of my husband who are Ilonggo, thank you very much for coming to my program today.

To my Bikolano brothers and sisters, thank you and good evening.

And to all of you, thank you very much for your unwavering help to those in need in our country.

I’d like to introduce my delegation to you. We have Press Secretary Toting Bunye, who some of you may have met when he was mayor of Muntinlupa and then Congressman of Muntinlupa; and then not here, somewhere around here, is the head of my Presidential Management Staff, Silvestre Afable. There you are. Maybe he has relatives here and he’s sitting with them over there; and then, of course, you know our Ambassador del Rosario. He was also here with me last year; and then I thank him for his welcome, Consul General Jun Paynor, who is also my presidential assistant for foreign travels. Kasama ko ngayong gabi muli ang aking kabiyak, si Attorney Jose Miguel Arroyo. May I greet those who put this lovely townhall meeting together in such short notice, Doctor Carlos Manlapaz, the chairman of the Steering Committee; Doctor Batong Malaque, the President of the Veterans Association of Southern California; Doctor Lambero, the Vice chairman of the steering committee; and the other officers of the various Filipino-American organizations in California.

I’d like to greet the Filipino veterans and also my fellow old girls from assumption — there you are; and the various thousands that are represented by the officers here, the Filipino-American community in California. I’m so happy to see you again.

Because I already came last year—when this itinerary was first made for APEC—it was supposed to be just a technical stopover here in Los Angeles. But… That’s it, because they said I already came here last year. But I said, that was going to pass through Los Angeles without talking to our companions there, the largest Filipino community in all of America. So here we all are again, here we all are together. And thank you, even though you already heard me last year, you attended again this year. Thank you.

Many times I have said that overseas Filipinos should be called overseas Filipino investors because you are the biggest investors of the Philippines.

That’s why when I was a Senator, I had filed an Overseas Voting Bill. But like many other overseas voting bills before mine and even after mine, my bill did not even progress beyond the committee level. So when I became president, I certified as two of my five most urgent bills — one, the overseas voting bill and two, the dual citizenship bill.

And I’m so happy to share with you that my efforts have borne fruit. Our efforts have borne fruit. Because for the first time, after so many attempts in so many administrations, the absentee voting bill has passed both houses of congress on third and final reading. Now, let us pray that the house and the senate can ironed out their conflicting provisions soon because as soon as they do so I will sign that bill into law within 24 hours.

The Dual Citizenship Bill has likewise passed third and final reading in the senate. And here, in accordance with the resolution that the veterans gave me this year and last year, it is true that every time there is a bilateral, the veterans issue is always part of our main agenda. We are working for the passage by the U.S. Congress of improved benefits for Filipino World War II veterans.

You asked me to do this last year. And when I went to Washington, I took it up with president bush. I took it up very strongly and emphatically. Tinarayan ko pa nga iyung Veterans Affairs Department.

And President Bush promised me last year a review of services and benefits for Filipino veterans. I’m also happy that that review is yielding results. Again, for the first time after so many attempts in so many administrations, a bill has been passed in the U.S. House of Representatives to expand benefit eligibility for health care, compensation and burial benefits for our Filipino world war veterans to the tune of 65 million U.S. dollars. That appropriation measure which for the first time in the history of our advocacy passed the House is now in the Senate. So let ‘s pray that this bill can soon passed the Senate.

Meanwhile, the Bush administration, on the executive level, on the executive branch is giving veterans assistance for our veterans, World War II Filipino veterans, who are in the Philippines in the amount of half a million dollars every year. Again, for the first time after so many attempts in so many administrations. The first half a million dollars will be handed over to the Philippine government right this month of October.

It is an uphill fight, but we are getting to the next level as you have seen, and let us continue. There are many uphill fights we have to make but we must continue.

For instance, our economy back home. I hope you still remember that a year-and-a-half ago, when I became president, I inherited an economy with 4 million jobless Filipinos and a 40 percent poverty incidence. That is an uphill fight. And after a year-and-a- half in the presidency, I have come to realize that to overcome such tremendous odds, we must build a strong republic.

To build a strong republic, my administration is committed to good governance. And I believe that the primordial requirement in the drive against corruption in government is to set the example at the top.

Thus, even my husband, my very supportive husband, has allowed himself not to be above the law. Though I consider intrigues against him as an occupational hazard, I have gone to the extent of encouraging him to face senate investigations to demonstrate that there are no sacred cows in my administration. Thank goodness! By letting the investigations go wherever any evidence might take them, I thank god that the evidence invariably shows that accusations against him are false and politically motivated.

But, because my husband has humbled himself by submitting to senate investigations, I have enhanced my moral authority to investigate anybody else any serious allegation and hold anyone accountable if corruption has been found to take place in his jurisdiction.

Let me assure you that I am working diligently to ensure that the Filipino people are getting the professional and clean government you deserve, for you are still part of the Filipino people even if you are here in America.

For instance, our new e-procurement program is saving billions of pesos and minimizing anomalies.

My Presidential Anti-Graft Commission is investigating a number of bureau directors, government board chairmen and government board members whom I have asked to go on leave pending the results of their investigations. And as for corruption within the courts, while there is separation of powers in our constitution, we are proactive in prosecuting graft among state prosecutors, and with the cooperation of the Supreme Court, we are prosecuting erring judges as well.

Last year, I declared that we will make Customs and the Bureau of Internal Revenue showcases in the fight against graft and corruption. This is still a continuing effort.

But I am happy to let you know that as a result of our anti-corruption and systems’ improvement efforts in the bureau of internal revenue under my new BIR commissioner, PMA Class ’70. Where’s the PMA Class ’70 here? Okay, your classmate Willie Parayno is my new BIR Revenue Commissioner.

After one month in office, he has been able to meet his revenue targets, collecting more than one-third more than the same period last year. He has been able to reverse many months of low revenues which had caused our budget deficit to swell. And he is confident that he will meet his targets for the rest of the year and even make up for some of the shortfall of the earlier part of this year.

Upon the cornerstone of a strong republic, we are building a structure of shared ethical values, a firm consensus to serve the common interest and a common vision of our national future.

These goals are also uppermost in my work program for the next six months which I would like to share with you. Even as we are resolving the terrorist threats in our country, I am focused on a tightly consolidated work program for the next six months:

The first is to strengthen our small and medium enterprises. And I’m glad to hear from Consul General Jun Paynor that many of you are willing to participate in the one town, one product, one-million peso loan for small enterprises that we are launching or we have launched to pump prime this drive to strengthen our small and medium enterprises as a source of domestic demand in our country;

The second program is to jumpstart housing;

The third is to reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon;

The fourth is to begin the infrastructure that will decongest Metro Manila;

The fifth is to mark up the contribution of the PCGG to our fiscal resources;

The sixth is to make Makati a specific urban tourist destination for holiday shoppers;

The seventh is to stimulate private investment in agriculture; and the eighth is to begin the complete staff work or to complete the staff work needed to make the reclamation area in Roxas Boulevard another tourism complex to be called “The Bagong Nayong Pilipino.”

Our main goal for all of these and for the programs I told you about last year is to win the battle against poverty within the decade. To win the battle against poverty within the decade but we must also seek national stability. Yes, to win the battle against poverty within the decade to seek permanent national stability.

Thus, I am happy to report to you that because of our aggressive drive against terrorism, despite the desperate resort to hit and run bombings, domestic terrorists particularly the Abu Sayyaf are now on the run. Yes, they bombed two parts of Zamboanga, but we have captured the Zamboanga bombers and identified the mastermind of the latest bombing in Manila.

We have crushed at least five kidnap-for-ransom gangs. And the Filipino-Chinese community, which is their favorite target has even said that now all is quiet on the Binondo front.

These efforts are beginning to bear some fruit even in our economy. Inflation is at a 12-year low, driven down by stable food prices and declining power costs. Interest rates are at their lowest in 15 years.

We are rated as stable by the international credit rating agencies. The regional GDP growth figures show that the Philippines is the best performing economy today in Southeast Asia. And even if you take Asia as a whole where China is number one, the Philippines is the third best performing economy in Asia.

What does this mean for the poor in the Philippines? Well, for one thing it means: the price of rice for the poor is stable at 14 to 16 pesos; it means that more than 150,000 urban poor families have acquired the right to buy the land that they are occupying squatters no more; it means that schools are being built in barangays where there used to be none, about a thousand of them; it means that more than 3 million poor Filipinos now have health insurance. These achievements were attained only during my administration.

But no president can build a strong republic single-handedly. I can do this and do this well only if I can count on the support of the more than 2 million Filipino-Americans, especially the 700,000 who are here in Los Angeles.

And so, though I was here with you last year, I am here again with you to ask you: stay with me. Help me build a strong republic.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Meeting with the Filipino Community in Los Angeles, California, U.S.A. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409210713/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8403&Itemid=38