Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During a Meeting with the Council of Saudi Chamber of Commerce and Industry

[Delivered at the Chamber of Commerce Bldg. Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, May 8, 2006]

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

I’d like to thank Minister of Social Affairs for having accompanied me throughout my stay since yesterday; and Ambassador Wali, I’d like to thank you for making us know the different opportunities that we can point out during our visit here; and I’d like to greet also the chairman of the Saudi-Philippine Business Council, Mr. Waleed Al Swaidan, and thank you for the friendship that you have shown the Philippines and also our Filipino workers; officials and members of the Saudi-Philippine Business Council; members of the government and business delegations of the Philippines’ state visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, ladies and gentlemen.

I’m deeply honored in making this state visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and I thank everyone from His Majesty the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques to everybody else concerned for your warm welcome.

Our historical ties are strong, steady and lasting. Historical ties, indeed, when the Governor of Riyadh went to visit the Philippines in 1999, he noticed how much of Philippine customs, cultures and traditions had origins in the culture of the Middle East. And in more recent times, Saudi Arabia has stood by the side of the Philippines for peace and development. And as you have said, more than a million Filipinos help build your economy right here in Saudi Arabia. In every vital activity in this land — producing oil, building cities, laying out roads and power lines, taking care of the health of the people — Filipinos are there.

The relationship is both reciprocal and synergistic. And you who are here today represent the companies, agencies and individuals that contribute to our successful and mutually beneficial ties and I thank you for organizing this meeting today.

Well, the most obvious link between our two countries today, the most visible link is the great Filipino worker. Filipino workers have been in the kingdom for more than 30 years now and therefore you know the quality of our great Filipino worker. Therefore we hope that the expansion, ongoing, of the various sectors of the Saudi economy, especially the mega infrastructures in the King Abdullah economic city will provide outsourcing opportunities for Philippine corporations.

I remember the first petrochemical boom in the early 1970s, that was the time when the first big inflow of Filipino workers came to Saudi Arabia. And at that time they came through the employment in Philippine companies who were doing construction and engineering work in that petrochemical boom. Since then, the number of Filipinos has increased but the bulk of them now, the vast majority are now hired directly by Saudi companies. And however, we hope that with this bigger boom that is coming up with King Abdullah economic city — a boom that is much bigger than the petrodollar boom of 1974 — once again the companies in the Philippines will be able to provide outsourcing services to that development in the fields of engineering, construction and engineering-related I.T. enabled services.

I am very glad that we had that meeting just before this in the Saudi General Investment Authority, and there we saw the magnitude of this development of the King Abdullah economic city. Our business delegation was here meeting with you so they were not with me and I’d like to tell them that that economic city is bigger than some of the neighboring countries of Saudi Arabia. It’s in ten years time it will provide a trillion dollars worth of economic activities. But we don’t have to wait ten years because we have the capability and we can experience… We know that we are the preferred source of human resources here in Saudi Arabia. So we are very sure that our companies will be able to find vastly bigger opportunities in this new petrodollar boom than we even saw in 1974, which was already quite substantial.

You mentioned, Mr. Chairman, about the WTO, and I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your accession to the WTO last December 2005 after more than a decade of difficult negotiations. Being in the world trade organization, we can share a common stand for a fair and level playing field in global trade and investment. And with your membership in the WTO, the Philippines hopes to have a more fruitful participation — though our participation is already very fruitful with our 1.2 million Filipinos here — but we hope to continue to have an even more fruitful participation in the continuing and increasing affluence of your kingdom. This time not just the workers but also our products and services. In fact, you have rightly pointed out that Saudi sells to the Philippines 20 times more than the Philippine sells to Saudi. And for this reason, to even it up a little bit more, I shall assign a Trade Attache to Saudi Arabia. I’ve already given that instruction to Secretary of Trade and Industry.

I was telling my colleagues in the Philippines that really we should export more to Saudi Arabia because our 1.2 million workers alone already constitute a major market for Philippine garments, fresh and processed foods, marine products, tropical fruits, especially bananas and pineapples. But Minister of Social Affairs said, “yes, why not?” But those very goods are also goods that the Saudi will buy. So we have a critical mass for a minimum export market and it is much more than that because whatever the Filipinos buy the Saudis will also like to buy. And so we are sure that these products will be welcome not only to our Filipinos but also the Saudi Arabian consumers.

And I believe that the Saudi Arabian consumers will also welcome consumer manufactures from the Philippines like furniture and furnishings. They’re very world class, very sophisticated, always sold out in all of the trade missions that we have anywhere, even beauty products and consumer electronics. And it’s a great time for Saudi to enter the WTO because while — and we are very appreciative of your empathy for us — while world prices of oil are at a historic high, there is much that Saudi can do in helping the rest of the world through increased trade.

And so in this time of very volatile oil prices, we invite the Saudi business community through you the council of Saudi chambers, to recycle its petrodollars and profit from the oil trade in the form of direct investments to low-income and middle-income oil importing countries — the Philippines is a middle-income, low-importing country — particularly the Philippines especially because Filipino workers are making a valuable contribution to the economy of Saudi Arabia. And you have already had your meetings with our Filipino business delegation. I would just like to stress that we invite your investments to the Philippines which is at the verge of economic take off.

Our economic momentum is steady despite the increase in world oil prices. Our fiscal deficit management is three years ahead of the target set by our medium-term Philippine development plan. The Philippine peso has outperformed many Asian currencies in the past year. And exports are expected to grow double digit this year, more of it I hope to Saudi Arabia.

As far as investments are concerned, again, I believe you have talked already about some prospects and specific portfolios with our private business community. But I would just like to stress that we invite Saudi investments into our energy, tourism, mining, information and communication technology, and agricultural sectors. Tourism and I.C.T. because we are promoting fast growing industries where high-value jobs are most plentiful and which can use our most competitive resource that you are very familiar with — the great Filipino worker, so well known in the Saudi business community. You have admired them, you have expressed your appreciation of them.

I’d like to let you now that we churned out 40,000 knowledge workers every year such as engineers and I.T. professionals. Some of them come to Saudi, many of them come to Saudi, some of them are awaiting your investments in the Philippines. Tourism because we not only have the competent and warm and friendly people, we have the natural wonders that are very attractive to investments. And most of our hotels and resorts now are always fully-booked, so we can certainly use more rooms, more facilities, more hotels, more resorts from Saudi investments.

Mining, because the Philippines total mineral reserves are valued at one trillion U.S. dollars. The fifth largest mineral deposits in the world. The fifth biggest in gold. The ninth biggest in copper and the 20 percent of the world’s nickel.

Energy, of course, because Saudi Arabia is the energy giant of the world and we hope you can among other investments put up oil refining facilities in Mindanao, in Southern Philippines, where half of our ten million Muslims live. Because such a refinery to be located in Mindanao can serve not only the Philippines but also the American west coast market and Eastern Indonesia which is closer to Mindanao than to the Indonesian oil fields of Aceh.

Agriculture, because Mindanao where five million of our ten million Muslims live is the food basket of the entire Philippines. And we want to raise its production, processing and logistical capacities including the Halal food industry that we hope we can also service the whole Muslim world with including Saudi Arabia. And as Donald Dee, the president of the Philippine Chamber mentioned to me earlier, you also had some very promising talks regarding the investment in our Al Amanah Bank, our Islamic bank.

So these are so many things that we can do together, and I thank you for the occasion to address your esteemed council. The Philippine delegation and I hope to bring back to our country not only the fruits of economic cooperation on this visit but also memories of your hospitality, your generosity, your way of life, your dreams and aspirations as a great kingdom moving forward in the new millennium and we hope to be part of that moving forward.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during a Meeting with the Council of Saudi Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213827/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2786&Itemid=38