Thank you very much Secretary… oh, Secretary… that’s right, he is the Secretary of HUDCC but Vice-President de Castro and son of Mindoro Oriental, for your introduction of me. (Applause) They call him Noli Boy here, it seems.

Thank you also Governor Arnan Panaligan for your welcome remarks. And thank you to our two congressmen and deputy speaker from Mindoro Island, here with us are Girlie Villarosa, Rod Valencia, who they call “RGV,” and Boy Umali. And thank you also to our governors, Nene Sato and Bong Carreon, for coming here to our important meeting. Honorable Bishop, thank you for being here, the church is so important to our peace efforts. (Applause) And Mayor, thank you, and the different mayors of the region for being here, of course you are on the frontline of our peace efforts. With us here is not only my husband who doesn’t usually join me but he wanted to see Mindoro Oriental. (Applause) Our Cabinet members, our high-ranking officials of the military and police, and also high-ranking officials of several important departments that are involved especially here in MIMAROPA.

That’s why I am pleased with you and thank you for your continued support of our peace process. You are the first LPSA to discuss how to overcome the communist rebels in accordance with the new measure of our peace process. So, I apologize and I will summarize our new process in English because perhaps it’s about the first time we talk about this in greater length.

The new premise of our peace efforts focuses our peace process not on negotiating with armed groups only but more importantly on authentic dialogues with the people in the communities. And it’s good that your resolution includes those discussions with the stakeholders.

These dialogues with the communities will be centered on ending all forms of armed rebellion in the country. By talking directly with the people, we hope to generate a national consensus against armed struggle as a means of achieving political and social change.

Our overall discussion with armed groups is DDR or Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration. This is our framework now in our dealings with any armed groups in the peace talks. DDR, as espoused by the communities, should be a notice to armed groups that the communities reject armed struggle; it should be a way of showing that the force of arms does not entitle them to represent our people.

Through these engagements, we hope that our people will make all armed groups accountable to them and to the government for all their actions. So, these are our objectives in our peace talks now in the communities themselves.

Peace is a partner of development. And as Arnan said in his speech, the discussion of development is very important given the current global situation.

There is, as Arnan says, a global economic crisis that is responsible for driving up the prices of food, fuel and rice in the Philippines and around the world. We are not in crisis here at home, but we are facing strong challenges. During these troubled times, the role of the government is to help insulate the Filipino people from these price shocks and economic pressures.

Your government is doing everything in its power to put food on every table and protect your income from high prices and high inflation. And the entire nation of the Philippines is very grateful to Mindoro Island because you plant rice and feed the Philippines. (Applause) We are also continuing to invest in the nation’s system of healthcare, education and social services.

In the face of the crisis in America, the Philippines appears in relatively good shape. Thanks to the fiscal reforms that our congressmen enacted that manifested in 7 plus percent GDP growth last year. Were it not for the painful reforms of the past seven years, the impact of the global crisis would have been much worse as it is in fact in other developing countries. Instead, as the credit rating agency Standard & Poor’s says, “The Philippine economy is a relative ‘island of calm’ in a very stormy sea of global uncertainty.” (Applause)

But this relative strength and resilience of our people on our economy, this is still not consolation for Filipinos who are paying higher prices for basic goods. And we are aware of the pressures that you face from high prices and high inflation. And we know that you are worried about job security and what your income can buy. We are also concerned with that so we are striving, working hard to keep the price of rice, food and gasoline and diesel down, and to increase the number of jobs and investments that will continue to create job opportunities for more of our countrymen, especially here in MIMAROPA. And congratulations for being the fastest growing economy of 2007! (Applause)

The government has made sure that we now have a solid supply of rice for the foreseeable future. And of course, thank you again to Mindoro Island, and I hope that distribution of rice is working. I hope that people are getting the rice that they need. One reason why I go to the provinces is I want to hear if it is not so.

And our farmers are getting the investments they need. Good is one of your resolutions, and may I say that your resolutions are very well taken. I could say that almost all of them can be adopted immediately; some will be discussed with appropriate departments. But your resolution about hopefully repairing the irrigation facilities — I can commit that to you. (Applause)

And because you… because Noli said that it’s still okay in Mindoro Oriental, I believe your rice production is up. But they say that in Mindoro Occidental they are shifting to corn. We can’t force farmers to stay with rice if they earn more from corn. So all we can do is add more land that can be planted. And the way to do that is the long-established irrigation facilities that — in fact, this is true of the whole country — those built by previous… those from the early days were never, never repaired. It was only during our administration that they were repaired and many more lands were added for that. (Applause)

And thank you because of the good harvest of Mindoro Oriental, a major rice-producing province, inflation has started to come down. Thank you. The price of rice has started to come down from the heights they had last summer. And thanks to other conditions in the world the price of fuel has also started to come down. And if the price of rice and the price of fuel are falling, we expect the earning power of your salaries or your income from business to increase.

Our economic team is working to rein in inflation, to monitor prices and to put price gougers out of business. Artie Yap is not here right now because he is doing a lot of work to ensure the supply of rice and food. I just spoke with him earlier and I asked him to follow up on, “So, Artie, what about those we caught the other day taking advantage of rice prices?” So, he will give a report on how many licenses have been cancelled because of that, so that when the next lean months come around, there will be lessons learned from the examples made during this past lean month.

But we will continue to make spot checks in the markets to make sure that no one is taking advantage of their fellow citizens during this extraordinarily challenging time.

Vice-President Noli de Castro was made chairman or co-chairman

in the DTI of the Price Coordinating Council, right Noli? And that is one of the things he does, monitoring the prices of goods in the markets.

Last October, when I went out of Malacañang, I passed by the South Super Highway and I saw that Christmas lanterns were already being sold. Oh dear! We are now coming into the holiday season, we should all count our blessings and we should look to the future with greater hope, confidence and optimism.

That… our soldiers are good at fighting against insurgency, and we are grateful for that. (Applause) Our police are also good because, with our executive order, the police and the soldiers are working together to fight the rebels. And there is still a lot to be done for peace. Regarding your resolution on protecting the environment and the seas, when I was on my way here, an environmentalist told me about people guarding Apo Reef, where Girlie and Nene and I went diving and snorkeling for a few days during the summer. They saw ships that looked like PSG boats, and they initially thought they were PSG boats being prepared for our visit. But they said they didn't look like PSG boats because PSG boats only have two engines, while these had three engines, so they were more advanced. Then when they approached to find out who they were, they left and headed towards Palawan. And upon examination and interviewing them, they spoke a different language, not Tagalog. So, I said that was an example, it was good that the people of Apo Reef, the guards of Apo Reef, saw them. They should be found now, if they went towards Palawan, they should be found. I initially thought they might be Abu Sayyaf, but they didn't speak Tagalog, so they might be foreigners. Whether they are Abu Sayyaf or foreign poachers, they need to be pursued and arrested. So, that is one thing that still needs to be done for peace.

But the fact that the guards of Apo Reef saw them, approached them, and they ran away, shows that the guarding is good and we should thank all the ‘Bantay Dagat,’ all the forces — government, civilian, military, non-government — that are guarding the seas of MIMAROPA. Thank you all very much. (Applause)

The amnesty, thank you again to the congressmen and deputy speaker who passed it in the House of Representatives. Yes, (applause) it only needs to be approved in the Senate. So, hopefully this resolution will be sent by our secretariat to the Senate so they know that the people of MIMAROPA want the amnesty to be passed so that more of our people who are out there will return.

Our people must come together this holiday season to celebrate faith and families. Our communities must pull together and set aside personal feuds, political differences, and focus instead on what positive things we can do to improve our lives.

I am optimistic about our future and the hope, optimism and resilience of the Filipino people. I am optimistic about MIMAROPA’s growth prospects. I remember there was a time — because didn't I create MIMAROPA — back then you were part of Region IV, but every time there was an RDC meeting, it was always about CALABARZON that was being discussed. So, I decided to separate MIMAROPA so it could have its own policies, because the policies for industrialized areas are different, and the policies for MIMAROPA, which is more difficult, are different. But there was a time I was regretting what I did, because it seemed to me you were only trading… because, because you have different regional directors and different planning, so you end up just interacting with one another, maybe you’re just reinforcing each other’s poverty rather than being able to benefit from the wealth that is in Region IV-A. But the fact that you’re the fastest growing region shows that your proposal to have your own region wasn't wrong. (Applause)

And what the MIMAROPA Regional Director should do as the representative to the government here is to be vigilant in bringing government services to the people. One problem with MIMAROPA is that the regional offices are scattered, some are still in Manila, so we have a new secretary or Presidential Adviser for New Government Centers, my former colleague from the Department of Trade and Industry, Vic Domingo, and he has already done a lot, I mean, he’s right now on vacation leave before he starts his job, but he has already talked to the concerned parties. And I think he’s already had his dialogue with you to speed up the transfer of the Regional Center here to Calapan, which was chosen as the capital of the MIMAROPA Region.

It is important that your government works for you; it’s important that you can expect the government to deliver the services you deserve. That’s why they need to be here nearby. And even more important now is this LPSA we are doing, security and peace are even more important now. But, as I said, under the leadership of my former PSG head, who was with me in Malacañang and as Vice-President for eight years, Del Bangit, as well as our commander of the Western Command, I am optimistic about peace and security in MIMAROPA. Even Louie, my godson, isn’t that right, during the anniversary. So, I’m very optimistic because these are handpicked officers to help bring about peace and security in the region. So, let’s all work together because we know that peace is a very, very meaningful and real prospect. I would even say it’s here already in Mindoro except for a few of the influenced barangays, but in the whole MIMAROPA, it’s already here.

Let’s use this peace that we are enjoying to bring economic opportunities and human dignity to every man, woman and child in MIMAROPA. The rapid establishment of peace, the rapid improvement of MIMAROPA’s economy, that’s a huge investment to further improve the lives of every citizen of MIMAROPA. So to all of you, congratulations and good luck and more power in the future!

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the Local Peace and Security Assembly (LPSA) In MIMAROPA Region. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134937/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=12&Itemid=38