Thank you Secretary Favila for your introduction.

Thank you also President Andaya and the other officers of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines for inviting me to be here with you today. I’d like to greet also President of PDIC, President Nograles — I hope you don’t have too many clients from the rural banking system — and Gilda Pico, President of the Land Bank, I hope you have many, many clients from the rural banking system. All other officers and members of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, guests, ladies and gentlemen, thank you.

First of all, Happy Anniversary to all of you!

And second, as President Andaya said, mentioned, congratulations for helping the Philippines to be number three in having the best microfinance system in the world and number one in Asia. And of course through you I thank the whole banking sector for your efforts to make your services available to your clients even at the height of typhoons “Ondoy” and “Pepeng.”

And I thank your association for your donation, I believe especially to the flood victims of Rizal, which is the worst hit province of all in this past typhoon Ondoy. I have also my own pride in helping to strengthen the rural banking system to what it is today, because when I was a senator, I was the principal author of the law that help to rehabilitate and strengthen the rural banking system of the Philippines.

And now here we are in what we hope is the tail end of a global economic crisis; also in what we hope is the tail end of a once in a lifetime calamity. And with your support, we will l continue to work aggressively to ensure that our economic growth that has been generating jobs and revenue to invest in new infrastructure and critical social programs will be sustained. With your support we will continue our Economic Resiliency Plan and its important components like the Conditional Cash Transfers to the poorest of the poor. We hope that this poorest of the poor to whom we give allowances as long as they send their children to school and avail of rural health services will soon graduate from extreme poverty.

That's why it's called Pantawid Pamilya, hoping they can cross over to a point where they consider starting businesses and borrowing from rural banks. And here in this response to the calamity, through the support of all levels of government and the hard work of our people, both you and your clients, we will not be deterred in our effort to maintain growth. We will intensify our investment in infrastructure, especially shovel-ready repair and rehabilitation.

Right now, three things need to be done: garbage collection, draining of flooded areas, and cash for work for the thousands displaced by Ondoy and Pepeng, initially in helping clean and repair the roads. And for this purpose, we will continue our Comprehensive Livelihood and Emergency Employment Program.

Going into the more medium-term, but we have to begin now — in fact, we started yesterday — we do not want to return the evacuees who came from the endangered areas. They have been living in the creeksides, riversides, lakeshores for decades now. And therefore, it’s been a Herculean job for the local governments to convince them to stay out of those or get out of those endangered areas. But now that many of them did this is the opportunity to make sure they don’t return. But the way to do that is to make sure that they have relocation sites. And that is what we have been doing. We’ll be having a meeting again of the NDCC on Tuesday, and we will be having a report on this. But in the meantime, yesterday, the first batch of evacuees who will now be relocatees, and these are evacuees from Marikina, move to Sta. Rosa. And I will be visiting them tomorrow to make sure that they are well on their way to a new life. And we are continuing to do this and this is in fact the most important step that we have to take after the clean up and the draining.

But we work with you the private sector in the meantime because they need to have a new life to ensure that there is capital for our micro and SMEs to keep operating or even expand, and also to ensure public-private sector partnerships. And to make it easier for you to participate in rebuilding broken lives but also in continuing to build up the lives that were not broken.

In this regard, the Bangko Sentral, where Peter Favila is a member of the Board representing the national government, the Bangko Sentral has decided to keep the key policy rates unchanged rather than raising them to avert an inflationary pressure.

And as providers of banking services to the base of the economic pyramid, which is your theme, you play a key role as the primary conduit of funds to micro and small businesses and small farmers. And this, indeed, is an important component of the resiliency that we have been able to show during this global economic crisis.

Because during this crisis, although all economies have felt the pain of the global recession, that pain has not been evenly distributed. For instance in Asia, the economies that have been performing best and that are still enjoying positive growth and not negative are those emerging markets where consumption is a high proportion of GDP rather than exports. The Philippines has domestic private consumption 70% of GDP, Indonesia and Vietnam 65%, so with Sri Lanka, Bangladesh 75% even though it’s very poor. But because of the strong domestic consumption of these countries with large population they had been keeping the economies afloat and these economies are outperforming the trade-dependent economies. And how can we sustain this private consumption, it is because of institutions like the Rural Banks that cater to the small and the very small.

So as our country comes to rely more heavily on the local market, because we have seen that the international market is really just too unstable and volatile. Your role as a major engine of local finance activity becomes more important. You help to keep business humming in the base and by doing so you prove once again that commercial viability and the social necessity of our rural banks.

Well, if you and we in government together were able to bring about a system that is third best in the world and best in Asia in microfinance, it is because we have both believed you and we in government in microentrepreneurship. We have campaigned actively for more Filipinos to become entrepreneurs. We have put great emphasis on micro enterprises which comprise maybe 90% of our total economic activity. In the last eight years, through the government, through the Land Bank mostly, about a P150 billion — is that right, Gilda? — has been unleashed for microcredit. Much of this amount, thought it came from Land Bank, the Land Bank does not retail. So, it has reached micro entrepreneurs in the countryside through cooperatives, accredited NGOs, and of course, the accredited rural banks.

Peter Favila sent me a text message on my way here — couldn’t put it in my speech anymore — that the private banking sector, mostly rural banks, has provided… has an outstanding loan portfolio now for microfinance of six billion pesos to 900,000 clients with over 200 banks involved. And so I thank you all for taking care of them because your microclients are the same microenterprises that are helping enable the economies of our towns to remain active despite the global slump.

The report of the Philippines being number three in the world and number one in Asia in microfinance was also reported not only by the IFC but it was several multilateral financial institutions and announced by The Economist Intelligence Units. And may I add another quotation from The Economist Intelligence Unit which said: “Where the Philippines differs from its neighbors, and indeed from most crisis-hit economies, is that the crisis has generated less pronounced economic ups and downs.” Certainly, we had no economic ups and downs in the last eight years. We only had uninterrupted growth. I remember when I went to Washington with Secretary Favila and I met some senators who had been friends of U.S. senators who have been friends of the Philippines since the 1980s, one of them said, “The problem with the Philippines is you have your cycles, your ups and downs every…” “No,” I said, “Mr. Senator, not anymore, not since 2001. We have not had a boom and bust cycle anymore. It’s been boom, boom, boom and even during the crisis though our growth slowed down, it’s still positive.” And therefore that is one of the big differences, and private consumption and rural banks are a very important ingredient in that sustained growth. So, thank you very much to all of you.

And to continue what The Economist said, “The economy has not contracted at all during the current global crisis.”

How true this is, indeed. We have achieved much in the areas of infrastructure investment, job creation, macroeconomic stability and improvements in our overall business environment that has helped us through the worst of the global economic crisis. The result is the Philippine economy that is stronger and more able to withstand shocks such as those that the global financial crisis is throwing at us. Not only have we sustained positive economic growth throughout the global recession, but we even exceeded expectations for the second quarter.

Moreover, financial reforms including the bill that I authored which became law now since I’m a senator and later on through the Central Bank of the Philippines, financial reforms have created the solid fundamentals that underpin our banking sector today reinforced by your conservative banking practices.

Your values have significantly sheltered our country’s finances. And that is why you are among those who helped that in recognition of this stability, Moody’s Investors Service upgraded the Philippines credit rating last July.

Because of the bitter medicine of reform that we took early on and the economic resilience that it has in turn created, today indeed as I said earlier where a stronger, more robust nation. And we are poised to ride the wave of the coming global rebound because the signs are there for a global rebound. Let’s hope it is maintained. And therefore as the rebound comes because we are fundamentally strong. We’ve survived the crisis. The rural banks have an opportunity to capture the growth prospects that will come with the global recovery, especially for the base of the pyramid.

Therefore, we look to our rural bankers to continue to play an active role in promoting growth in the countryside. And I know you will not shirk from this role, because as a sector while some banks have failed as a sector, you have never yet failed our people.

So, side by side, let us continue to beat the odds so that with strong microfinance with a strong base of the pyramid, the rural banking system will be one of the institutions that will propel our country to the edge of the first world in 20 years when you turn 70 years old as an association.

To all of you, Congratulations and Happy 52nd Anniversary!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 52nd anniversary of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP) on the Base of the Pyramid. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134209/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26440&Itemid=38