Thank you very much, Press Secretary Milt Alingod.

National Press Club President Tony Antonio, welcome to your party; Vice President Alice Reyes, thank you for giving the welcoming remarks; Roman Floresca; Sonny Galvez; Jimmy Ching; I’d like to greet few Cabinet members who are here — Secretary Romulo, Secretary Ople, Bobi Tiglao, Toting Bunye — they’re the only ones who were obliged to come. The others have better things to do; friends and supporters of the National Press Club, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

First of all, I would like to ask you to… Well, I’d like to ask you to see my family who are all here with me tonight. Okay. Well, stand up, stand up.

I am very glad to have my family with me tonight.

My media group is really clever, they said, bring my whole family. Because their initial plan was to stage a scene where Mike and I would separate for the tabloids. But sorry, my media group is having difficulty for me to change my image from stern to martyr. So, sorry about that. The sob story will have to wait because I still have to comply with my annual new year’s resolution not to be harsh.

I really try very hard not to be mataray. Remember, that was the subject matter of my Gridiron last year, my katarayan? Every year, it’s my resolution, my new year’s resolution, and I really try so hard not to be mataray even if there is so much dirty laundry, so much filth, so much disorder, so much noise to deal with, and that’s just my granddaughter Mikaela. Plus, I have a government to run, too.

Being married to our country in such a difficult time as this is patience-consuming, energy-consuming, time-consuming. Which frankly makes me wonder what I’m doing here. Just like those who did not even bother to come tonight, they bought tables like that one but they didn’t bother to come because they have better things to do.

You notice only my Cabinet members related to the press, and Bert Romulo and Ka Blas are here tonight. The others, all have better things to do. But I am, just the same.

In this yearly ritual where the president has to grin and bear it while the press pokes fun of our mistakes and our problems. Yes I’m here, even as for somebody who is mataray — the matarays usually don’t like to be made fun of. But still I’m here because behind the light moments of this annual ritual, as said by Alice in the welcome remarks of Tony is the message: those in power must respect the freedom of the press. Yes, I will always uphold your right as journalists for as long as you report the good news.

If you are bad to me, I will have a lifestyle check done on you. Because my spies are clever, my security team is clever. I know who is naughty, I know who is nice to me.

My security team is really clever. I asked an aide why Vic Corpus spends so much time in the war room. The aide I asked isn't here, not on duty tonight. It's that one, my Class 95 salutatorian aide, Chris Magdangal. You know, he was the salutatorian of Class 95. The difference between him and Gambala is a very small point, but Gambala, according to the script earlier, is causing trouble in our country; Magdangal, honors our country.

Anyway, I asked him: why is Vic Corpus always in our war room? He said: ma’am, because he likes playing the game of the generals. So I went to the war room because I wanted to see the games that Victor plays. And he submitted to me the following report: Madam President, according to ISAFP, A1 report, you and Gringo have something in common, you both like dancing. Gringo likes the folk dance, the coup-racha, while you according to the A1 reports really want the cha-cha. At last, Victor Corpus’ intelligence is accurate. He’s really travelled the learning curve from his Mawanay days. Before, he was involved in shady dealings, now, he’s skilled.

My security team is really clever. Roy Golez — you showed him, without brains — he has brains. He even pre-figured your script, because one day he made the assessment for me, his national security briefing that the problem of finding the billions necessary for the national budget is nothing compared to the trillions involved in our national security concerns. Isn't Roy Golez clever? You put that in your script but he said it first.

My palace aides are also clever. I mentioned earlier, Magdangal. That one you all know, Ermie. But the one with me now, Vivian. When I was about to change for my exercise the other day, Vivian asked me, ma’am, will you be wearing your pidal pushers? Because Vivian is Visayan.

By the way, regarding that exercise, I’d like to invite again the female reporters, the palace reporters, you can join me if you like exercise — and you lack exercise because you’re following me all over the place — you can join me and the other female staff members in our twice-weekly exercise session. That’s true. Just no, no ambush interviews, for off-the-record remarks. But it’s nice to have you there in a setting without ambush interviews. Because my clever media group or groups say we lack bonding.

Our media groups are really clever, they say: due to the lack of bonding, there is… Well, that’s their fault. My media group is very good in bonding, but very poor at plumbing. Because when there’s a leak, they don’t catch the source. Why is that?

But they are really clever. When they felt I had been too harsh with Tina Panganiban Perez, they decided that we should send her roses. Actually, this is the third delivery. The first orders went astray. Because first, when Milt Alingod gave his assistant the message to send flowers: send flowers to Perez. Oh! Vince Perez blushed, because he was the one who received them. I found out Vince Perez received the flowers because he blushed during our meeting. I said: that’s wrong. You send flowers to the wrong Perez. So they sent the flowers to Nani, and I ended up blushing.

Matinik talaga yung aking mga aide. When I look for Vince Perez, they call Nani Perez. When I look for Nani Perez, they call Nani Braganza. When I look for Nani Braganza, they call my senior aide, General Braganza. When I look for Bebot Alvarez, they call Sonny Alvarez. When I look for Sonny Alvarez, they call Sonny Belmonte. I had to remove all that confusion. Mabuti na lang si Sonny Belmonte elected. Pero tignan ninyo yung iba: Sonny Alvarez is no longer in DENR, Bebot is no longer in DOTC, General Braganza is no longer my senior aide, Nani Braganza is no longer in DAR, and Nani Perez is no longer in justice. Watch out, Vince Perez. The flowers were not for you, they were for Tina.

Apologizing is not a problem for me. My father, many, many of the older people would tell me stories of my father apologizing even as president. He had no problem apologizing even as president especially if the mistake he made was at the expense of someone else. I think he learned that a president should be gracious enough to apologize when he was a Malacañang lawyer during the time of President Quezon. The story was that an aide went to President Quezon one time, he was having siesta, and told him, Mr. President, the press is here. Quezon said, tell the press to go to hell! So the aide went out and told the parish priest to go to hell. Quezon had to apologize. Press — priest, pidal pusher — pedal pusher, times never really changed among the aides, kasi multi-ethnic society tayo.

In Malacañang, the order of the day is always two things: feed the beast, and try to influence the agenda. But I think for the editors, the order of the day is: bite the hand that feeds the beast, and kill the good news. That’s why Tony said, you are nice to me tonight, because in the newspaper you are not nice to me.

Nonetheless, the freedom of the press is important to us as a democratic country.

We know from our martial law experience that without press freedom our democratic institutions die. During martial law the people were kept in the dark on what was actually happening to our country, because the dictatorship made it appear that everything was going well and it was done with the help of the controlled press, the controlled media.

At present, it’s the opposite. The media always makes it appear that our country is in deep trouble. This is because as Alice says, when she, in behalf of Tony Antonio, that the press can write anything under the sun in the Philippines. But the truth of the matter is that we are progressing economically and compared with other Asian countries, except maybe China and Malaysia, we’re doing comparatively well.

So please. Fix your reports even if you and I know that good news do not always make — in fact seldom make — for good copy. I wish it did. And I wish you could make it so. As others say, no, we have to have bad news, otherwise, our paper won’t sell. Well, I don’t know about you but my statistics say that the bulletin sells very well even if it is a very, very fair and sober newspaper. Thank you very much, Don Emilio.

I also share your grief about the latest death of Jun Pala. The Jun Pala was a hard hitting radio broadcaster, he was one of the few who used to saying nice things about me, and that makes me doubly sorry indeed. And I would like to accept the suggestion, Tony, to form a task force that will join your task force to especially run after these killers, or if there are already those accused and undergoing to trial, to speed up the trial. Oh, there’s Obet Pagdanganan of DAR. I didn’t see him earlier. I saw Obet because I was looking at who is the enforcer who bothered not to only to buy tickets but to attend as well. Nakikita ko dito, si Jun Ebdane ang nagpapasensiya sa inyo. Kaya si Jun Ebdane ang magiging… Ang maghahanap ng mga killer ni Jun Pala at iba pa. Susmaryosep! sana at the same time, he stumbles on Al-Ghozi as well.

One of the universal sources of humor about the press is the question: what would be the headlines if tomorrow were the end of the world? And my matinik media team played the game. Palagay raw nila, if tomorrow were the end of the world, ganito ang mga headline.

For the Daily Tribune: Last day for Arroyo, Erap takes over.

For Malaya: Oreta demands snap elections tomorrow.

For the Philippine Star: Star publisher invited to U.N. Summit on the end of the world.

Inquirer Analysis: Political conspiracies put an end to the world.

People’s Journal: Malacañang creates crisis committee for the end of the world.

People’s Tonight: Gringo: I’m the one in the picture.

Star Ngayon: Last Ro-Ro, departing!

Abante Tonite: The GMA government is falling.

TV Patrol: MERALCO pays full refund to the customers.

Inquirer: Mike A.: I won’t last a day without you; GMA: I will survive.

Balita: Noli: Goodbye, country.

Good evening to you all. Until tomorrow, we will survive! The Republic will survive with the help of a fair and free media.

Thank you very much to you all.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Gridiron Night of the National Press Club. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194405/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7118&Itemid=38