Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 60th anniversary celebration of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with Awarding of the 2008 Ten Outstanding Policewomen of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Heroes Hall, Malacañang, December 10, 2008]

Thank you Secretary Ermita for your introduction.

Secretary Ermita is, as our Master of Ceremonies said, the Chairman of the Presidential Committee on Human Rights; and the Chairman of the Human Rights Commission, Leila De Lima; the other members of the Commission and the other officers of CHR:  Thank you for being here with us in our separate celebration aside from the one you had this morning because I wanted to highlight the independence of the Commission on Human Rights.

Our members of the Diplomatic Corps headed by no less than His Excellency the Papal Nuncio, Secretary Puno and the officers of the DILG and the police who we incorporated in to this event in order to highlight the commitment of the police to the promotion of human rights.

Our officers of ZONTA led by Lieutenant Governor Beng Puyat, thank you for honoring our Ten Outstanding Policewomen every year for the last seven years now.

Our awardees; the different guests who are here today: NGOs, our friends in UNICEF whom I invited specifically today because you will see why when I give my speech; and of course, our members of Congress who are here with us today; ladies and gentlemen.

I greet the Filipino people on our celebration today of the 60th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. On this day 60 years ago, our young Republic signed a U.N. declaration that embodied man and society’s deepest quest from time immemorial — the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights.

We can draw vivid images on what transpired on December 10th 1948. A Republic barely one year old, still clearing the rubble of a terrible war, standing foursquare behind one of the greatest declarations ever made by the U.N. that human beings are born free and equal, and entitled to all the human rights.

We thank our speakers whom we invited here today, the chair of the CHR, Leila De Lima and the deputy commissioner of the UNICEF for your observations on the challenges on human rights in the Philippines. And may we add among those challenges the many human rights violations of the New People’s Army and the blatant human rights violations of the three renegade MILF commanders who brazenly murdered and pillaged innocent civilian communities. And if we talk about unsolved crimes, may we also point out and help seek a solution to the murder of Popoy Lagman way back in 2001.

We have made major inroads on promoting the rights of individuals in the past few years. The institutions that used to be the targets of criticism for alleged human rights abuses have undergone a significant transformation that has been noted and praised by both local people and the international community. For instance, in a remote part of Central Philippines, a newly-installed religious leader there told me that the people had shifted their support from the insurgents to our soldiers because they had observed how the soldiers worked hard to protect their rights from the human rights violations of the NPA.

Our efforts to improve our human rights record has earned us a seat in the Human Rights Council in the U.N. in 2006 and enabled us to be reelected to the same council and Secretary Ermita was applauded by the reviewers when he underwent in behalf of the Philippine government the U.N. Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review.

We are committed to further refining our procedures for the promotion and protection of human rights. That’s why to this end today, I signed an administrative order further strengthening government policies and programs for human rights with at least one provision in the administrative order for each of the human rights in the U.N. Declaration on Human Rights.

And today, and this is the reason why I asked UNICEF to be part of our program, I also ask the nation to focus its collective effort on enhancing and promoting the human rights of a precious, valuable but vulnerable sector — this is the Filipino child, our children. The future of the nation; Jose Rizal’s hope of the fatherland.

The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, which the Philippines ratified in 1990, spells out four broad categories under which the rights of children are clustered:

1. Survival. Like humans in general, as pointed out by Chairperson De Lima, the rights of a child to live. And by this, we include provisions for food, health care, shelter and clothing.

2. Development. The rights of a child to attain his or her full potential. These cover education, rest and recreation, spiritual activity, love and care.

3. Protection. The rights that cover protection from physical, mental and sexual abuse, and from neglect and exploitation. Support for the children is also imperative under this broad category.

4. Participation. The rights that enable a child to express his or her thoughts and feelings, to speak his or her opinion and to be with his or her own peers. Under these rights fall the right to a name and nationality, the right to be identified as a member of family, community or society.

The U.N. CRC has a bedrock principle. Whatever the decisions of societies and governments are the “best interests of children” should be a primary consideration. And that is why we share the concern of UNICEF about the rights of children in a situation of conflict especially the use of child combatants by the insurgents. We were the first country to launch a formal campaign against child abuse when I proclaimed the observance of Child Abuse Prevention Year from October 2006 to 2007.

We have been religiously working on the U.N. Millennium Development Goals, which include preparing a better future and protecting the rights of children. We have passed many laws in behalf of our children, including those that protect them from abuse including the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act, including the Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act, including the Anti-Violence Against Women and Children Act.

These laws are complementary to the concrete, ground-level work to provide the best for our children, to act according to the best of their interests, to prepare them for adulthood via a seamless transition.

To carry out these laws, we have launched various programs such as the PNP’s program which today has its own Women’s and Children’s Desk. And today, I decided to add a dimension in the celebrations with the awarding of the Ten Most Outstanding Policewomen of the year. My congratulations to all the honorees! You bring pride not only to the PNP but to every Filipina. And I am pleased particularly with your handling of the rights of disadvantaged sectors especially the children. And I decided to put your awarding in today’s event because so many of you are receiving awards because of your work for the children and on sensitivity to vulnerable sectors.  Congratulations! (applause)

We are very religious about the U.N. Development Goals. In fact, six out of eight goals are already assured of being achieved by 2015. Of the remaining two, the one is on maternal mortality which we are working on and the other as mentioned by the deputy commissioner is on Universal Primary Education. And indeed, we are working very hard on that.

We are breaking through the usual investment threshold in order to give our children a first-world education and health care within the medium-term. The education sector will get some 200 billion pesos budget in 2009. Of course, we count on our congressmen to pass this budget for us. And the health sector including services for maternal health led by the Department of Health and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation will be given P36 billion in 2009. And in addition, government hospitals continue to retain and use their income.

To move the enhancement of children’s rights to a higher level, I talked to the secretary of social welfare this morning and I said that I am directing her and the Council for the Welfare of Children to craft the pooling of a Children Defense Fund, which shall document and help prosecute cases of child abuse and exploitation everywhere.

Our goal is a child-centered human rights agenda. This shall be built on training, preparing and equipping our children to be global citizens in a changing world. And protecting them with an intensity and fierceness that was practiced in ancient times to shield children against abusers and predators.

But even as we work to increase awareness and promotion of human rights, we are similarly focused on a particular basic right of individuals — the right to earn a decent living. The pursuit of one’s economic rights is fundamental in enabling the exercise of most other rights.

Our country can expect that the government will do everything in its power to protect our people from the global crisis that is sweeping the world. But we will do everything in our power to prevent the global crisis from becoming a Philippine crisis.

We are aiming for easing inflation — which we have been achieving — easing price in fuel, easing price in food and rice. At the same time, we will continue to grow our economy. And most importantly, as deputy commissioner mentioned, like Manny Pacquiao, we are fighters. We will prevail even in the toughest of times.

The toughest of global times requires no less than the concerted effort of every Filipino. In celebration of Human Rights Day, I call on everyone to make our human rights  programs and our economic programs a successful shield not only against those who would violate these rights but also against the storm winds of the global economic hurricane. With all of us working together, we will weather the global storm. We will see the bright light of a day when we will be ready to join the ranks of the first-world, when poverty shall have been marginalized, and when we will have achieved all the hallmarks of a modern society where institutions are strong especially the institutions of human rights.

To all of you, happy anniversary on the Declaration of the U.N. Human Rights!

Thank you. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 60th Anniversary Celebration of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with Awarding of the 2008 Ten Outstanding Policewomen of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609071533/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=14684&Itemid=38