Maraming salamat Ambassador Albert del Rosario.

Most reverend Bishop Goedert; Father Headley, Consul General Pineda.

And I would like to introduce to you the various elected officials who are with me in our delegation today. Perhaps as Filipinos, you watched the events before I became president – those that reached January 20, People Power 2. Perhaps you watched on television how the impeachment trial began – how the Speaker of our House, the House of Representatives, started the session on November 30, year 2000, prayed for a long time, and then, continuing from his prayer, everyone was surprised, he continued with his speech stating that the Articles of Impeachment were being sent to the Senate. That was Speaker Manny Villar, now Senator Manny Villar, who is with us today. His wife, the Congresswoman of the district of Las Piñas, is also here; from Cavite, Congressman Plaridel Abaya is also here; and from Iligan in Lanao del Norte, Congressman Alipio Badelles. Also here are our, our newly elected Governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Governor Parouk Hussin. There are also Cabinet Members here, Secretary of Energy Vince Perez, and Presidential Spokesman Bobby Tiglao, and our Senior Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs Larry Baja.

I am also with my spouse this morning, Atty. Jose Miguel Arroyo and my son Diosdado Macapagal-Arroyo.

Thank you, Bishop Goedert, for giving me the opportunity to be a part of this holy celebration today. thank you also, Reverend Headley, for your warm hospitality and providing a welcoming home for Filipinos in this Parish.

And my countrymen, good noon to all of you! Caring Cabalen, my Kapampangan, good day to you all! To my relatives on my mother’s side, a good day to all of you! To our brothers and sisters from Mindanao, especially Congressman Badelles, good morning to all of you! And to the fellow provincemates of my husband who are Ilonggo, good noon to all of you!

I am happy to be with you, my dear countrymen who reside in Chicago, and to the countrymen who came from other places, especially those from Wisconsin, Michigan, Indiana, Missouri, Kansas, and Ohio.

We are blessed that the Lord has brought us together again.

I appreciate this opportunity to be with all of you in this Windy City, which to its good fortune has been enjoying an unseasonably mild-winter. Demographers estimate that there are over two million Filipinos in the United States.

Because of your number, Filipino-Americans constitute a veritable second Philippines. Nowhere in the world outside of the Philippines can you find this mass of Filipinos. According to the 1990 Census report, Tagalog is the 6th most spoken foreign language in American homes.

And today’s mass among Filipinos, today’s mass for peace is most relevant to our times. The international community continues to face a clear and grave threat to its security and well being. As I did when I visited New York and Washington, D.C. last November, let me extend again my heartfelt condolences and that of the people of the Philippines to all those who suffered the loss or injury of a loved one as a consequence of the September 11 attacks.

I also find it proper that we, through this mass and this assembly, seek comfort, tranquility, and peace for ourselves, for our countries, the Philippines and the United States, and for the rest of mankind.

Long before September 11th, the Philippines was already fighting terrorism on the southwestern part of its soil and gained the upper hand, isolating terrorism to one small island. We have felt the pain of terrorism first hand and knew it must not spread to the rest of the world. That is why we were the first in Asia to lend our support.

Much has been written about our proctracted campaign to destroy the Abu Sayyaf terrorists in that remote island in southwestern Philippines in Basilan but headlines have been revved up recently with the arrival of U.S. anti-terrorist trainors and several hundred support troops who are there for joint military exercises. Predictably, their presence has stirred up passion among a vocal minority of our citizenry. Old rhetoric reminiscent of the U.S. bases debate and even Vietnam have again surfaced.

But as the first Asian leader to come out in support of the international coalition, I applaud the imperative to wipe out terrorism. That is why I took the politically risky action of recommending that this year’s annual joint military exercises between the Philippines and the U.S. be adapted to enhancing the capability of Filipino soldiers to fight terrorism. This will help us go the last mile in destroying the Abu Sayyaf terrorists and have peace at last in our land. I have done so in what I believe is a responsible and lawful contribution of the U.S. military to ensure the stability and freedom of our people. The Americans are there to provide the intelligence and capability building, including the operation of sophisticated tracking equipment. And even though in my view the circumstances exist for them to be lawfully engaged in combat, we have taken the policy decision for the American soldiers not to do combat in the Philippines because our own soldiers will do the fighting.

We Filipinos bring a unique view to this issue: from a few small islands in southwestern Philippines to the grand island of Manhattan, we have seen what terrorism can do to our society, our economy, our security, and our sense of moral purpose.

But this is a war that must be devoid of any religious undertones. The Philippines has institutionalized the tools of autonomy, consensus, and interfaith dialogue with our Muslim brothers. We have a ceasefire with the Moro National Islamic Liberation Front, and I thank them for having renounced the Abu Sayyaf. A few months ago, our Muslim brethren in Mindanao reaffirmed their solidarity with the Filipino nation when they renewed the electoral mandate of the leadership of the Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao. They elected Parouk Hussin as the new Governor of the Autonomous Region — and he’s here with us today.

We have put a face on terrorists, and now we must put a face on the poor. We will eliminate terrorism but we must eliminate poverty. If we do not eliminate poverty, the breeding ground of resentment will begin again to plague another generation.

My battle plan for the war against poverty revolves around four components:

First, free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century;

Second, a modernized agriculture founded on social equity;

Third, a bias toward the disadvantaged to spread out the fruits of economic development; and,

Fourth, a commitment to high moral standards in government and society.

With God’s grace, under the custody of skilled economic managers like Vince Perez who’s here today, and with the cooperation of our Senators like our Senate President Pro-Tempore Manny Villar and Congressmen like our Congressmen here Del Abaya and Tikbong Badelles, the plan we created is bearing significant and tangible results.

Where bigger and richer economies failed during the past year, our Philippine economy moved forward. Our Gross National Product grew 3.7 percent — 3.4 percent without your remittances, 3.7 percent including your remittances. And this growth rate is one of the highest growth rates in the world today where many countries are suffering from recession.

Where bigger and stronger currencies collapsed, ours held firm, even though, as the IMF acknowledges, I am the only president who assumed office during fragile times who did not ask for an IMF program. So, we stabilized our currency without an IMF program and without instituting capital controls.

Indeed, we have gone a long way to bringing our country back on the radar screens of the world. And for the month of January 2002, Bloomberg says that the Philippine Stock Market was the top performing stock market in the world — a first for the Philippines. Our public deficit has been placed under control. Interest rates are at their lowest in the last 15 years, and inflation rates have likewise declined.

Even unemployment rates have declined. From 11.6 percent when first I assumed the presidency, in nine months we were able to bring down the unemployment rate to 9.8 percent and we intend to bring it down some more.

This is a good time for you to put in your investment or to expand your business in your homeland.

I have come to talk to our kababayans in the United States and to extend to you the gratitude of the Philippine government and the Filipino people. Filipinos are indebted to our brothers and sisters in the United States, the great Filipino workers in the United States, for many reasons:

On top of the good reputation you give to our country as a home for the great Filipino worker, millions of young people have been able to study or finish their education with your help.

Thousands of new houses have been built by you and those you love there are also having new houses and are having new lives. Because of your help, we have been able to launch so many businesses, even small businesses throughout the country. The successful businesses established in our country because of your remittances are a major pillar of our economy. Many barangays, towns, cities and provinces have flourished with the contribution of overseas Filipinos.

The great Filipino worker sends six billion dollars to our country every year, so you are major economic investors in the country.

You know, we are proud that, during my trip to America, Canada and the U.K., we have already obtained investments of 1.2 billion dollars but you, six billion dollars annually.

So, in my opinion, the label for you by the country should now be changed. Because the common term for Filipinos abroad, whether with a contract or a green card holder, is overseas Filipino workers. I think it would be more fitting to call you overseas Filipino investors.

You are overseas investors who invest in the development of our country every day. You invest your productive years for the sake of our country.

The Filipino-Americans constitute 34 percent of overseas Filipinos, but you contribute 71 percent of all foreign exchange remittances to the Philippines in the last five years.

Filipino doctors, surgeons, dentists, nurses conduct regular medical and dental missions in many parts of our homeland.

And through your donations of books, food and medical supplies, Fil-Ams have made a great difference in the lives of poor school children and families in the barrios.

Our Senator and our Congressmen and women here have good news for your. They said, Senate President Pro-Tempore Manny Villar, Congresswoman Villar, Congressman Abaya and Congressman Badelles expect that the Absentee Voting Bill will be passed this year.

And they also created a bill on Dual Citizenship for Filipinos. Let us pray that not too many will oppose these two bills so that they can pass as soon as possible.

In the meantime here in the U.S., let us strive to build a National Coalition of Filipino organizations and forge greater unity to promote the interest of Filipino immigrants, contract workers, and Fil-Am in this great country.

Let us strengthen our unity, cooperation, working together, the spirit of bayanihan, the spirit of helping each other, brotherhood.

Let us strengthen our concern for our motherland, for your new country, for our future, and for our youth.

Filipinos here in America, I know that even though you are here and many are already green card holders, many are even citizens, I know your hearts are still in the Philippines. That is why we, your officials in our country, part of our duty, part of our joy is to be able to visit you here in America. We are proud of you and I hope that in the coming times, even though the world economy is struggling, you will remain strong in your livelihoods, in your work, in your businesses; and let us not forget our country, and I want you to know that you are not forgotten by the Filipinos in the Philippines.

We dearly love you all.

Thank you very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during a Special Mass with the Filipino-American Community. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230818/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7622&Itemid=38