Thank you very much, Chairperson Karina David.

Secretaries of the various government departments led by Secretary General Alberto Romulo.

General Abaya and all the major service commanders and field commanders who are here, in solidarity with the Civil Service of the Philippines. Government employees, distinguished guests, Ambassador Maimunah Dato Elias of Brunei, my beloved countrymen.

Civil Service employees, Happy Civil Service Month to all of us. Our party is very big. Thank you for coming and for enjoying yourselves here at our party. I remember when I was still Vice President, you made me the guest of honor at the 100th Anniversary of the Civil Service. I was the one who went to you. But that was the 100th anniversary, but now it's only the 103rd, we are happier today than we were during the 100th anniversary. Thank you very much.

Thank you very much for your sincere and meaningful oath just now. Now, and what was said earlier, is a meaningful oath not only to the presidency but to our country and our people.

You are truly our partners, you are what we stand for, you are the ones who stand firm, you are the bureaucracy for democracy. Very good – “bureaucracy for democracy.” You are the ones our people are counting on.

I just landed from Brunei, so please excuse me, we are doing this here, we are doing our civil service here because I just landed from Brunei where I attended the meeting of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council, together with my fellow leaders of the ASEAN and other neighboring countries.

My brief trip to Brunei was important to signal our firm commitment to regional integration and fair trade that are vital to jobs, investments and continuity of reform. Jobs, investment, maintaining reforms, these are our priorities, we who are civil service employees. These are our priorities and we shall pursue them as we ward off destabilization attempts. We will ward off destabilization attempts through the unswerving pursuit of justice and political consolidation.

And leading the way in our political consolidation and civil service. You know, we have more than one hundred thousand soldiers. But our civil service, national and local, has two million, so you are the most needed in political consolidation for our democracy. You serve not only the national government, the civil service also serves in local governments. You help not only with national policies, you help with rural development.

I made a trip to Central Luzon yesterday. I saw the relentless spirit of enterprise and optimism among the people. What I read in the newspaper says everyone is pessimistic. But when I went to the province the day before yesterday, the people were optimistic, they were proactive. And their optimism and enterprise continues to push our nation forward, especially because they can rely on the service of our civil service.

Because of you, civil service employees, domestic and international confidence in our government is undiminished. There is no doubt that certain personalities are engaged in a continuous effort at destabilization obviously to escape the long hand of justice.

I am grateful that the leadership of the Armed Forces of the Philippines is here because they are steadfast. Attempts to buy loyalty within the armed forces have been monitored, combined with efforts to manipulate the media and project instability. But with our two million strong bureaucracy supporting democracy, destabilization plans are futile and these will fail as they have failed in the past because of you.

Moreover, these attempts will fail because they will be rejected by the soldiers as well as by the people.

The major service and field commanders are here to express to us, to express to you that we – the government, the administration, the civil government– have the support of the Filipino soldier and we have the support of the Filipino people. The entire chain of command is behind us and there is no turning back from the tide of positive change whether in the military organization, in the civilian bureaucracy, and in the entire nation.

I am grateful that among those who presented earlier was the representative of the civilian employees of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, especially now that I am currently Secretary of National Defense.

Upholding civilian supremacy and moving logistics to the field – these will be the principles of our rapid consolidation of the armed forces as we reinforce morale, discipline and professional loyalty in the command. I want to make it very clear during his term of two and a half years Secretary Angelo Reyes promoted these principles, and we shall continue and expand the excellent work that Angie Reyes did for the peace and security of our country. The march for reform will be decisive and irreversible.

You are here, we are together, representatives of the civil service, representatives of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, representatives of the people. How can destabilization succeed if we are together, if the bureaucracy is for democracy?

The only revolution taking place in our country is the revolution in the promulgation of justice and in the upliftment of the poor. The revolution is not led by any military adventurists or any urban insurrectionists, the revolution is being led by the government, and we have no intention of stopping or turning back. The revolution is being implemented by our foot soldiers in the civil service. Civil service personnel, thank you for your help in our revolution for justice and for the well-being of the poor.

Justice and well-being for the poor, this is the true trust in the Filipino. And you, civil service personnel, are at the forefront of national stability and development.

As we celebrate this September, the month of the Philippine Civil Service, I greet you, I thank you, government employees, because you chose to serve the people, because you support my administration, because you uphold the constitution, because you defend the highest interest of our country. Thank you very much.

Those awards for Outstanding Civil Servant we will not do now. This is only part one of our celebration. The next is September 19 where the Outstanding Civil Servants for 2003 will be announced. Until that day, civil service personnel, thank you very much because you are a bureaucracy for democracy.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the 103rd Anniversary Celebration of the Philippine Civil Service. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194524/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7133&Itemid=38