Thank you very much. God bless Undersecretary Vilma Labrador. Thank you for your introduction of me.

Governor Typoco, Congresswoman Chatto, Mayor Alegre, Principal Estravez, our friends who are here, our students, teachers, good morning to all of you.

I am visiting you because, as the Mayor said, we are continuing active governance until the last moment that I am in office. And for that purpose, we are implementing the thorough initiatives we have been undertaking since I assumed office, especially our three important programs:

First, as Mayor also said, the additional power and opportunity to develop will be brought to each region, so that development is not enjoyed only by Manila.

Secondly, continue to foster the three E’s – Education, Economy, and Environment – to ensure continuous and equitable development is achieved.

Thirdly, we are focused on the youth of the country as our hope for a better future for the Philippines.

We have already done much to contribute to development in various aspects of life. But still, much more needs to be done. All the efforts of the government are for the betterment of the future of the next generation of Filipinos.

I visit you, the youth, even while you are still in high school because… you are the hope and inspiration of our country. Everything we do must be focused on providing you, the youth, with a better life.

As we take pride in the accomplishments of our government, this honor can only be considered truly excellent if the nation is capable of continuing its progress and growth. We hope that the progress we have achieved will not stop; that you, our next generation of leaders, will take on whatever remains to be continued.

As a nation, we need to focus on our future, build upon what is beneficial, and diligently face the challenges ahead.

You, the youth, are the bridge between our past and our future. For your sake, we correct what is wrong, we fight for change, and we hope for a better life.

Our country has come a long way, but it still has a long way to go. That is why I go to towns like San Vicente that other leaders do not visit. And that is also why I chose to visit this school because you, the youth, represent the dreams of our nation. To you, we dedicate all that our government is doing to uplift the Philippines.

And the reason why I went to school is that education is the foundation of opportunity. It is the key to a better life. It opens the mind and the doors to progress. And in today's world, strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology.

Shape the mindset, keep pace with the world. Education and technology are the two foundations upon which the future of our country rests. Because of this, we dedicate the remaining months of our term to promoting a stronger and quality education and better technology infrastructure.

So when I arrived earlier, I didn't immediately go to the stage. I first looked for your internet laboratory because… and I am happy that you have an internet connection because the internet is the most important infrastructure in technology in modern living. So congratulations! and you have an internet connection.

So, I spoke with the Principal, and they said you have forty computers. That’s good because for me, what’s important is having at least one computer with internet access, so the 40 with internet are… but I heard while doing my homework for this visit that some of the computers were broken, so that was the first thing I asked the Principal: “Principal, what did we do with the broken computers?” They said that 15 computers break every so often, of course, especially the older ones, but they are always being repaired and that’s also important, we shouldn’t waste them. And these 15 computers, the only problem was the power supply, so the spare parts needed are power supplies. They said they can be bought at the hardware stores there in Daet. So within a week’s time, these remaining fifteen will be fixed.

It is so important that we prioritize taking care of your computer and paying your bill for the internet connection. That is the most important technology that our public high schools should address. And that should be prioritized in the MOOE which is usually done. And so that our teachers are also encouraged to keep up with new technologies, your training is important, but so is your livelihood.

So, in our administration, we increased the salary of teachers. The previous salary of a Teacher I was P9,000, it is now more than P14,000, that’s how much your salaries have increased. And there is another increase coming under the Salary Standardization Law and that is what I told the DBM, to ensure that we have funds for the next salary increase of our teachers and other employees of… working in the government. This includes teachers, ordinary employees, the military, and everyone.

And also regarding the training of teachers, because technology is important, we released more than two billion pesos for the training of teachers, especially in English. And I heard that here in Camarines Sur, there are already 750 teachers from Camarines Sur who have received special training in English, Math, or Science. And isn't it, Undersecretary Labrador, that this summer we have a Special English Training? Starting today, right?

Oh, when is your graduation here? 29, okay. Okay, so our teachers, your training, that English training of yours is very important. Because if we want to keep up with the whole world, we need to bring back English as a medium of instruction because that is the language of technology.

We have come a long way in education and technology, but we still have a long way to go. We should not rest. I, we built the Presidential Task Force for Education to review our education system. So that we have recommendations to offer to the next generation. What the task force, led by Jesuit educator Father Bienvenido Nebres, found, what we have done to follow their recommendations, and what remaining recommendations we can endorse to the next administration.

Meantime, meanwhile, I fervently desire that you, the current youth, will come into your own, value education and modernity. Use these as weapons for your own good, for the good of the country, and for the good of the province of Camarines Norte and the town of San Vicente.

Thank you very much to all of you. May God repay you for everything!

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Meantime, samantala, nawa’y kayong mga kasalukuyang kabataan, I fervently desire that you will come into your own, bigyan niyo ng halaga ang edukasyon at modernidad. Gamitin ninyo itong mga sandata para sa ikabubuti ng inyong sarili, sa ikabubuti ng bansa, at sa ikabubuti ng lalawigan ng Camarines Norte at bayan ng San Vicente.

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during an Education Event: visit to Froilan D. Lopez Technical-Vocational High School. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232210/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27735&Itemid=38