Thank you very much, Secretary Lina, for your wonderful introduction and for your presentation of the accomplishments of our administration, and for your urging that we unite to continue our fight against poverty successfully.

Cadet First Captain, please give ‘tikas pahinga’.

Distinguished Vice President of the Philippines, Vice President Teofisto T. Guingona; our PNP Chief, General Leandro Mendoza; the deputy director General of the PNP, General Ebdane; our president of the Public Safety College, General Ramsey Ocampo; our superintendent of the PNPA, General Alejandro Gutierrez. Ah! That’s right; and the other officials of this school; Governor Maliksi; Congressman Abaya; Presidential Adviser Sarino; Punongbayan Napoleon Beratio; and various officials of the province of Cavite and the town of Silang; parents of our graduates today; our new police officers; ladies and gentlemen.

I extend a warm greeting to all the graduates of the PNP Academy’s ‘sinag-laya’ class. Congratulations! To all of you.

Graduation is a time for gratitude. First of all, we thank your parents, teachers and administrators. And I thank you, graduating students, for choosing to serve our country as police professionals. I will follow your careers because now I am your commander-in-chief. I expect that you, new police officers, we who serve in government, and all of us Filipinos will work together to overcome poverty, suppress criminality, and achieve peace throughout the country.

Oh! By the way, I would like to acknowledge also Lt. Gen. Gregorio Camiling, representing the armed forces of the Philippines.

We are all proud of you. And now, we expect much of you. We expect you to fight criminality with all your might within the law. But we also expect you to show temperance, restraint and courage in the face of provocation and danger. We expect you to wield the iron hand of the law, but we also expect you to wield it in full respect for human rights. We expect from you loyalty, reform and achievement. We expect these to be the hallmark of your work as police professionals.

You have all the reason to have faith in yourselves that you will meet these expectations. You have all the reason in the world to be happy with your achievements in school, especially the six recipients of our awards for academic excellence. Your entry into the ranks of police officers will reinforce our efforts to build a competent, efficient and truly professional police force.

I believe that you have role models in PNP Chief Larry Mendoza and the other police officers who are here on this stage today. Because I have seen in my administration that they produce results quietly and professionally. In the face of steep constraints their morale is enduring. I thank them and I congratulate them, and I look forward to your maintaining and even surpassing their standards graduates of Sinag-Laya class 2002.

Half of our awardees today are women. This is a good sign of gender equality in your academy. And I am instructing General Mendoza to make sure that the women are not streamed mostly to administrative jobs. I want the women in the police to be in operations and intelligence. Like everyone in your ranks I am sure are policewomen are capable of the toughest jobs in the streets.

I remember that old television series, “Charlie’s Angels.” In the beginning of the program—now, I know there’s Charlie’s Angels, with… Who was it? Cameron Diaz. But in our time it was Farrah Fawcett—the opening of the program had someone saying, “once upon a time there were three little girls, and they graduated from the police academy.” Then scenes were shown, Farrah Fawcett being piled with paperwork at her desk. The other one was shown helping little children cross the street. That meant that after their graduation, they were given routine jobs. But then a voice said, “but I took them away from all that. And now, they work for me.” Then, the episode was about their jobs fighting criminals. So it was as if it showed that during that time there was still prejudice against female police officers.

Now, in our armed forces, women are quite visible in combat duty, and I hope to see the same in the police. We need more women not only in the office but out there in the streets. Not only to direct traffic but to fight criminals. I want this to happen so that women will have more opportunities to become heroes and leaders. Maybe this batch with three honor students among women will someday have a woman lead the Philippine National Police. But I don’t want to wait for this batch before I see another woman police general. And it’s not just women I want to see leave the office and go to the streets. I believe that if we are to fight crime more effectively there should be less office work and more operations work. There should be more policemen out in the streets than in the headquarters.

And in police work alliances are important, and we must strive to expand and deepen them. The police officer’s job entails maximum exposure to almost all sectors of society. Together with these sectors much work remains to be done:

We must root out terrorism. And to do this, we must work with the international community;

We must return the reputation of manila and the Philippines as a welcoming and safe place in which to live and do business; We must increase the benefits from our new global relevance and engagement after years of being isolated and adrift.

As Joey Lina said, our rating in the world used to be negative. Now, it’s stable. Let us maximize the benefits of this new rating.

Dear gradutes of sinag-laya class 2002, from the first day that you are commissioned as a police officer — which is today — you become a leader and an agent of change in the community. Therefore, you have the duty not only to fight crime, but also to prevent crime. You have the duty to set an example, and you have the duty to help the public resolve problems.

Because of these multiple duties of police officers, I instructed the police during there anniversary to take the lead in playing… In organizing visible, sustained outreach and emergency employment programs particularly for out-of-school, out-of-work urban poor youth. The police is doing this now in the central police district under the national capital region under the leadership of district Director General Tor; in Baguio City under the leadership of regional Director General Aliño; in Iba, Zambales and Cabanatuan City under the leadership of Regional Director General Berroya; and in the Southern Tagalog towns and cities bordering on Metro Manila under the leadership of Regional Director General Reyes, who is here with us today. I hope many graduates of PNPA will be a part of this effort because you are young like the young that we want to employ and keep out of harm’s way among the out-of-school youth. Sabi nga ni General Mendoza ngayon gagawin niya itong nationwide program for the urban poor out-of-school youth.

Students of sinag-laya class 2002, your graduation is significant because you symbolize our goal to sustain our long-term program to professionalize the PNP. Last year, I instructed General Ramsey Ocampo to put together a new curriculum for PNPA. I remember that there was a proposal that I should instruct new buildings and facilities to be put up. I said, “no.” Before the physical infrastructure, first the mental infrastructure. If we are going to put new physical facilities it must before laboratory equipment so that we can use forensics to fight crime better.

Last year, too I asked General Mendoza to hire new personnel, and he did. 1,700 new personnel all college graduates. They made their first appearance in mall assignments last Christmas. And I believe last Christmas was a very peaceful Christmas for those doing their Christmas shopping in the malls. And, now this year, he is hiring some more.

We are increasing the quality and quantity of our training programs including those promoting effective community relations. Aside from the new curriculum for PNPA, I also instructed the Public Safety College to add a specialization course on crime investigation and detection to be subsidized by PAGCOR.

My recent visit to London early this year also resulted in the commitment by Prime Minister Tony Blair for Scotland Yard to help the PNP build up the skills and capacity to fight kidnapping and other organized crimes. General Fianza has just returned from London where he and the Scotland yard officials worked out the details of this curriculum, and soon this training program will be implemented. I have also asked him to make a formal proposal to the Hong Kong police for a similar training.

Police duties require special technical and physical skills as well as versatility in human relations. It also requires impeccability of personal conduct and supreme courage under fire. Police duty could range from the most menial jobs — like Farrah Fawcett’s job there in the beginning of Charlie’s Angels — or also what many policemen consider very menial like clearing the streets of illegal vendors or raiding jueteng joints. Then it goes on the other side to the most extreme challenges such as running gun battles with the most tenacious criminal syndicates.

Many of our police officers have died and more are called to the frontline. I know the steep sacrifices you will be called upon to take, and I would like to commend you for your readiness to rise to the call of duty.

In return last year, I was able to get a supplemental budget from Congress — and I thank congress and Abaya, and other Congressmen for being so kind — to finally carry out a new salary scale for the police. And this year, congress further provided an additional budget. Thus, as police officers, you the graduates of sinag-laya class 2002, will be enjoying an upgraded salary scale equal to that of teachers in public schools.

I also know the difficulties you have hurdled in this academy, but you must consider these as mere samples of what you will actually encounter on the job. Now is your chance to live up to the PNPA’s motto: “to learn today, to lead tomorrow.”

But if you are to lead, you must by now have a clear idea of the tools you need — not just your talents and your skills, but the moral imperatives of your work.

Today, as I was giving out diplomas, your class goat, using his traditional prerogative to do something unusual ask me if I would pardon the 15 of your batch — who are not with you graduating today — because they are still being metted out discipline for going AWOL. And I told him, “well, let me think about it. Because first and foremost, the most important thing that one must learn in the PNP and in the AFP for that matter is discipline.”

The discipline required of the uniformed services is much greater than the discipline required of any other occupation. As I always say, if you are a bit rebellious, maybe you should apply to U.P. Don’t apply to PMA or the PNP academy. Because at U.P., the only weapon is the brain, but in the PNP, in the PMA, in the military, in the police, there are weapons that can kill people—the firearms themselves. That is why there must be a culture of discipline, unquestioning discipline to go with your mental and physical training.

That, in ‘charge of the light brigade,’ what was said, “theirs is not to reason why, theirs is but to do or die”—that really symbolizes discipline, the culture of the uniformed services.

The only order you can refuse is an order that is against the law. If it is against wisdom or against your policing beliefs, you cannot disobey the order. Yours is not to reason why except when it is totally and probably against the law.

That is why we enforce discipline. These fifteen who have not yet graduated will graduate in June, after they have served their punishments which are currently being carried out.

And let me share with you what my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal told me about priorities in public service. He said, “it must be god first, that’s morality; then country, these are the wise policies; and family last.” This means that your job is not to use law enforcement as a means for self- aggrandizement for you and your family.

A public servant’s family must be self-effacing rather than self-aggrandizing, and this goes for the police as well. Keep your family out of your work. Because you’ve another kind of family in your work environment. This is with respect to the dramatic rise of the number of civic, religious and non-governmental organizations supporting the PNP, they are your family in your work.

The individual behavior of the police officer in the street makes or breaks the public perception of the entire organization. The interface of the police officer and the ordinary citizen is the most critical component of police credibility.

The basic image of a dignified, honest, courteous but firm and incorruptible police officer is the key to success in law enforcement.

I trust that you — sinag-laya class 2002 — will live up to this image, because I trust in your sense of duty. I believe in the great Filipino police officer.

I believe in the great Filipino worker. Whether in government service or in the private sector; whether in industries or in the farms or in the information technology call centers; whether in police uniform or in the utility worker’s t-shirt. The great Filipino worker is a pillar of excellence imbued with a strong sense of sacrifice, discipline and professionalism.

You have my unremitting faith and my commitment to push our common quest forward. In cooperation with all the pillars of the criminal justice system, we must strengthen the rule of law permanently throughout the republic.

Your task will be difficult and full of pitfalls, but you must not abandon it. Mustering a supreme sense of duty, and strengthened by the unity and support of the police and the institutions of good government, help me bring justice, law and order, and public safety in all corners of the land.

Yes, your chosen career is difficult, the sacrifices are steep. But when people see the law in the hands of credible enforcers, people will obey and respect the law. I have faith that you will hold the line of courage and integrity.

You have been trained to fight the lawless. But beyond that you have also been trained to keep the peace in the community — to settle conflicts, prevent abuse and uphold the system of justice.

In your chosen career, know that there is no gauge of excellence but achievement. There is no overlord but the people. In serving the people, you must exemplify the general principles of public service and good governance.

Many times I have outlined what I believe are the three pillars of good governance: first, a sound moral foundation to guide leadership at all levels, including the level of police officers; second, a philosophy of transparency in all government transactions, including police work; third, an ethic of effective implementation by the bureaucracy, including the police force. These must be the pillars that must strengthen the PNP and for that matter the BFP, the BJMP, the PNPA, the PPSC and all other institutions of law enforcement and public safety.

With the cooperation of everyone, there is great hope that the light of our future will come.

My dream for our future is that we can eradicate the poverty of our country within a decade. To achieve this, our government program has four parts: first, promote free enterprise suitable for the twenty-first century because it will create more jobs; second, modernize our agriculture based on social equity because most of our poor people are in the countryside; third, side with the disadvantaged sectors in our development plan; and fourth, raise the standard of morality in government and in society.

The public safety profession is needed in all these four aspects of our medium-term Philippine Development Plan. We need public safety to bring about the investments that will produce jobs. We need public safety in the countryside so that farmers will not be afraid. We need the police to do community relations work that serve the poor directly. We need the police to carry out the rule of law if we want to raise standards of morality in government and in society.

And as leaders in public safety, I ask you, help me. Share my vision for the community we serve. And if I may suggest, a change in your motto. I think it should be — “to learn today, to serve tomorrow.”

Congratulations! And thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the 23rd Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412230008/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7645&Itemid=38