Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 40th anniversary celebration of the Philippine Constitution Association

[Delivered at Hotel Intercontinental, Makati City, September 28, 2001]

Thank you for this honor of joining your prestigious association on our 40th anniversary celebration. When Chairman Estrella was president of Philconsa in 1988, he also had my father as the guest speaker in the anniversary celebration. So this is a symbolic thing of entering into a new generation for the Philippines.

But over and above that. I welcome this opportunity to speak before you because you are the appropriate forum through which I can present to the Filipino people our policy regarding the most urgent issue in the world today, terrorism. And to give the people a formal idea of how we intend to carry out our policy.

The directions and parameters of the global war against terrorism are now taking shape. We are aware of the unique and challenging nature of this war. The enemy is often faceless and unseen, without uniform, flag or standing formation.

Its cells and members are loosely organized and affiliated, cruising the urban underground or plying the jungles in the company of criminal syndicates – kidnappers, drug dealers, and money launderers. Sometimes, they surface above ground among legitimate organizations. Some may even appear the paragons of virtue on humanitarianism. They identify with state sponsors developing and using weapons of mass destruction. They’re in the internet, spewing hatred and fanaticism. The use the media and propaganda by spreading shock, terror, and fear.

As charter member of the United Nations, and as part of the international coalition against terrorism, the Philippines must actively implement the United Nations Security Council resolution no. 1368 passed last September 12. Let me refer to specific paragraphs of the said resolution:

Paragraph 3 calls on all states to work together urgently to bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers, and sponsors of these terrorist attacks and stresses; that those responsible for aiding, supporting, or harboring the perpetrators. organizers, and sponsors of this act will be held accountable.

Paragraph 4 calls also on the international community to redouble their efforts to prevent and suppress terrorist acts.

In the international struggle against terrorism, the Philippine government is prepared to undertake the following specific measures:

First, to join the international counter terrorist coalition and to work with the United Nations.

Second, to work closely with the United States on intelligence and security matters concerning terrorism.

Third, to make available Philippine air space and facilities when the latter are required as transit or staging points.

Fourth, to contribute logistical support in the form of food supply, medicines, and medical personnel.

Fifth, subject to the concurrence of Philippine Congress, to provide combat troops if there is an international call for such troops.

Sixth, to prevent the flow of funds to terrorist groups to the Philippines by passing and implementing legislation against money laundering.

We cannot predict how events will unfold or how fast they will unfold. We must therefore make preparations for both quick response and long-term management. But one thing is sure, we are determined to go all the way if our security and survival demand it.

The impact of our involvement in the war against terrorism will not be measured by our contribution to the international coalition alone. To a greater degree, it will be measured by our own achievements in defeating terrorism within our own territorial boundaries. We must never lose sight of our immediate and overriding objective: identify the terrorists within our country, mop up their networks, stop them, and destroy their cause.

We must continue to preserve this objective unswervingly even as we assist the international coalition in the larger arena of counter action. In this war, as in my modern enterprise, we must think globally but act locally.

I shall flesh out now the directions to which we’ll take in the following concrete policies and actions:

First, we must organize the whole enterprise and delineate clear lines of responsibility and accountability.

The Cabinet Oversight Committee on Internal Security which is headed by Secretary Roberto Romulo shall be responsible for overseeing and supervising the implementation of our response to the war against terrorism. All special committees’ task forces, and work groups’ delineated responsibilities shall be placed within the ambit of the Cabinet Oversight Committee which is authorized to call upon any department, agency, or office of the government to support its functions and responsibilities.

Second, we need to anticipate events more efficiently and effectively. The National Security Adviser shall undertake special intelligence coordinating projects to consolidate all covert or overt, domestic or international kind of information relevant to our response in the war against terrorism. Such consolidated intelligence will be shared within the Cabinet, with Congress, with our allies in the international coalition and with the media as called for by the situation.

Third, we must strengthen our internal focus against terrorism. The Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police shall go all out against the lawless violence engendered by the terrorist threats. Our local government units and institutions down to the barangay level shall be part of the core of this effort. And more often than not, it is the vigilance of ordinary citizens in the streets and in the countryside that makes the difference in this clandestine war.

Fourth, there is also a need to hold accountable all public and private organizations and personalities abetting or aiding terrorism. The DILG and the Securities and Exchange Commission shall conduct an immediate inventory of dubious organizations and agency elements that may be working as fronts for terrorists and criminal activities, expose them and neutralize their operations by legal sanctions.

Fifth, we must synchronize our internal efforts with the global outlook. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall fasttrack a regional consensus in the war against terrorism starting with our neighbors – Indonesia and Malaysia and extending to the larger community of ASEAN nations. By consolidating ourselves into compact blocs sharing common borders, concerns and interests, we can act more expeditiously and effectively to serve the global interests.

Sixth, we must combine a policy of tactical counterforce with a set of strategic legal measures. The Department ofstice must now anticipate all the legal issues and concerns that are expected to arise from the situation. The DOJ shall set up a special team to serve the special requirements of the campaign including the speedy prosecution, deportation, and extradition of suspects. But even as we engage stringent tactical measures, we must demonstrate the ascendancy of the constitutional system and its capacity for swift and impartial justice.

Seventh, we must pursue broader inter-faith dialogues to promote Christian and Muslim solidarity. Terrorists wish to instigate a religious war. We must take the opportunity to forge religious understanding, ecumenism, and solidarity. This shall be the responsibility of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process.

Eighth, all law enforcement agencies shall exercise the strictest vigilance against movements of suspected persons, firearms, explosives, raw materials of explosives, toxic materials, and biological materials. The Bureau of Immigration shall guard against the entry of suspected terrorists into the country. Congress has agreed to out a money laundering law in place at the soonest reasonable time so that we can consolidate the financial system to check questionable and dirty money transfers.

Ninth, we must now coordinate preparations and actions in the event of catastrophic terrorist attacks however remote this may be. The National Disaster Coordinating Council shall be on top of this effort. I would like to see our contingency plan in place at the earliest time possible.

Tenth, there must be a comprehensive security plan for critical infrastructure including power plant, power transmission and distribution facilities, oil and gas depots, key public works structures, vital communication installation, and public building as well as private buildings and facilities in the near centers of commerce and industry. The cabinet oversight committee shall generate these plants in coordination with the pertinent departments and agencies of the government and the private sector.

Eleventh, the interest of our overseas Filipino workers are paramount. The government shall support their immediate transfer out of harm’s way in the event of tactical contingencies anywhere in the world.

Frontliners against terrorism and banditry gel a big boost as the President acknowledges their braver). A rebel from the MILF turns over his firearm to the Commander-in-Chief (left, below).

Twelfth, the modernization of the Armed Forces and the National Police must now take into consideration the current and emergent needs to contain the global terrorist threat.

The Secretary of Defense on the one hand, and the Secretary of Interior trod Local Government on the other hand, shall submit a proposal for fund -edeployment to meet our most pressing objectives. Once I have approved them, I shall submit these proposals to Congress if warranted.

Thirteenth, the mass media assumes a paramount role in the overall strategy to defeat terrorism. I seek the media’s support in the implementation of our policies and programs in enlightening the public of the rationale behind their actions in promoting consensus and constructive criticism in depriving terrorists of the benefit of glorified coverage in publicity, and most of all in maintaining calm, sobriety, prudence, and solidarity in our society.

The Office of the Press Secretary shall maintain close constructive contact with the media in the pursuit of our common objectives, and arrange periodic briefings to brief the media into the loop of collective action and information.

Fourteenth and finally, nothing justifies terrorism, but we must take cognizance of its political, social, and economic underpinnings.

The National Anti-Poverty Commission shall undertake an in-depth study of the spawning ground of terrorism in the country and recommend concrete and workable measures to act upon the perceived root of fanaticism and irrational violence.

Upon these 14 pillars of policy in action, we shall work with the community of nations to build a strong and formidable bulwark against terrorism.

In this quest, we shall be guided by the high principles of universality with the fee and civilized world gaining our stamina from the unity of all Filipinos wherever they may be, regardless of religion, creed, ethnic origin, or social station. In our own land, we shall defeat terrorism on our own terms, with our own hands and in line with our own national vision.

We shall win this war, again, under the tenet of constitution democracy and the rule of law. We shall continue to draw our economic strength from the market system, the social concept of capital, and the capacity of our people to take command of their livelihood and their future.

Terrorists will try to divide us, to strike fear in us, to immobilize our institutions. But it is up to us whether they can succeed or whether they will fail. They will fail if by our unity and concerted action will not allow them to succeed. I ask every Filipino then to dig deep into the wellsprings of our common vision, our deep sense of patriotism, our abiding sense of national pride, our shared values and belief, grounded on high moral standard. I ask every Filipino to use this wellspring to grind the efforts to win this war for our people today and for our rising generation.

Members of PHILCONSA, lovers of the constitution, lovers of democracy, and all the other ideals and enshrined in the constitution, be with us in leading this effort. Thank you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). Strong republic : selected speeches of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . [Quezon City] : Philippine Information Agency.