Speech of the Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, at the 6th National Assembly of the Philippine Councilors League (PCL)

Thank you very much.

Thank you very much, Councilor Melendrez, Chairman of the PCL, for your very… heartwarming introduction of me. And thank you very much also that you, who are now graduating as a councilor, are still helping my government as a member of our peace panel. Thank you for your help.

Thank you also Councilor Pangilinan of Makati, president of the PCL, my cousin. You are also graduating as a councilor. You are part of the two thousand councilors who are graduating this year and we are giving them special recognition.

Let me also greet Councilor Jose Alejandro. Let me also greet and thank him for his very broad and deep support for me. Former councilor and now president of the Mayors League of Metro Manila, Mayor Lito Atienza. We have two companions with us today, my colleagues and I want to emphasize my introduction of them, former senator and surely will be a senator again, our expert in Constitutional law, Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago. And many of our people from Mindanao know her very well, and she will be a worthy representative of the Muslims in our Senate, the governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, Dr. Parouk Hussin.

Let me also greet the former councilor, who was even president of the PCL and graduated, to all of you who are graduating as councilors, consider him a model for you because he is a very good city vice mayor and not only that, he was the chairman of the very successful Sinulog Festival in Cebu which just happened, Vice Mayor Michael Rama. Also present are some officials of the PCL: the auditor, Wilhelmina Lindo; the treasurer, Corazon Del Mundo; the P.R.O., Joseph Ortiz. I will not mention everyone, I greet you all, caring councilors a capampangan mayap a gatpanapun quecongan. Dagiti kakailyak nga konsehal ti bangir ni mamang ko naggapo Ilocos, Pangasinan, naimbag nga malem yo amin.

To those coming from Cebu, Visayas and Mindanao where I grew up, good afternoon to all of you. Including those from the hometown of Michael Rama. To the townsfolk of Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago and the townsfolk of my husband who is Ilonggo, good afternoon to all of you. To our brothers and sisters, brother of Parouk Hussin, assalaamu alaikum pagariya. To all of you, welcome!

And as president, it is my honor to reopen this meeting of the Philippine Councilors League.

Year after year, we come together since I was a senator. We also get together at your meetings, I became a senator in 1992, you know, twelve years we have been helping each other. And in 1992 the Local Government Code became effective, so last year we celebrated the 12th anniversary of the Local Government Code. And I remember then Governor Dolfo del Rosario, the president of the Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines, expressed twelve things that I did to give more power to our local government units.

I will not mention all of that. But as Mayor Lito Atienza said, the local government, you councilors, you who make the laws in your local government unit, you also make the budget of your local government unit. The effectiveness of your administration, the effectiveness of your chance to be re-elected as a councilor or be promoted if you have already graduated or are looking for other aspirations is how you used your share of the internal revenue allotment.

That's why I, as Lito said, in our twelve years together, I understand the situation and needs of local government units. I was also saddened like you when in 1999 there was Executive Order 189 which stated that twenty percent of the I.R.A. of local government units would not be given to you. Of course, when you were reduced by twenty percent of your I.R.A., your power and ability to help our people were also reduced. I think that lost power to you was also part of why during those times the jobs created averaged only 350,000 new jobs net a year.

When I became president, one of the first things I did was repeal Executive Order 189. As Lito Atienza said, I gave you your internal revenue allotment in full and on time. Not only that, I also paid off the debts from previous years.

And I think because you received your I.R.A. in full and you even received the debt from the past, so you received more each year than your I.R.A. for that year, we all worked together to give what the ordinary Filipino desires most — livelihood, jobs. Because all of us, because you used your I.R.A. and the debt from the past, you used your I.R.A. in good allocations, we all created in our economy in this short time that we were together. During our term from 2001 to 2004 we created three million new jobs. We all worked together on that.

So I won't dwell too long on my speech. My job is to open your meeting. I join your officials who welcomed you. I join Mayor Lito Atienza who welcomed you. I thank them especially for the kind words about me, so I will not add to that.

To all of you, let us use this last meeting before the elections begin. Think about how we can further improve our service to the people.

We have a short time left, but I want to express something to you that we can still do to serve the people further.

During my short presidency, with the number of poor people we included in the Philippine Health Insurance, we have now reached a point where the majority of families are covered by Philippine Health Insurance. Thank you also for the premiums you allocated for our poor countrymen. So you are included in that achievement.

Let us increase our ambition because the majority of families are now covered by Philhealth, let us strive to make it universal, let us strive for all Filipino families to be included in the Philippine Health Insurance. If your council can still manage it, I hope you will allocate additional funds that the PCSO can counterpart. But if you think your council is having difficulty adding more premiums for those who can be added to Philhealth, tell the PCSO to advance the entire premium. Give Philhealth the list of the poor in your towns who do not yet have health insurance. Let us strive to include them all because the ordinary Filipino seeks health, seeks affordable treatment. Let us all do this so that the ordinary Filipino, because of our closer collaboration, has a job, has health, and achieves their basic needs.

You councilors are very close to the ordinary Filipino, you know this is what our ordinary citizens desire. Let us not waste the remaining time of our term on politics alone. Let us use this time to add more service for the ordinary Filipino.

That is transformational politics. And I hope that during these days of your meeting, we can achieve resolutions, decisions, commitments that this will continue to be a good start for the aspirations of the ordinary Filipino.

I declare this convention open!

Welcome! Congratulations!

Good luck to all of you!

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 6th National Assembly of the Philippine Councilors League (PCL). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090716/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5651&Itemid=38