Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much Secretary Claudio for introducing me. Thank you very much and congratulations Mayor Monching Guico for your wonderful accomplishments for the League of Municipalities of the Philippines! Don Emilio Yap, thank you also because the Manila Hotel is always helpful to our LMP whenever they have an event here in Manila. Mayor Escalante, Mayor Tiu, other officials of the LMP, local chief executives, guests, ladies and gentlemen.

First of all, after congratulating Mayor Guico, I commend all of you for the help you have given to those affected by the recent typhoons. Thank you very much to you and your constituents.

That’s right what Mayor Guico said, for eight or almost nine years that we have been together – you as town mayors, me as the national leader – every time we hold this General Assembly, I see something new in the LMP that deserves praise. You are very consistent in that.

And through all of these, I am thankful that through all these years, a great majority of our mayors have always been by my side. Together, we have been seeking ways to improve the quality of governance and the delivery of services down to the grassroots. And the LMP has been, as Monching said, a key instrument in the effective performance of our municipal local government executives. Congratulations LMP!

Mayor Guico enumerated in his report the many accomplishments in these years of his watch. Most impressive has been the single-mindedness of the mayors and the LMP leadership to gain credibility as an organization devoted to good governance, and not merely a social club of politicians. Kanina doon sa ating exhibit, exhibit ‘A’ talaga, that tells us no nonsense performance has been your key to earning the support of various international organizations, among others — and many of them have exhibits to show how they had been working with you — the UN, the ILO, the USAID, the Asia Foundation, CIDA, ADB, the European Union, AusAID, them and many others. They support and their support continues to fund your development, capability-building and livelihood training programs for your towns as well as the LMP itself.

That’s why the national leadership is even more encouraged to find ways to work with you. During that first LMP meeting in 2001, there was a long list of requests, but I told Monching, wait for the money because the government we inherited had nothing… but that’s why during the previous administrations you couldn’t even receive your full IRA. So I said, Monching, find a way, be self-reliant, but I can assure you that you will receive your IRA in full, that was one reform we made. And not only that, we also had some money, so I paid off the debts to you from the previous administrations. And when we had a larger fund due to the VAT, well you were included there, 40 percent goes to you three years later, and since it was implemented in 2006, three years later is 2009, so I think this year you felt the biggest increase in your IRA – 40 billion pesos for the LGUs.

And from the VAT reforms, you have a larger fund. And on top of what Monching said about what the League has accomplished, I hope that the mayors will use the large increase in your funds to continue to share the burden in programs against poverty.

For example, in microfinance. In the last eight years, a P150 billion pesos has been unleashed for microcredit. Much of this amount came from the government and reached the microentrepreneurs in your jurisdictions through cooperatives, accredited NGOs and rural banks. But LGUs are also corporations, you have corporate powers. You can also do microfinance in your… your development fund.

Another weapon against poverty is the conditional cash transfer program that we call Pantawid Pamilya. Our firewall against economic recession includes this emergency protection for the poorest of our poor. This conditional cash transfer program currently helps 700,000 families among the poorest of the poor. And before the end of the year, we will expand the coverage of this Pantawid Pamilya to one million families by the end of the year. But our list of the poorest of the poor is two million families. Perhaps the municipalities can claim some of those over and above the one million who are not yet receiving conditional cash transfers.

Another important weapon against poverty is land reform. Through the distribution of millions of hectares, more than a million of your farmer constituents have become CARP beneficiaries and 700,000 of the natives of your upland municipalities now own their own land. LGUs can greatly help support them because the Department of Agriculture has been devolved to you. So, those former tenants who no longer have a landlord, are alone, are adjusting, perhaps your Municipal Agricultural Officers can help them to continue their good farming.

And because of Philhealth, health insurance now covers 86% of our population, who are your constituents, but I would like to remind everyone that according to Philhealth law, the obligation to pay the premium for the poorest of the poor lies with the LGUs and not with the national government. However, to show the benefits of Philhealth, the national government provided premiums. But this should be the obligation of the local government, so now your IRA is large because of our VAT starting this year, I hope that in the coming years the LGUs will shoulder your obligation to pay the premium for the poorest of the poor in your various towns.

These are some of the things that I hope that the LGUs, the municpal governments will do in our fight against poverty and of course all the programs that Monching mentioned. We could go on and on about the numerous programs that allow you to effectively cascade basic services to the most vulnerable of your constituents. And indeed, as you have been applauding as Monching mentioned your different accomplishments, you deserve the accolades because the harvest of mayors we have had over these past years has raised the bar of local governance. Kung gagamitin natin ang jargon ng mga kabataan, municipal governance has leveled-up. And much of this has come together with the reforms of the League of Municipalities of the Philippines.

Inaasahan natin that you will be able to institutionalize your best programs and methods, improve on any systems that have rendered less than satisfactory results, and seek new methods for the new challenges we will face, and Monching has identified several of them.

And so, my wish is for LMP to go forward as a stronger, more confident and more effective organization.

Let us continue to work aggressively to ensure that the growth that has been generating jobs and revenue to invest in critical social programs both of the national and municipal level to fight poverty will be sustained. Through government support at all levels and the hard work of our people, let us not be deterred by any calamity, man-made or natural, in our effort to remain growing as an economy.

Once again, Monching, maraming salamat for your exemplary leadership of the LMP. And once again, to our mayors thank you for your unwavering support.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP) General Assembly. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134005/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26649&Itemid=38