Thank you, Brother Rolly. Thank you so much for your introduction and more than that thank you for your affirmation.

President Aquino, our national icon; Sister Luz; Mrs. Gutierrez; our outstanding nationalist alumni and students awardees of the Benigno Aquino Award for Nationalism; officers and members of the various alumni associations of catholic schools; parents and friends of the awardees; teachers and students of the various catholic schools; ladies and gentlemen.

I will not say much because we have heard the wonderful words of, I said our national icon, President Aquino. And those are the things that we should remember.

Let me just add that, indeed, history is replete with stories of freedom lost to tyrants and freedom redeemed by heroes. Ninoy Aquino was a true redeemer. And as President Aquino said, “it was because he believed that the Filipino is worth dying for.”

Today, we honor for the second time because the first time was last year in the first awarding of the federation. Now, we honor eight individuals who have followed in his footsteps in their own way. They have followed him to win freedom, to build a nation, to strengthen a society, and all these come at a great price.

Ninoy paid with his own life and I who are… Am undergoing what Brother Rolly said as assaults on my character, I feel humbled because they’re assassinating my character but they assassinated Ninoy, and this humbles me and it should humble us all.

But such a sacrifice has a rejuvenating and a healing effect on any nation. His death awakened people from the fear and lethargy imposed by the dictatorship, as President Aquino said, “breathed life to the restoration of democratic institutions, restored confidence over despair.”

His will and nerve never faltered, and that’s an inspiration for me. He continued fighting to the end, not with loudness or braggadocio — though he was truly an epitome of eloquence in his political days — but at the end, in prison, in exile, and in assassination, he soared with a deep-seated patriotism borne only of profound love for the Filipino.

Indeed, Ninoy was a martyr. A martyr for freedom but also a martyr for peace. And it’s in this spirit that we mark this day with mourning for another great liberator, the man of god who as President Aquino reminds us presided over Ninoy’s funeral mass and virtually made him a secular martyr of the church — Jaime Cardinal Sin.

The last wish of Cardinal Sin was also for peace — peace. Ninoy Aquino and Cardinal Sin are proof that we do not lack heroes even in modern times.

And today, we honor another eight of these patriots.

I’m privileged to celebrate this meaningful and timely event with President Aquino, with my fellow alumni and alumnae of the catholic schools. And my wish and prayer for today is that may there be many more Filipinos worthy of the Ninoy Aquino award. But I know the lord answers prayers and this prayer is easy for him to answer — that there be many more Ninoy Aquinos; that there be many more worthy recipients of the Ninoy Aquino award for nationalism. Because as Ninoy himself said, “the Filipino is worth dying for.”

To all our awardees, thank you for continuing to make the Flipino not just worth dying for but also worth living for, and worth sacrificing for, and even worth suffering for.

Congratulations! Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the Awarding Ceremony of the 2nd Benigno “Ninoy” S. Aquino, Jr. Award for Nationalism. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412080645/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5070&Itemid=38