Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the IFTAR (Fast-Breaking) for Peace and Forgiveness

[Delivered at the Sunset Pavilion, Westin Philippine Plaza Hotel, Pasay City, October 29, 2005]

Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Ermita, our living and walking data bank for our peace process, because he was there way back in the delegation with Madame Imelda Marcos in Libya in 1976.

Madame Marcos, Speaker De Venecia and the other officials, of course, our host, my brother Ambassador Adam and Engineer Ahmed, members of the diplomatic corps, ARMM Governor Zaldy Ampatuan, Governor Akbar of Basilan and the other local officials, members of the Islamic community, members of the Christian community, ladies and gentlemen:

Assalaamo alaikum, warahmatullahi warrabakatu.

Tonight, we proclaim the greatness of God in our hearts and homes, in the streets and the corridors of public service, sharing sacrifices in his name, humbly seeking guidance and being grateful in the bountiful rewards he bestows upon us.

In breaking of the fast that is part of the observance of the holy month of Ramadan, I acknowledge the theme which is: “Understanding the Muslim-Christian responses to violence.”

Ramadan does not only signify physical restraint, it means a deeper reconciliation with God. And I have taken the opportunity of this holy month to call for a period of national renewal in the Philippines.

For Catholics, this should mean a nationwide program whereby all should take the sacrament of reconciliation and penance. For Muslims, observing the annual fast of the Ramadan for celebrating the greatness of God. And for other denominations, a similar program in their churches.

I thank Libya and all the other Islamic countries and all the other Christian countries who have vigorously helped us as my administration has propagated inter-faith dialogue. Inter-faith dialogues which is open, sincere and frank, to build a national community founded on civility with oneness, with humanity and God.

I thank all of you, the different countries represented here tonight for supporting us in the resolution that we spearheaded and which was unanimously adopted at the united nations last year for the adoption of inter-faith dialogue and cooperation as a means to resolve conflict among nations. Inter-faith dialogue not only among Muslims and Christians but also among Hindus and all the other great religions of the world.

I’m grateful to the Lord Allah that the peace process with the MILF is at a high point, and may he bring us to the end of a good and fruitful journey soon.

I am very grateful and I was very proud to say in the United Nations that our peace process is perhaps the only peace process in the world that has incorporated an anti-terrorist element institutionally.

We are determined to forge a peace settlement in Mindanao that will combine the aspirations of the Bangsa Moro people with the rest of the region in an integrated strategic plan for economic equity and the total defeat of terrorism. As I said earlier, the only peace process in the world with an anti-terrorist element because during the cease fire, which has lasted already for two years, part of the cease fire agreement is that we will exchange information, intelligence and orders of battle in order to together interdict the terrorists in Mindanao and in the rest of our country.

In other words, both our Muslim brothers and we, as we talk peace are equally determined to be partners in upholding the anti-terrorism campaign and in upholding global security. Together, we reiterate our call for Congress to pass the anti-terror bill as we vow to sustain the war together, Christians and Muslims, with heightened vigilance at all levels.

One cannot speak of the peace process in Mindanao without mentioning, of course, the enduring role of Libya since the Tripoli agreement in 1976. The role of Saudi Arabia that spearheaded the Jeddah accord of 1987. The role of Indonesia that led the OIC committee of the six and then the eight, towards the signing of the GRP-MNLF final peace agreement in 1996. The role of Malaysia in facilitating our current peace process, and of course the entire OIC for their support with this peace process.

And we thank Malaysia, Libya and Brunei for the international monitoring team, the head of whom is here with us tonight, that has done wonders to safeguard the cease fire in Mindanao.

As Governor Zaldy Ampatuan indicated in his speech, Filipinos are completely exhausted with ‘poison politics’ when so much remains to be done in the nation. We must, with the backing of our allies and friends, get back to work, not in the streets but in our offices and industrial centers, in our farms and our communities.

The upgrade of our country’s ratings by a Japanese rating agency and now by Merrill Lynch — the world’s leading financial management and advisory company — confirms the solid prospects of economic take off, along with the strong showing of the peso — assessed to be one of the strongest currencies of the world today — a robust stock market, continuing investment inflows, and respectable profit margins among business operations in the country.

And Governor Akbar, I continue to count on the local government units to activate the price monitoring systems in your respective localities to stave off unscrupulous business practices that will use the revenue reforms and the oil price increase as an excuse to raise their prices exorbitantly.

In this time of prayer, we continue to seek guidance from and consecrate all our efforts to God. And I look forward to joining all Filipino-Muslims in celebrating Eid’l Fitr next week.

Thank you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the IFTAR (Fast-Breaking) for Peace and Forgiveness. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092200/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5179&Itemid=38