Thank you.

Thank you very much, Secretary Ronnie Puno.

Vice President de Castro; I would also like to acknowledge the presence and greet Congressman Boying Remulla; Dr. Cojuangco; Senior Superintendent Tira; may I also congratulate, now Inspector Basiya, for your very, very impressive and substantive valedictory address; PNP Chief Calderon; Fire Director Collado; Jail Director Cruz; other government officials; staff; uniformed and non-uniformed officers; personnel; corps of cadet; parents who can truly be proud of your graduating sons and daughters today; other guests:

I congratulate the Sansinirangan Class of 2007 on your graduation.

When I first read the name of your class, Sansinirangan, I said I would just say congratulations class of 2007. Because I might stumble over my speech. But when I learned, especially when Senior Superintendent Tira mentioned the meaning of your name, it is very meaningful. Sansinirangan, a combination of Waray-Waray words connected by 'san,' because 'san' like 'sambayanan,' 'sanduguan,' means unity. 'Sinirangan' means new beginning in Waray-Waray, so a new beginning. United for a new beginning. That's why the name of your class, 'Sansinirangan' Class 2007, is very important.

It means your group is united, that's the 'san,' to start, the 'sinirangan,' your change in providing security to our citizens. Unity for a new beginning, that is what I understand is meant by Sansinirangan.

And this is the mandate addressed to you and to the rest of the Filipino people as we cross the high curve of economic growth and look forward to the triumph of democracy especially in the elections this coming may.

Why am I talking about the elections this May? Not because you should engage in politics, but because you have an important role in the peace of our elections. I don’t wish nor expect violence to increase as we move closer to the elections, but you and I and Secretary Puno and General Calderon must take a number of actions — and we are taking a number of actions — through increased police presence. To protect candidates, to protect the public, to protect the right to the ballot box. The political process is just as important as the political outcome. We will have fair elections. But to you today I would like to say our efforts are also equally directed at ensuring that the elections are also free from violence. That will be your first assignments as new inspectors.

As you enter a new phase in your career as law enforcers, whether it is police, jail management or fire protection, so is our nation entering a durable future of growth and prosperity, solidarity and reform, peace and hope. The Philippine peso continues to register record highs against the dollar. Well, this may be due to a number of factors, the biggest single act that we believe is mainly responsible for the good performance of the Philippine economy was the passage of our value-added tax, which in one bold stroke raised serious revenue to send an unmistakable signal that we are serious about moving the nation forward.

That isn’t all though. Our complete focus on the economy, fiscal discipline, a balanced budget and the need for long overdue human and physical infrastructure improvements have round out the economic surge. And I am glad that your valedictorian, Inspector Basiya, among the many impressive things he said to show how he’s internalized our mission and vision very aptly connected public safety to the success of our economy.

(by the way, are they at ease now? Are they not at ease yet? It seems you are not yet at ease. At ease.)

And our focus on the economy is paying off in a strong peso, low inflation, a robust stock market, rapid inflows of foreign investment, and over five million new jobs in the last six years. Our unemployment is the lowest in a long time and our poverty rate is the lowest as well. The surge of investment is coming from all points of the compass. It doubled in the first two months of 2007 at a time when doomsayers were expressing a lag due to the forthcoming elections. The trend is now clear that investors are putting their stake in our vision for the future. This is most of all a tribute to Filipinos here and abroad who have kept faith in the great potentials of our nation, a faith that has spread far and wide across the Asia-Pacific. At the same time this government and all the institutions including the police, the fire department, the jail management bureau are closing ranks to clean up the mess of the past and forge ahead with integrity, excellence and productivity.

The political noise has largely been bypassed by the investment community. We have crossed the sound barrier. We have entered the frontier of peace, development, security and prosperity. The growing efficiency, competence and professionalism of the men and women in the Philippine National Police, the Jail Management, the Fire Bureau ride beside our overall gains in the economy and the political stability.

I would like the PNPA, the Police, the Fire Department, the Jail Management, and indeed all our national public servants to share in the social payback of our economic reforms. That is why for the benefit of our cadets in the Philippine National Academy, I’m instructing Secretary Puno to allocate five million pesos for new barracks for our PNP cadets.

And for our new policemen, new fire inspectors, new jail inspectors, as well as the rest of the police fire fighting and jail management force that you are joining, I am asking Vice President Noli De Castro, as chairman of HUDCC, and Secretary Puno to work together so that they can prepare a proclamation whereby with regard to the property right behind this campus, 50 hectares all in all, we will be proclaiming that property for off-base and on-base housing for police, firemen and jail managers and personnel.

And for you and for the rest of our national public servants, I have just signed an executive order, soon to be made publish adding yet another compensation increase for all national government employees.

Lifted by a sturdy fiscal house, a solid program of good governance, a robust payback to the poor as well as the ordinary Filipinos — one million of which are national government employees. Now including you, our young graduates — and mounting gains on the security front where you, our young graduates will also participate, we have arrived at the gates of permanent political stability under the rule of law and criminal justice.

For every criminal brought to the bar of justice, for every case resolved under due process, the good credit goes to the police officer on the beat and on patrol. And so for the sake of our economy, for the sake of our future, as Inspector Basiya has said is your role, be guardians of our streets and homes. Keep the people from harm’s way. That will be your great contribution and investment in the future of our country.

Maraming salamat.

Congratulations to all of you graduating students!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the 28th Commencement Exercises of the Philippine National Police Academy (PNPA) ‘Sansinirangan’ Class 2007. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151024/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1959&Itemid=38