Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the 28th year anniversary of the Philippine Council for Industry and Energy Research Development (PCIERD)

[Delivered at Hyatt Hotel, March 17, 2010]

Thank you Secretary Alabastro for your kind introduction.

Thank you also Usec. Yumul for telling us about what PCIERD is doing especially with regard to climate change, and to all of you PCIERD members, staff, clients — Happy Anniversary!

I’m very glad to join your celebration for two reasons: one is sentimental the other is strategic. The sentimental reason is that I was a member of PCIERD’s Council in my early years in government and I still remember how hard the PCIERD people work. So, congratulations to all of you for your hard work.

The strategic reason is to highlight your contributions to the nation’s growth. Your theme: “Taking the Extra Mile in Facing Global Climatic Challenges” says it all. The extra mile is what PCIERD enables, R and D in industry and energy. And now because the world and especially the Philippines face this very difficult challenges of climate change. That is the extra mile provided by PCIERD R and D especially in adaptation. Why are we stressing adaptation? Well, as we all know there are two responses to climate change, mitigation and adaptation.

But in our case, I don’t think we have to feel very guilty about what we’re doing about mitigation. When I was in Copenhagen I said with the world that we have a good carbon footprint. We are a good citizen as far as mitigation is concerned. The world’s average carbon emission is 6 tons per capita and the world wants to bring it down to 3. But we are already 1.6, so we’re even better than what the world is trying to aim for. So our challenge is adaptation because even if we are such a good world citizen as far as climate change is concerned we are one of the most affected, we’re one of the biggest victims of climate change, we’re the most vulnerable. For one thing, due to the fact that we are on the western rim of the Pacific. We are in the front door of all those typhoons that come and so we owe it to ourselves to do research and development for climate change adaptation.

And when you need research you need researchers and you need research grants. In 2004, UNESCO founded the number of researchers, scientists and engineers in developing countries should be 340 per million of the population. We have much less than that. So we want to move fast forward to try to achieve that in the shortest possible time and also to face global challenges like global climatic challenges.

So, three years ago, after we got our Expanded Value Added Tax reforms we decided that over and above what is usually provided in the science and technology budget we’d invest a fresh three billion pesos from our budget and all budget sources for R and D technology. And a lot of that has gone to scholarships for R and D related disciplines. The DOST as per our records has provided scholarship slots to about 27,000 beneficiaries during our administration.

Then given about a 100,000 scholarships… I’ve been calling Nina Alabastro last night, “Nina, how can you have 100,000 scholarships and 27,000 beneficiaries?” It turns out when I asked my staff, we’ve opened more than a 100,000 scholarship slots for natural sciences and mathematics. But how come we are talking about 27,000 beneficiaries. It turns out that some of the scholarships are not given for four years or two years for the whole course, they give out every year, so one person will be getting it four times, one person like getting it two times, so it’s 100,000 scholarships for 27,000 beneficiaries.

But anyway, the important thing is of this number 1,900 are masteral and doctoral students in various fields of science and math, and 155 of them are from PCIERD. So, congratulations to all of you 155!

We have also invested — Nina, this is on top of the three billion, right? — One billion pesos for the University of the Philippines in Diliman so it can build its own P1.6 Science and Technology complex. So that would already be almost 5 billion pesos over and above the usual budget for research and development. I don’t know if any other administration will do the same thing after me. They haven’t done it before, I don’t know if they’ll do it after. I hope they do.

All of this is to promote Engineering R and D activities in the country at a significant scale in order to modernize every aspect of the economic underpinnings of the Philippines to propel growth, including in your case industry and energy. Also in your case climate change adaptation because climate change cut across different areas of the research and development so you do have your own industry and energy component for climate change adaptation and even mitigation.

I saw in the exhibit earlier some of the projects you have been doing for climate change mitigation and especially adaptation, so I congratulate you for that! Because we have to modernize as well as protect ourselves from climate change, both protecting ourselves and modernizing, both need a critical mass of research and development capable manpower. And because we’re talking industry here we need to work on a manpower that will attract technology-base investors to the country.

Yesterday, I met the international chairman of NIDEC, an electronics company that has been in the Philippines for the last 13 years but decided yesterday that he would put in a fresh 300 million-dollar investment in our country. And he said he’s willing to go all the way up to one billion dollars, but he said his problem is that he doesn’t have enough engineers. He has three plants in Laguna. Okay, good supply of engineers. He has one plant in Subic, he’s complaining about that, he can’t fight enough engineers there. And he has put up a fifth plant, that’s 300 million dollars, again, in Laguna.

So he said, I want to expand some more but I can’t find enough engineers. So, Lilia de Lima, the head of the PEZA said, “No, we’ll help you find.” And we told him about this program. See, the last time he was here was two years ago and he said, “Wow! what a big change in infrastructure you have. It takes half the time now to travel to my plant compared to when I was here two years ago.” Well, we told him what has happened in the physical infrastructure is also happening in the human infrastructure. These lacks of engineers you’re talking about we’re curing that. We’re spending all this billions on scholarships for science and engineering, and not only that a lot of scholarships are of masters and doctorate. So, that is the type he said of engineers that I would like to have and scientists because right now, I do the electronics here but I do the R and D in Japan. So if you have that then I will do the R and D in the Philippines as well. And that is one of the fruits of the works of PCIERD. So I’d like to congratulate you for that!

Because PCIERD is key to the creation of a favorable environment for science and technology to flourish — we can do it. With PCIERD we can have the knowledge to build the basic industries that engage in high-value added activities not only climate change adaptation but design R and D, product conceptualization, product development, innovation.

Investors know our caliber. Our manpower is world class. At the forefront are our engineers and they think we don’t have enough of them but we are providing for more. All of these knowledge workers are the engines for national growth. They help spawn high-tech companies. With engineering R and D facilitated by PCIERD, we can further hone their skills and create our own technology roadmaps that will bring S and T right at the doorstep of the Filipino nation. And who is the one in-charge of creating that roadmap that R and D for industry and energy — no other than PCIERD. That is how important you are to our nation.

So, I take this opportunity to thank PCIERD and to Secretary Alabastro for all those things that you have done as exhibited outside especially one of the things I mentioned in my State of the Nation Address two times already I think for having patiently pushed for the installation of the additional Doppler radars that have boosted the weather-forecasting capabilities of PAGASA. No one can tell how many lives will be saved by the early warning derived from these instruments. This is really a very important climate change adaptation tool. And I was asking Nina, what is the role of PCIERD in our Doppler radars? She said it was the PCIERD who packaged the proposal to make that a reality.

We have now — thanks to you and your proposal — a total of ten weather radars now, five of which will be fully operational within the next two years.

Industry and Energy. Energy. During the Energy Summit two years ago, I also directed PCIERD to focus on energy. And I’m glad to see again outside that your researches have been a lot on energy. You have research in wind turbine generation, compressed natural gas. You have research that has proven to be commercially viable. For instance, the wind farm in Ilocos Norte is providing electricity to the whole town of Bangui and the CNG-operated buses have been given franchises to ply the Southern Luzon route.

Indeed, PCIERD is expected to meet a number of global challenges in the coming years especially global climatic challenges. I have an unshakeable faith in science and technology as the main driver of modern-day growth. And now as the main protector against the onslaughts of climatic changes.

As early as my first days in the Presidency, in fact in my first State of the Nation Address, I declared technology as the foundation of future economic development. How frustrated I was all these years, I couldn’t put money, more money than we had for R and D. Finally after VAT, we were able to do it in 2007.

Indeed, there is a need to promote R and D activities so as to modernize our lives, so as to modernize industries and energy, and so as to modernize our capability to protect ourselves from destructive climatic changes.

We followed the pronouncement about technology being the foundation of development in our Medium-Term Plan. We put a four-pronged approach in our Medium-Term Plan:

First, enhancing the competitiveness of our human capital; which we finally we’re able to put in billions for R and D related science courses.

Second, developing a critical mass of scientists and R and D personnel, and that’s what we’re spending this billions on.

Third, speeding up knowledge creation and dissemination to push productivity; that’s PCIERD doing that work.

Fourth, improving mechanisms that promote technology-based entrepreneurship which is why I put TRC under the supervision and control of the DOST so that they will fund or they will give technology transfer not to sardine-making but to something more technology-based.

We are laying the foundation also for a sound education with a strong technology backbone to serve future generations. ‘Cause if we want more scientists and researchers, well, we need to make the children, the young people more at home with science and math. So that’s why the basic education level, we strengthened Science, Math and English teaching by increasing contact hours for these subjects and we need 50% more than we had for. Also by retraining and upgrading at least 100,000 teachers in these subjects, and especially in English which is the language of science and technology. And in today’s world so much research is done on line and besides you have to be internet savvy if you want to be a techie technology savvy.

So, we have installed more than 5,000 of the country’s 6,000 public high schools with internet connectivity. I hope that with this preparation we’re doing on human capital and physical technological capital, PCIERD will have many, many more opportunities to provide. The important research for industry and environment and energy — environment because of the climate change — I hope that there’ll be a lot of work that PCIERD can do and a lot of resources that you can continue to access so that you can do the work you have been doing so well in a much, much grander scale than we were able to do in the past.

So once again, to my fellow lovers of science and technology from PCIERD, thank you for all your support for our technology programs. And Happy 28th Anniversary!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 28th year anniversary of the Philippine Council for Industry and Energy Research Development (PCIERD). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100505232157/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27740&Itemid=38