Thank you.

Vice President Guingona, other officials, ladies and gentlemen, my beloved countrymen: I will be going to Malaysia and Thailand on an overnight trip.

The timing is perfect, reinforced by recent events. There is a need for fresh diplomatic initiatives as we push forward in democratic consolidation and internal reforms.

Our regional neighborhood also needs a reinvigorated dialogue on issues of terrorism and poverty. The Philippines' relations with our two neighboring countries in ASEAN will be improved.

I shall use the next two days to put forward the position of the Philippines on trade and security as I seek a meeting of minds that can be of regional and global value.

Your servant has been invited by Prime Minister Mahathir to speak at the International Government Meeting of the Pacific Basin Economic Council or PBEC. The PBEC is an association of senior business leaders from around the pacific basin region. It represents over a thousand companies in 20 economies in the region. These account for over 4 trillion dollars in global sales and employ over 10 million people.

I will use that opportunity not only to encourage Asian-Pacific businessmen to invest in the Philippines. I shall present before this forum our position on liberalized and equitable trade. I will touch upon the relationship of the war against terrorism and the war against poverty. I will dwell on mechanisms to temper protectionism pursuant to our national interest.

I will promote the welfare of Filipinos in Malaysia. We will ask for more leniency from the authorities there to be more moderate in their deportation process and to make it efficient and humane for undocumented Filipinos. I will also ask Prime Minister Mahathir to continue Malaysia's support for peace and development initiatives in Mindanao.

After four months of negotiations, the trilateral agreement on information exchange and communication procedures will be signed in Kuala Lumpur during my visit. This agreement rallies together our neighbors in ASEAN to jointly address border and security incidents, terrorism and transnational crimes, and other illegal activities.

This agreement was among my proposals at the 7th ASEAN Summit held in Brunei in November 2001. I consider this the Philippines’ contribution, together with Malaysia and Indonesia, to the global campaign to combat terrorism.

In Thailand, I will promote the implementation of the bilateral agreements that we have already made in the past five years, including those made when Prime Minister Thaksin visited the Philippines last October. Among the topics we will discuss are tourism, trade, and counter-terrorism.

Thailand, being the regional leader in tourism, has much to share with the Philippines. I intend to discuss with my counterpart the ways and means for our two countries to step up cooperation in this field.

I will also be talking to some business leaders of Thailand for possible investments in the Philippines. This will also serve as an opportunity to show our sincere desire to advance the development of the Philippines and the welfare of the great Filipino worker.

There are more than 5,000 Filipinos all over the Kingdom of Thailand, making significant contributions to Thai society as educators, musicians, skilled workers and technical experts.

In times of challenge and opportunity, there is nothing more natural or easier than to look to our neighbors for mutually beneficial arrangements. Let us pray that this trip of mine will be successful.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Departure Ceremonies for a Working Visit to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and an Official Visit to Bangkok, Thailand. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412225731/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8306&Itemid=38