Thank you very much Secretary Ermita, Chairman of the EDSA People Power Commission.

President Fidel Ramos, who started EDSA; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; Secretary Romulo and other members of the Cabinet; Mayor Sonny Belmonte, our host here in Quezon City; the heroes of the people power revolution of 1986; the heroes of the continuing people power revolution that received the awards today, mga kababayan.

Your servant is pleased to be with all Filipinos who love democracy and freedom as we celebrate another anniversary of the people power revolution.

Peaceful revolution is a hallmark of the Filipino struggle. It is also part of the great anointment of His Eminence Jaime Cardinal Sin whom we miss and whom we recognize today in a posthumous award.

We gather today because we believe that the spirit of EDSA must remain alive. But we need to give this spirit a more appropriate meaning in our time if we want future generations to value it.

People power should not simply mean the unity of the people to oust a government. Instead, like our awardees today, we must use people power to unite responsible citizens in building a strong and modern nation.

In recent years under our administration, another people power has taken place. This was the support of the people and the sacrifice for our difficult but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. Now, these painful steps are bearing fruit. We now have funds to use for job creation, new roads, new bridges and ports, and more for education and health.

Through strong international alliance — and we are happy that the diplomatic corps are here today — we have forged new partnerships that have led to billions in investments, a record for our country, that helped create five million new jobs, another record for our country. And I’m also glad that the soldiers, the police are here. And we have strengthened our military and security alliances in the Philippines, in the region, and the world. This has led to major gains for peace in Mindanao. This has led to the isolation and tracking down of known terrorists. This has led to a reduction in violent crime.

I’m glad that Mayor Belmonte is here in representation of the local governments. We trust the local officials to work with us to continue on the path of reform, social justice and economic development. They form the centerpiece of Philippine democracy and are on the frontline of change. Our officials from the center of the metropolis to the farthest barangays also form people power.

Our national aspiration aims to advance the Philippines towards greater political stability, prosperity and peace. This is our goal that needs people power more than the noise of protest and political strife.

When President Ramos came to EDSA on the first day of EDSA in 1986 and throughout those four days especially when Cardinal Sin called upon the people to come and the people responded, the world embraced EDSA in 1986. In 2001, the world tolerated EDSA. The world will not, however, forgive another EDSA but would instead condemn the Philippines as a country whose political system is hopelessly unstable, and the Filipinos as among the finest people in the world, but who always shoot themselves in the foot. Under those circumstances, who would invest in the Philippines? How would we finally bring the gains of the economy to the average Filipino which at the end of the day it was as truly meant by people power.

And so today I am glad that aside from having President Ramos as our honored guest, aside from the posthumous citation given to His Eminence Jaime Cardinal Sin, we are also honoring today’s people power heroes. The many who have responded to the call of Cardinal Rosales to contribute a little bit of their hard-earned modest earnings so that microfinance can spread throughout the archdiocese. To those who contribute their work and who partner with the government, who equal every contribution of the government and even more to build houses, 700,000 in seven years starting from 2003 — Gawad Kalinga. That we have honored today our overseas Filipino workers who though their number has more or less remained at eight million all these years had increased their remittances to the Philippines from seven million dollars before 2001 to almost 13 billion dollars or almost double today.

People power is about the future, not just the past. And I am glad that today we honor those from the past but also those from the present working for the future. People power should be about new ideas, like Gawad Kalinga is a new idea, Pondong Pinoy is a new idea, not old complaints. People power should be about fighting for a stronger nation, not just fighting.

And people power is about the heroism of the many who in their daily labors and trust in the almighty which was a very important characteristic of 1986. People power is about all of them who bear faith in a new Philippines.

So on this day, let us say, long live 1986 EDSA! Long live people power for unity!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’S Speech during the Flag-raising Ceremony in Commemoration of the 21st Anniversary of the EDSA People Power Revolution. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151349/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1866&Itemid=38