In just over four months, “Go Negosyo” has brought this great undertaking to five major locations in the country – Cebu, Bacolod, Baguio, Manila and now in Pampanga. On behalf of my Kabalens, we thank you.

Iting caravan a ini munta munta ya naman Cagayan de Oro, Makati, Batangas ampong Pangasinan karing tutuking mapilan bulan. Atyu tamu king pamaglakbe nung nukarin pasibayu ta yang gigisingan ing entrepreneurial spirit o ing ilig king pamagnegosyo karing Pilipinu.

We extol the recipients of the Most Inspiring Entrepreneur Awards to local businessmen whose success stories continue to inspire our people.

At keti mismu king Pampanga, atin tamung sariling inspiring stories a malyaring ikuwentu. Ing kuwentu nang Jaime “Jack” Uy, Presidente at CEO ning Sentinel Development Corporation; i Dr. Emmanuel Y. Angeles, Chancellor ampong Chairman of the Board na ning Angeles University Foundation; deng Garcia brothers ning Mekeni Food Corporation; i Peter Nepomuceno ning Nepomuceno Group of Companies; i Lolita Hizon na ning Pampanga’s Best; i Ryan Razon ning Razon’s Restaurant; i Wilfredo Tan of Hausland Development Corporation; i Fatima del Rosario ning Sasmuan Delicacies; ampong i Teresa David-Carlos na ning Bank of Florida.

Ila ngan matapang da’lang herapan ding pagsubuk king pamanalakad negosyu king tuktuk na ning pamana’kitan ampong responsibilidad king lipunan.

We are glad that the Center for Entrepreneurship is giving them due recognition. We hope they will be role models to the rising generation of Filipino entrepreneurs. Congratulations!

We can produce more entrepreneurs of their caliber – capable of facing new challenges, persevering, and industrious.

In my inaugural address in 2004, I said that when we step down in 2010, part of our legacy shall be that we will have supported three million entrepreneurs by giving them loans and helping them become good managers, thereby establishing a deep foundation for a broad middle class.

In my State of the Nation Address last July, I said: My desire is for the Philippines to be counted among the wealthy nations within twenty years. By then poverty shall have been marginalized; and the marginalized raised to a robust middle class. We need a vibrant middle class if we are to be on the verge of First World in 20 years, which is our aspiration.

The current benign, stable growth conditions are likely to spark a wave of entrepreneurial activity in the Philippines. We see signs of this happening already. In several key areas we have promoted a new entrepreneurial class. One is in microfinance. The microfinance system which we have empowered has extended more than P80 billion to four million low income men and women who want to start their own businesses.

Kailangan da ding keketamung memalen ing empowerment, at iti yang kekatamung panikwanan king Small and Medium Enterprise Development Plan a ni-launch tamu inyang 2004.

Since 2004 we have extended more than P100 billion worth of loans to 50,000 middle income men and women who want to start or put up their own businesses through the SME Unified Lending Opportunities for National Growth.

In addition, through the Central Bank we have created a series of investment incentives and programs for overseas remittances to be invested into capital enterprises.

And we are cutting red tape to simplify the requirements for small and medium investments.

Alang nanu mang kainge political a malyaring makapigil kekatamu king pamapgpatupad na ning peka-importantent inisyatibo a magawang marakal a negosyong mana’kitan ampong milyun-milyon a trabaho para karing kekatamung memalen.

We continue empowering our people so they may be able to grab these opportunities. And Go Negosyo will not only empower them, but inspire them to get into the exciting world of entrepreneurship. Thank you, Go Negosyo, for helping bring out the entrepreneurial spirit of our people.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech at the Launching of the “Go Negosyo Caravan”. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412141037/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2238&Itemid=38