I would like to greet the members of the Board, the past presidents, the different VIPs, the presiding justice of the Court of Appeals, the Associate Justices of the Sandiganbayan, the members of the Judicial and Bar Council, most of whom, if not all, were my appointee.

Well, I am glad to see all of you here tonight. An I am glad to see the faces of may of the Philippine Bar Association, leaders and members, so that, in my next term with your support, I know whom to appoint in the Supreme Court. Excellencies of the Diplomatic Corps — I should have mentioned also the RTC judges — the recipients of the award, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, a few days ago, I unveiled my pro-poor agenda to the next six years to end poverty and unite the nation.

In the nest six years, I pledge to triple loans to self-employed and small business owners. I pledge to build 3,000 new schools, grant college scholarships to every qualified poor family, and give a computer in every school. I pledge to (COVERAGE CUT) — rogue and abused in our government.

I further pledge to continue to fight for self-sufficiency in rice production. To fight for new roads, bridges and highways to link our great nation. And to fight for more property rights and more legal rights for our people.

Legal rights. Justice is the source of a democracy. Justice is a bedrock of democracy. Without justice, there can be no democracy. A society lacking justice is a dictatorship, a system of fascism.

In my short presidency, with the support of many of you — I mentioned earlier almost all of my presidential appointees, but Nonong Cruz and Joey Peñafrancia, is Attorney Acosta, and I remember to mention them because they are among those who have been helping me in my administration’s making a strong part in judicial reform. Thank you, Ding, the filing of cases against corrupt judges and prosecutors, but more in general and more positively, the adjustment of the judges and prosecutors’ pay. The package of institutional strengthening of the judiciary funded by the World Bank and the Mediation Law.

In my next administration, with your help, we will build on this strong start. Together with the Supreme Court, we will further cleanse our judiciary, our courts, and the people serving as termites inside and outside the court. I will use my influence so that our judiciary has equal application of justice to all Filipinos, rich or poor. We will pursue and imprison those who distort the law inside and outside the court. We will eliminate those that our members of the diplomatic corps, who I am greeting tonight, call 'hoodlums in robes,' who are hindering investments from coming here.

And you, the excellent lawyers of the Philippine Bar Association, I encourage lawyers who care about the country, like yourselves, to further expand your pro-bono service for the benefit of the poor and powerless in life.

If my complete term, as this one — it is only half a term — I also intend to share political power as broadly as possible. I will reach out to all parties, to all groups, to all communities to identify their best, brightest and most honest to serve in our government. Under my next administration, there will be a true national unity government.

I invite the opposition, the opposing party, the former adversaries to forget politics and send their best representatives to our government where high positions await them.

My government will be a true mirror. When you raise this mirror, you will see the image of the country.

My government is a true family of the race. This includes representatives of the youth, women, cultural communities, senior citizens, the opposition party.

It is time we detoxify our political system. Let us rid politics of its pernicious poison.

It is time we employ the blessing of civility to heal a wounded society. Civility is the glue that will bind Filipinos together.

Help me foster a new unity. The strength, the rule of law will revive if the national interest prevails over self-interest.

Members of this oldest lawyer’s association, you are the cream of the crop of our legal profession. If there is anyone who can help me with the challenges of reform and reconciliation in the coming times, it is you. Help me.

Maraming salamat.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the 113th Foundation Day of the Philippine Bar Association. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412090035/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5666&Itemid=38