Thank you.

Thank you, Secretary Puno.

Mayor Abalos and the other officers of the League of Cities, city mayors from all over the country: Happy New Year to all of you, to all the members of the League of Cities of the Philippines!

And let me say, you know, Benhur was talking about the past years of his presidency of the League and reviewing these past years, let me say that the cities have been among the most efficient and effective of the National Government’s LGU partners.

You have many successful programs, and your most successful programs ensured not only the economic viability of your cities, they also helped to enable our country to escape recession last year even as two-thirds of the world was devastated by the worst economic slowdown in 60 years. Not only with our growth stays positive, but Business writer Tony Lopez even quoted Han Sy, many of you know him because you have SM malls all over the cities. Han Sy said, that SM malls had their best year ever in 2009. That means that whatever the macro figures are about positive growth are translated into spending power for the ordinary Filipino.

But not only SM but also your cities are to be congratulated for their success because most of the SM malls and other major businesses for that matter are located in the cities. And your governance plays a big role in business friendliness. In fact, Benhur was talking about the different things you’ve been doing to make your cities more business-friendly. Certainly here in Metro Manila, we have been proud to tell the world about the cutting down of red tape because of the shortened and also synchronized licensing and permit system. And I understand that there is a continuing effort that every city achieves ISO certification. These efforts, these achievements are particularly impressive.

And the success of the cities is due in no small part to the leadership of the League of Cities. So for the hard work, Benhur and the other officials of this League have put to improve the quality of governance in our cities, congratulations and thank you. The contribution of the League of Cities to the development enjoyed by various cities is undeniable.

And therefore, what the nation has achieved in the last nine years is not only a record of the achievements of national government, but it’s also a story of your success. Why? For one thing Benhur is right about the number of persons who now lived in cities and urban areas. When my father was in politics seventy percent of the people were in the rural areas but now that’s no longer the case, the people are in the cities.

Urbanization is a joint product of demographic growth and economic development. It is they say an irreversible feature of modern life. I remember a few years ago there was a book about trends in the 21st century, and one of these trends is increasing urbanization. This presents opportunities, and you know more than I do, as well as problems. It presents rewards, and you know more than I do, together with the risks. And that’s why I can understand the concerns that the League has over the increasing urbanization, including the increasing number of cities.

At the end of the day the issue is performance and results. And if we are to review what we did together, Benhur previewed some of the things we did together. All of the things that Benhur said I did for you were an implementation of what together you and I set out to do nine years ago. And that is to get our economy moving again, to regain control over the fiscal insanity that we inherited, and invest in the people for the first time in a generation. By any measure, our economy has performed better than any economy in the Philippines over the past 30 years — peaking at more than 7.0 percent growth in 2007 before the global recession.

I will quote Tony Lopez again who points out: during this period, per capita GNP more than doubled — one thousand dollars in year 2000 to over 2,000 by 2008. Even if 18 more Filipinos were born, still per capita income doubled. And the economy itself more than doubled. It was 75 billion dollars in year 2000; it’s worth 189 billion dollars today, that’s more than double.

And how does it translate into the lives of ordinary Filipinos? The best measure is the people who buy from SM. Why do they buy from SM? Because there are more jobs available. We’ve created nine million new jobs including creating an entire new industry almost from scratch — the call centers and BPO industry that has put the Philippines on the global map. I just came now from yet another call center and BPO center located in Eastwood, and there they have a thousand employees now, they’re going to double that and that is the story of almost every call center here. India’s BPO business is at nine billion dollars; ours is seven billion dollars, we’re not very far behind. And if it comes to call centers themselves we have more workers, half a million in call centers, than India does because India has more in the IT portion of it. So that is only one source, half a million people of the nine million new jobs created. Nine million new jobs is certainly a substantial result.

One of our key legacies in terms of steering the Philippine economy forward in the new millennium is the sheer momentum of economic growth on our watch: 34 straight quarters of growth and that is unprecedented, capped by continued positive growth as I said even through the depths of the worst global recession in decades. And as Benhur said, we’ve also stabilized inflation, strengthened our currency, and we have increased the access of three million children to education through investments in schools, classrooms and textbooks. And I must thanked the cities, because even if education is not yet evolved, you the cities use a lot of your own IRA and your income from licenses and real estate taxes in order to put up more classrooms, hire more teachers and buy more textbooks. So we can say that together, we have invested in the people as a result of our tight fiscal controls, as a result of our new revenues both national and city, and because of all these the lower cost of borrowing and the bigger empowerment of the cities to borrow as Benhur said. Now you can go straight to the financing institutions, get your own terms and borrow on your own credit rating. That has led to more and better schools, more healthcare, and more economic opportunity.

Another legacy is the fiscal reforms we instituted, capped by the Expanded Value Added Tax which brought down our deficit ratios. You see, when people talked about deficits, it shouldn’t be the number itself. When people talked about our loans, it shouldn’t be the loans themselves. It should be as a ratio of our own total production and certainly that ratio has gone down tremendously. Because a big corporation can borrow more than a small company, because they can absorb the debt servicing more. And it is a way by which you can expand the economy more. And that is why even if our critics point to absolute numbers, our ratings have been upgraded, our cost of borrowing has been lowered, that means we have much better credit and economic rating than ever. And our revenues have funded economic stimulus and social safety nets against the worst of the global recession. Yes, these reforms were bitter and unpopular but they have spared our country the worst of the global financial shocks.

And equally important, they gave you and me the resources to stimulate the economy. Benhur recounted how the IRA, the total IRA, grew over the past years, but the largest increase in the IRA happened last year, 2009, the first year that the LGU shared in the new EVAT, that’s why last year the IRA increased by 40 billion pesos. It went up to 249 billion pesos from barely P210 the year before. And this year it will be P265 billion, imparting strength throughout the country at every level of government, and I can understand your concern about how the cities will share in this new IRA. Of course, I can’t comment on it in sub judice but we respect whatever the League of Cities and individual cities will do as far as that is concern.

The immediate challenge coming up now is for you to make your respective cities a model of free, fair and open elections. With the help of our newly established automated polling system, let’s work hard to help the COMELEC ensure this for the people of the Philippines and the people of your cities.

Meanwhile, until June 30th we are in our respective offices so there should be no respite in our efforts to make our cities more and more liveable. Let us look forward into the future to see what more we need to do in the next six months to ensure that the Philippines and your cities continue down a path of growth in the long-term.

With your unceasing hard work and with your support and with our supporting each other, I know that we will beat the odds and bring most of your cities to the first world in twenty years.

Maraming salamat. And on this last meeting of yours, congratulations to the League of Cities!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 55th General Assembly of the League of Cities of the Philippines. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100410090039/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27286&Itemid=38