Vice-president de Castro; Speaker Nograles; Senator Enrile; Senator Angara; Chairman of the Finance Committee and Chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, Congressman Lagman and the other members of Congress; Speaker Nograles; other members of the House of Representatives; members of the Cabinet; members of the business community; members of the government.

And I would like to greet some of our special guests, our friends from Parola, Tondo; (Applause) our friends from Baseco; (Applause) our friends from Navotas; (Applause) Congressman Alvin is also here; (Applause) and the household beneficiaries of the DSWD; (Applause) Friends of Espie Cabral; also our leaders in the corn program; (Applause) In the rice program, our seed growers; (Applause) In the high value crops program (Applause) There's Phil-foodex; the livestock; (Applause) the fisheries; (Applause) our teachers and students; (Applause) and to all of you, good morning.

Today is a good day for the Philippines. The people elected members of Congress and me, Noli in the executive, our LGUs to work for the common good. The people are tired of politics of division and despair. They want us to make tough decisions on the economy to fight against poverty, to keep our nation safe, secure and moving forward.

With this in mind, we’re all here to celebrate another milestone in the forward progress of our nation with the signing of our national budget. This budget is significant for many reasons, let me note three this morning:

First, this budget reflects our values and policy priorities for investing in our people. This budget invests in what we call the three ‘E’s,’ they’re the essential building block of our nation, namely, the economy, education and the environment. Every Filipino wants a good job, food on the table, sound education for their children and a healthy environment with clean air, clean water and clean land.

Second, this budget represents another important step in the economic development of the Philippines. We’ve the strongest economy in over thirty years as a result of the tough reforms we have made to break the cycle of despair which has kept our nation back. Part of the plan includes a march toward a balanced budget for the first time in many years. The average Filipino must live within their means so must the government. For the first time in a generation, the tough political choices we made have left us with more revenue to invest in our people. This is what this budget is going to do.

Lastly, this budget proves once again that members of Congress from both the House and the Senate and all parties can come together to work with the executive branch to get things done for the nation. Indeed, the people are tired of partisan wrangling and want all of us to do our job — which is to work for the interest of the people, keep the nation strong and stable, and always moving forward.

On behalf of a grateful public, we thank each political leader for being here today and to paraphrase the bible, “for forging unity out of the swords of partisanship.”

Our strengthened economic fortunes comes none too soon, for there are clouds on the economic horizon that we must guard against. Much remains to be done to lift up our poor in particular. The global forces that are driving up the price of oil. The environmental forces that are driving up the price of rice. The forces driving down the U.S. and European economies are hurting us here in the Philippines. The recent rise in the incidence of poverty is tied to the rising global demand for oil and the decelerating supply of rice due to global warming.

The budget we are signing today is a major step forward for investing in our people and our nation. It provides a buffer to mitigate the pain of a deteriorating global economy and the accompanying rise in prices which affects food and transportation the most.

Concerning the first “e” — the economy. Let me tell how this budget and our overall policies are being directed. Perhaps no other issues are more important to the average Filipino than the high price of gasoline, electricity and everyday commodities like rice. And these issues hit our poor the hardest. While the high price of oil and rice in the world market is a global issue outside the control of any one government, we have nevertheless taken and will continue to take actions to reduce the pain on our people.

We have cut tariffs on oil. We have started providing targeted cash payments to the poorest of our poor to help them cope – Espie, sila yung kasama sa ating mga bisita ngayon — because the price of rice per metric ton in the world market has gone up from a 180 dollars in 2001 to 400 dollars this year. We have had to spend unprecedented amounts on rice subsidies. That’s really a strain on the NFA budget. And we are spending on agricultural modernization. I hope senator Angara will be happy to know that we have allocated 23 billion for agricultural modernization, more than what you demanded in your AFMA, and this is over and above the credit provided by our GFIS.

Our central objective to create more jobs and grow our economy is to invest, invest, and invest. We’ve been doing that and with this budget, the march to modernization through human and physical infrastructure will continue.

Key components of our economic investments include key physical infrastructure projects across the nation to build up our roads, bridges and ports. And to also invest in our people through better healthcare, improved social services and housing, and a more productive, modern and profitable agricultural sector.

The final pillar of a strong economy is an open and transparent economy — free from corruption. This budget invests more and more to clean up the culture of corruption that has plagued this nation for generation.

To fix the corruption that still plagues our nation, we call on Congress now that you have passed the budget to work with us to pass a comprehensive anti-corruption reform act in 2008. On our part, we will hold officials accountable if they are found to be corrupt after due process. Let the chips fall where they may as investigations are concluded and friend and foe alike are brought to account for their actions in the proper courts.

Meanwhile, I instruct the implementing agencies of the budget to submit project and procurement information requested by the procurement transparency group on the priority projects earmarked for monitoring. And I instruct all national government agencies, GOCCS and GFIS to provide their annual procurement plans, also requested by the procurement transparency group for monitoring of major bidding processes.

The infrastructure budget of 200 billion pesos from the GAA, the GOCCS and the local governments enable us to implement key infrastructure projects. For instance, national roads like the Surigao-Davao, the Davao del Norte-Bukidnon, the Lebak-Maguindanao, the Butuan-Esperanza in Agusan del Norte, the Sibuco-Siraway-Siocon-Baliguian in Zamboanga del Norte, some examples of major projects in Mindanao;

In central Philippines: sta. Barbara airport to Iloilo city; Caticlan-Pandan-Libertad in Panay so that Boracay tourism can spread; Bacolod to Silay airport; El Nido to Rio Tuba in Palawan ‘cause there are some segments that are not yet completed; Esperanza to Aroroy in Masbate — I see the governor here — the Caramoan peninsula road in Camarines Sur;

In the urban beltway: the c5-nlex-slex link, which Bayani Fernando is working very hard on because there are relocation and right of way issues that we have to address; and the Marikina-Infanta road;

In the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle: the Halsema highway, the Bontoc-Tabuk-Tuguegarao, the Tarlac-Nueva Ecija-Dingalan;

The farm-to-market roads and irrigation projects together worth 15 billion pesos;

Bridges like Panguil Bay Bridge in Mindanao between Misamis Occidental and Lanao del Norte;

Airports like the remediation works on NAIA 3 to comply with FAA standards; Cotabato, Pagadian, Siargao, Zamboanga airports in Mindanao; Panglao, Tacloban, Dumaguete, Daraga, Puerto Princesa in Central Philippines, among others; and in the North Luzon agri-business quadrangle, a series of no-frills airports including Alaminos in Pangasinan and San Vicente in Cagayan;

Seaports like Dingalan in Aurora; Healthcare infrastructure like the upgrading of hospitals from primary to secondary hospital care;

Housing and relocation — with five billion pesos, Noli? Almost? — Aside from his Pag-Ibig funds of 30 billion pesos.

The second “e” – education — takes a front seat in this budget. No other issue is as important to Filipinos as the opportunity education affords the next generation to be liberated from poverty and live a life of hope, optimism and prosperity.

The 200 billion pesos allocated for various agencies dealing with education allows us to invest in more than 10,000 classrooms; 36 million new textbooks; 900 plus computer labs in public high schools; 60,000 Gastpe scholarships under the education service contracting; and for the separate high school voucher, an increase in each voucher from 5,000 pesos to 7,000 pesos, and per recommendation of Jing Lapus because it’s more expensive in Metro Manila said, 10,000 for Metro Manila;

Engineering, RD, technology and science scholarships at high school, college, masters and Phd levels at 1.4 billion pesos overseen by Nina Alabastro, unprecedented in our history; other college scholarships worth 400 million pesos; vocational training worth three billion pesos, including p350 million for BPO training; 10,000 more teachers; teacher training in math, science and English worth a billion pesos with 500 million of that going to English.

And finally, the third “e” — the environment. Filipinos love our nation. We must be careful stewards of our natural environment. Our environment is God-given; we must not abuse what god has created. This includes a commitment to clean air, clean water and a clean, healthy environment, free from toxic wastes that can harm each and every one of us.

The GAA will help — just help, not fund the whole thing — it will help fund the creation of a green Philippines that encompasses: conservation to beautify our villages and cities of trash; build more urban parks and recreation areas; purify our water and clean up industrial sites that are an eye-sore and are unhealthy. And the DENR has a five billion allocation mainly for conservation.

We have almost 300 million also to support DOE’s energy independence. But Angie Reyes has various PNOC corporations have a lot more resources to fund our quest for energy independence.

Reforestation at 300 million pesos. So when I asked Angie to move to DOE, I asked him also to allocate some of the PNOC resources for reforestation. And I asked our ODA partners who are here and I have asked especially New Zealand that hopefully all forthcoming ODA from New Zealand will go to reforestation.

We also want to turn our coral reefs and beaches, our mountain vistas and our tropical forests into national parks and international sanctuaries for eco-tourism and scientific research. And we have 240 million pesos to start that up, but we can put PTA funds to augment that.

While we have accomplished much, much remains to be done. We plan on working hard the next two years until the day our term ends in 2010 to fulfill our Philippine reform agenda. We must and we will press forward with more reforms. We will fight for the economy, education and the environment. We will fight to feed the poor, improve job creation and do everything in our power to mitigate the global forces increasing the price of commodities like oil and rice.

Overall, we remain bullish on our economy, optimistic about our future and deeply committed to being a force for good.

To all of you, thank you for joining us — not just joining us today — but joining us in the work that we must do.

Thank you for demonstrating your commitment to our nation’s stability and to invest in the people.

Thank you very much to all of you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the Ceremonial Signing of the General Appropriations Act Of 2008. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412123042/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1067&Itemid=38