Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Ray Chua, our Chairman of the Commission on ICT for your introduction of me.

Thank you very much also to Mayor Nonito Vier for your kind words to express your warm welcome to me. Thank you. I am also with Undersecretary Ramon Bacani of the Department of Education. To all of you, the people of Siruma, good morning to all of you!

Mayor Vier said I was the first president to visit you, it's a good thing I failed when I planned to come here as a senator because I was already scheduled to come here but the weather turned bad. You know Siruma is far, the journey is long, you pass through mountains so I couldn't continue here. So I said before I leave national politics I should visit Siruma, so when I didn't get to come here as a senator, I was able to come here as president. So I experienced the difficulty of getting here and that's because you are far from Naga, the journey is six hours, because you pass through mountains and then you are often hit by storms, that's why my trip didn't push through even though I was in Naga at that time.

So I brought with me today the Director of DPWH, Danny Manalang. Where is he? There, because I discussed with him how we can make the trip to Siruma easier. The mountain is the problem. Isn't it that even Baguio is a long trip because of the mountains but really from Manila so… I said but I hope the road isn't too muddy. So there is insufficient maintenance so I instructed Director Danny Manalang to get funds from the Road Board to fix your mountain maintenance. This is far and the population is small so what can be done according to the cost benefit analysis is just road re-gravelling, that's what we should do to ensure that you are not always covered in mud and it's difficult to travel.

As Mayor said, you are happy that I am here even though it is in the last months of my administration because we continue to implement active governance until the day I leave office. And for that, we have identified three things: First, increase the power and development brought to the regions away from the dominance of Manila. Second, continue to promote the value of the three ‘E’s — education, economy and environment, in our efforts to create sustainable and equitable development. And third, continue to focus on the youth of the country as our greatest hope for a more resilient, better Philippines.

We have progressed in many areas, for example here in Bicol, we poured many programs into Bicol to make it easier to get here including tourists. As Mayor said, this is a Hidden Paradise because you have white sand beaches but they are really hidden because there are mountains separating you from some visitors.

That is also the history of the entire Camarines Sur before, even the entire Bicol so we fixed the roads, the Maharlika Highway and Andaya Highway, we fixed them so that travel here is easier or you the Maharlika Highway that passes through Camarines Norte but we also fixed the Caramoan Road. We are fixing the Caramoan Peninsula Road so it's good that I visited you and I asked how this Caramoan Peninsula Road can help Siruma, it turns out you don't pass through there, you pass through Calabanga-Tinambac, and you pass through mountains. So more than re-gravelling is needed.

And also to be closer, because Hidden Paradise shouldn't have to travel from Manila by road anymore, it should be by plane, so we expanded or built two airports here in Bicol. In fact, we are building an international airport in Daraga, Albay. The access road is already built, the runway is being constructed so that tourists don't have to pass through Manila, they can come directly from Hong Kong, Korea, Japan, China, directly to Daraga which will be closer to the Bicol coasts including Siruma.

We are also improving the ports that connect Bicol to the Visayas. And that's why I made the Caramoan Peninsula Road to make Catanduanes closer to you. I don't know how it can help, but for example, people are going to the beaches of Caramoan and landing here in Virac and then it's just a short trip to get here. I don't know if that would be a better trip for you.

But in short, this is what we are doing, that's why tourists continue to flock to your region and I hope that one day tourists will also find your Hidden Paradise. We expect this kind of progress to also reach Siruma. But as I said, since you are still Hidden Paradise, that means more needs to be done so that you are no longer Hidden Paradise.

All the efforts of our administration are to have a more comfortable future for the next generation of Filipinos, the youth of our country are our hope and inspiration. We must do everything to build a better life for every young person in this country. While I am proud of what our administration has achieved, past achievements are only as good as the country's ability to continue to grow and develop. For example, we will visit your Botika ng Barangay later because we have established a Botika ng Barangay here so you can buy cheaper medicines, those things should be continued.

I sincerely desire that the progress we have made will not stop and that the remaining work will be taken up by the next generation of leadership. As a nation, we need to focus steadfastly on the future. Build on what is good and strive even harder to address the challenges that remain. The youth of our country are a bridge between the past and the future.

For our youth — where are our youth? I know it's summer vacation now so they're not here but I see some children there — for them we are correcting the mistakes. Fighting for change and seeking a better day. There! the children are there. Our country has come a long way but there is still a long way to go, we must reach towns like Siruma with progress. And the youth represent the aspirations of our country, to them we offer the efforts of our government to uplift the Philippines.

And education is the foundation of opportunity. It is the key to a brighter life, opening minds and opening doors. From the reforms we implemented at the start of my term, we had additional funds to return to the people. We improved the school curriculum so that young people can learn science, mathematics and English more quickly. We increased funding so that more teachers can be trained. Are our teachers here? Yes, there are some of you who have already gone through training for English? Very good, I hope there are more. And to improve the quality of teaching. Why just one? Undersecretary Bacabi, there should be more of them. Because we have put two billion pesos into teacher training, two billion pesos, even more for teacher training.

And in the current world… oh, not just that. We have built classrooms all over the country, one hundred thousand classrooms, and here in Siruma we have built eight classrooms. And I expect that — because the population of Siruma is small — our quota here… this is for the elementary school, our policy here is that there should be two shifts, morning and afternoon in elementary school and a maximum of 50 students per shift in a classroom. That's how we base how many classrooms we need to build.

And in this world, strong education must be accompanied by a strong backbone of technology, that's why I included a Cabinet member, the Secretary of CICT, Secretary Ray Chua. Because technology and education shape the mind and connect it to the world. Education and technology are the twin pillars of the country's future. Here in Camarines Sur, we built computer laboratories in almost two hundred schools, and some of them already have internet connection. That's what I'm looking at, the internet connection of high schools. But here in Siruma High School, you don't have broadband connection here in Siruma, given your distance. But I heard you have eleven computers here, it's a shame to waste those eleven computers if you only learn computer games. So for technology, you need an internet connection.

That's why I tasked Undersecretary Bacani, and he said he can do it before the start of our new school year, we will build a satellite broadband so you will have internet. That's my gift for you.

In these last months of my term, I remain focused on promoting better education and better technology infrastructure. We have come a long way in those two areas, but we should not rest while there are places like Siruma that need our attention to have technology. I have a continuing interest in seeing the current youth take advantage of the value of education and modernity. And use these weapons to advance themselves and the country. By giving more opportunities to modernize the learning of the youth of Siruma, we hope they will learn skills that can be used for livelihood. And I hope you, the people of Siruma, do not waste this opportunity to improve the standard of living here and for all the people of Hidden Paradise of Siruma to finally progress.

God bless you all!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2010). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during a new town visit: Siruma, Camarines Sur. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100609080015/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=27956&Itemid=38