Maraming salamat.

Thank you very much for your warm greetings to me, the mayors of all of Luzon. Thank you very much, Secretary Joey Lina for your kind introduction to me that I hope our mayors of Luzon will remember how much we value the mayors of the Philippines.

God be praised, Mayor Ramon Guico and the other mayors of the north. I thank… Oh, I thank not only the mayors of the north, the mayors of the whole Philippines, the mayors league, for your very good resolution supporting my decision to run in the election next year.

Yes, I thank the league of municipalities of the Philippines for that resolution. Thank you also Governor Dolfo del Rosario on behalf of the entire ULAP, you also support my decision. And thank you for pointing out the twelve gains of the union of local authorities of the Philippines, but these twelve gains happened in the two and a half years of my administration.

Thank you very much, mayor mayor — I always call him that, mayor Mayor — for that resolution that you have attested to. I am very grateful for that. And I want to greet also our other officers of ulap who are here such as Governor Louie Villafuerte. He has been urging me for a long time to make a decision. Sometimes, we would have dinner and he would say, decide already. I would remain silent, speaks like silent. I see Louie's frustration. So earlier when I greeted him, I said, so Louie, are you happy now? He said he was happy now.

Thank you also to Mayor Francis Tolentino representing the League of Cities. He immediately texted me that he and the cities support my decision. And if James Marty Lim were here — oh, there you are. How could I miss such a handsome face — and thank you also, thank you for the support of the barangay officials. And to everyone who attended here at the Luzon island Conference — caring Cabalen my Capampangan, good evening to you Tagalogs, to you Bicolanos, good evening to all of you, thank you for your support.

My decision was based on our national interest as well as the interest of your constituencies. You incumbents, you know the value of experience.

And in the more than two years of my presidency, I have gained the experience necessary to understand what we need to do in order to change society in a way that leads to economic development and the elimination of poverty.

In the past six months, we were comparing growth rates with ASEAN where I came from. We achieved 4.8 percent GNP growth — this is the highest in our country since the 1997 Asian crisis. And perhaps in many of your towns you feel it, in so short a time of two years, we accomplished one of the most massive housing programs undertaken by any administration. And perhaps in your markets you also see, we’ve been able to keep the supply and the price of food stable. We confronted our deep national divisions face to face and implemented painful court rulings like the arrest of Estrada and Misuari. We won victories in pinning down corrupt high-ranking officials, some of them on the basis of unprecedented lifestyle checks. Even my family is not above the law.

Monching mentioned our all-out war on illegal drugs. And in the past three months, after Joey and I made a particular all-out war, the illegal drugs confiscated in three months, worth 8 billion pesos, spending less than 100 million of enforcement money — unprecedented achievements. The number of drug dealers, so our prison is now full, far outstrips those made in several years before. And the big fish that were caught there, those triads, big fish who were untouchable before, are now touchable.

We have sought a peaceful resolution to the Muslim insurgency, and we are well on our way to signing a permanent peace pact. We cut red tape to make sure crucial infrastructure are built. For example, the roll-on/roll-off ferry that reaches Mindoro and beyond Mindoro. Vacationers are now passing through Boracay via Mindoro island and other areas. New bridges — some of you thanked me when I passed through for the long-awaited bridge that is now completed. New highways, and also because among other things, your leagues passed formal resolutions for changes in the Constitution. I listen to you and we began meaningful debates on those changes in the constitution, particularly on the parliamentary and federal form of government.

Last night, almost midnight, I arrived in Cebu from the ASEAN Summit in Bali. At Bali, the leaders of ASEAN signed the Bali Concord II. It was named after the first Bali Concord in 1976 which established the first ASEAN. Well, many years later, the world is new so they made a new Bali Concord. And here they agreed to push economic integration, expand trade and enhance, we will consolidate among the various countries in ASEAN our vigilance against terrorism. Like your agreement there in your peace, unity and democracy that you will fight terrorism.

Besides the Bali Concord II, China and India also acceded to a treaty with ASEAN, a treaty of amity and cooperation in Southeast Asia. These are key developments and — here is our hybrid rice winner — China is where the hybrid rice came from that doubled the yield for many of your constituents here — there, Cito Lorenzo is clapping, he is the one who brought the hybrid rice here.

India, there are now two hundred million millionaires in India in a population of one billion. Well, in many of your towns you have a large Indian community, and many of them still hold Indian citizenship, and we buy medicine from India. Your programs that I hope you are using the cheap medicine that is half-priced come from India. So it is necessary, I said to the Prime Minister of India, we buy a lot of medicine from you so we should be on each other's radar screen. The Prime Minister of India said he is giving our airline, our designated national airline landing rights unilaterally in several key cities in India. So the Indians in your community, many of them are still Indian citizens, offer them to expand trade with their mother country because they have two hundred million millionaires there, more than the entire population of the Philippines. Because in the end, whatever I negotiate it will be you, the frontliners, who will translate the gains we make in foreign policy into the momentum and effectiveness in our common battle against poverty, against terrorism, against criminality.

We are all in the executive branch. You are in that sense extensions of presidential authority in the communities. As I am chief executive of our nation; you are the chief executives of your municipalities. Together we share a determination to deliver the best of governance. But also together, we must overcome the obstacles to our mission.

Our historic problem has been the need for economic development to fight poverty.

Historically, our economic development has been slow compared to our neighbors. Mabuti na lamang na sa nakaraang dalawang taon at kalahati ng ating administrasyon, during the last two years and a half of our administration, we did better than our neighbors. Because our neighbors suffered very much in the aftermath of the Asian crisis but as an economist I knew that if I don’t build up domestic demand we will suffer too. How did I build up domestic demand? I build up demand in the provinces, and now you know why I released all that IRA even the debts of the previous administration.

So, yes, because I love you, but our country also loves you, and it worked. The debts you used, which I paid, debts from the past, you used for development in your towns that’s why we performed better than our neighbors in the last two and a half years. But now our region is starting to recover. Oh! It’s scary, we are comparing growth rates. Our neighbors are starting to accelerate their growth again, and this time we cannot afford to be left behind.

Our historic economic problems cannot be blamed on any single president, because the problems are fundamental, caused by our economic and political system. So I am pleased with what Monching said that you understood, you realized when I said my decision. I said and you agreed in your resolution that to really develop our economy and create a stronger republic, we need to change our system. We need to institute true reforms in our politics and true reforms in our economy. And I am glad that in your covenant you have peace, democracy and unity, because we also need unity as a people.

We need to heal the deep divisions within our society. We must have justice and we have gotten much justice in this administration. Many cases waiting for decades have been resolved in our administration. But we must also have reconciliation. We must put a closure to our national divisions. Because in the final analysis, as you have said in your resolution, it will be reform and reconciliation that will heal the wounds of our divisiveness.

You’ve always been on my mind since the day I assumed the presidency. And because even then I had that idea that we need reconciliation, my belief was only strengthened by my experience. I also looked for the causes of division between the national government and the local government. And what I saw, even when I was a Senator, the source of separation in the views of the national and local government is the tendency of the national government to interfere with the autonomy of the local government. That’s why Dolfo mentioned, Joey mentioned, one of the first things I did in my administration was the recall of the executive orders which placed a yoke on your fiscal autonomy.

There are twelve of them, I won't list them all. Dolfo already listed them and Joey elaborated on some. But lately, I talked about the first, I’ll just talk about the last major one.

I have released all your last local government service equalization fund. I have already paid the national government's debt to you. And as the two of you said, there were no deductions and your shares of the internal revenue allotment even increased. What I ask of you is that, because of the many jobs lost during the past El Niño and typhoons, please use one million pesos per municipality from your LGSEF release for microfinance in your municipality. In that way, we can provide relief to many unemployed people in our countryside.

Sad to say, the political season is here.

But because our neighbors are starting to accelerate their growth, and we can’t afford to be left behind, we must together give — even as the political season is on — we must together give greater certainty to business and investors. We must together show them that our programs are devoted to strengthening the economy, creating more jobs, and encouraging business activity unhampered by corruption and red tape in government.

In your meetings over these last two and a half years in your league meetings, you have been sharing best practices on reducing red tape — the one-stop shops, the… there are so many, so many things you are doing, the fast processes. And I ask you to stay on track with that. I ask you to stay on track in the task of governance as I am keeping a steady hand over the concerns of the state. Let us also ask our constituents, your constituents to keep their eyes focused on the challenges we face daily. Day-to-day, sometimes there is crime, day-to-day there are still drug lords, day-to-day challenges. Or there was a flood and no harvest, daily challenges we have to face them daily. And let us not allow ruthless politics to distract us all from the all important charge of nation-building.

And in this all important charge of nation-building, I would like to assure you that as your president, I will always be — as the twelve accomplishments have shown — I will always be your champion for local autonomy.

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the League of Municipalities of the Philippines (LMP) Luzon Island Conference and Celebration of the 12th Anniversary of the Local Government Code. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412194121/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7391&Itemid=38