Thank you.

Thank you, Joe, our Party President.

President Ramos, our esteemed Chairman Emeritus of the party, the leaders of our great party, ladies and gentlemen.

If the trend of the results of revision in the protest against my running mate Noli de Castro continues, our party lawyers are optimistic that we could right finish to the 2004 poll controversy and all these political grandstanding on alleged poll cheating will die a natural death.

The ballots used and election returns canvassed for the vice president were the same ballots and election returns for the president. Thus, aside from observing Noli’s vote — and Agnes Devanadera can tell you — our party lawyers are doing the same also, looking at the votes for the presidential candidates. After opening the ballot boxes of Mandaue City and opening the ballot boxes from Lapu-Lapu city, no evidence of poll irregularities for presidential and vice presidential candidates were discovered.

I remember during the canvassing one of the other candidates was saying, “dalawang ERS lang tignan natin — sila pa ang pipili; eto kalaban pa ang pumili — Mandaue and Lapu-Lapu, everything matches.” So our lawyers are optimistic that the more than one million vote lead I got from the province of Cebu and Cebu City, where the bulk of my final lead came from, will be confirmed and the legitimacy of my proclamation unassailable and should be respected. Thank you beloved party mates for bringing us to victory in the last elections.

Another big fight looms for the party. We face three fronts of struggle: First, the economy — we must sustain our gains; Second, charter change — we must achieve this by the middle of this year; Third is poverty — we must bring relief to the people battered by high oil prices and unemployment.

During my administration, our administration, I’m very proud that we created one million jobs a year. But with the growing population as mentioned by President Ramos — 20 million in the last 20 years — we need to create 1.5 million jobs a year.

We have a plan for each front and each must be pursued with teamwork and discipline. I shall be at the helm of both the economy and the pump priming program for social equity. Congress and the local government shall push the pencil attack on charter change gathering force behind the mandate of the people. And I know our party with our unity and teamwork will succeed in that great political reform.

Our strategic aim is permanent political and economic stability to take us to the threshold of the first world in 20 years. We must strengthen our ranks to enforce and sustain full democratic leadership until 2010 and for the next generation.

We shall preserve our coalitions on the pedestal of principles and ideals and never on the shaking floors of expediency. With our heavy armory of legitimacy and democracy, we shall fight the squads of destabilizers and spoilers in the opposition. We are the superior force. Our opponents must either tow the line of the national interest for which we stand and fiscalize responsibly with statesmanship or be relegated to the wayside of irrelevance and ignominy.

The stakes for the party and the nation are high. The demands upon each and everyone of us formidable. For the past years, we have already been steeled by bruising battles, we don’t need additional training to win over our political foes in every round. What is needed is more aggressive advocacies to shoot down threats even before take off, to rally the people behind charter change, to demonstrate party rule and discipline attuned to a parliamentary system.

Every time we meet as a party, I have consistently committed myself to a leadership of fairness and mutual respect — my vow stands. I face the greatest battles. The terrain is rough and sometimes unforgiving, but I place my faith in the hands of the Lord and in the great alliances like the one that fervently lives in this gathering.

The economy is taking off. Two years… In 2004, we reached six percent growth rate. Last year with the oil crisis and everything, about five percent, Romy? Global confidence in the Filipino, a winner in front after front is firm and we can see this in the strong peso, the strongest currency in Asia and the fifth strongest currency in the world; the strong stock market, the second strongest in Asia; the strong investment inflows. Last year’s inflows were many times over the year before; the strong tourism boom, two million and a half tourists last year; and the privilege of leadership granted to us in the great forums of the world.

I shall continue to devote my energy in leading the fight against poverty and hunger while we anticipate the positive impact of our economic boom on the daily lives of the people.

I call upon you, our party mates, to ride the wave of social equity and reforms as the payback for the sacrifices of our people. We must increase the volume of civic duty above the political noise and work unceasingly to uplift the people and to right what is wrong with our political system. Social reform, economic growth and political renewal must be knit tightly in a single-minded national strategy to achieve first world status in 20 years.

You know one time during our difficult moments, our Executive Vice President Sonny Belmonte reminded me about something very inspirational. Sonny said, “you can get bruised and battered, but the last man standing is the man to win… Who will win.”

And so I end by repeating Sonny’s observation and advice: “to everyone of us, together and to the last man and woman standing, we must fight and win for the Filipino people.”

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Lakas-Kampi CMD National Directorate Meeting. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412215758/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2382&Itemid=38 .