Thank you very much PNP Director General Sonny Razon, ‘Mamang Pulis’, (applause) I remember one of the first times we met, he was with the WPD and he invited me here as a senator to look at his facilities. I even tried shooting but I missed the mark.

To the honorable mayor of Manila, who was also formerly chief of the WPD, Mayor Lim; (applause) Our beloved and respected representatives from the House of Representatives, representing Manila, Congressman Amado Bagatsing and Congresswoman Grace Bonoan are here; I also greet the officials of Metro Manila led by General Geary Barias, Richard Gere. (laughter/applause) During our Christmas party in Malacañang, when he sang, he really gave it his all, very enthusiastic. I said, he's great, General Barias has a good rhythm. Others said it's because he's always at the Peninsula. (laughter) So I said after the Manila Pen, he finally had a reason to dance and sing with such joy. And of course, our host, our current head of the Manila Police District, General Boysie Rosales and all the police officers of the district; (applause)

Our awardees, some are outstanding police personnel and others are our outstanding donors, not just Mayor Lim, but also the Filipino Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chamber, the Filipino Chinese Business Club, the Philippine-Chinese General Hospital and Don Emilio Yap who gave today. I saw his check for P500,000 pesos; (applause) friends; people from Manila. Because I am also from Manila since Malacañang is under the jurisdiction of Boysie Rosales.

I am happy to be with all of you, to be with all the brave police officers of Manila under the leadership of Boysie Rosales again on your anniversary as the Manila Police District.

I remember I went here during Pete Bulaong's time, because Pete came from me. He was the head, the police head of my security force as Vice-President and as President, so of course it was right for me to go to his celebration.

Usually, with local officers, I go sometimes, I don't go again, but the Manila Police District is very important so here I am again. (applause) and really to also add to the gratitude for those we have honored. And among those honored is your valiant city mayor who was also the former head of the WPD, Mayor Fred Lim, who is also a policeman looked up to for his service as a guardian of the law and as an elected city leader.

When Mayor Lim was with the Manila Police District, which was still the Western Police District then, right Mayor, he had the opportunity to serve the President of the Philippines, who was my father, the late President Diosdado Macapagal. And I learned this when Mayor Lim was seated as mayor, my parents, President and Mrs. Diosdado Macapagal gave him a dinner, during his first time sitting as mayor and they talked about those times and my mother showed me a photo of Mayor Lim when he was with the Western Police District. I was asking earlier, “Mayor, what was that photo? You were in that photo, right?” He said “yes, I was with it because I was with the police force that augmented during the inauguration of your father as President of the Philippines.” (applause) so our coincidences here are very beautiful.

And that's why I have great trust in his word when we met at a function here in Manila that Mayor Lim will defend the presidency during my term and during his time. Thank you very much Mayor Lim. (applause)

This General Boysie Rosales, this is his first celebration as head of the Manila Police District, I really decided to come here when he invited me because I have been following him for a long time. Since we learned about his record-breaking achievements against drugs when he was still in Quezon. In fact, in my State of the Nation Address in 2003, I mentioned him along with other remarkable personalities at that time, Colonel Boysie Rosales, I said, the terror of drug lords, refused a bribe of P35 million pesos. (applause)

So when Mayor Lim became Mayor again now and he said he would accept whoever I put as chief of the MPD, because the MPD covers Malacanang, I chose General Boysie Rosales. (applause) And with your record-setting performance, at that time, the biggest drug-bust, right? Then you imprisoned those VIPs you caught, now I count on Boysie to move aggressively against drug syndicates in Manila and the gang wars disturbing its neighborhood.

Because like Trish, right, we go around the barangays and many people say they are disturbed by drug addicts and also the gang wars. So that is one thing we expect from Boysie to continue his good work that we saw in Quezon, to bring it here to the city of Manila.

There’s much to celebrate today, especially the big decrease in crimes in the past year here in Manila and also throughout the country, right? What, Sonny, 40 percent reduction in crimes. So congratulations to the Manila police! Congratulations to the Metro Manila police, congratulations to the police of the entire Philippines! (applause) And earlier our announcer said the reasons why Mayor Lim was given an award today. Not only because he is an outstanding alumnus, a former chief of police here, but also because the City of Manila, the government despite a reduced budget has provided the MPD with 60 new mobile cars, then 20 from the federation, two from the Filipino-Chinese Business Club. So, you have 82 new patrol cars. (applause)

I asked Sonny, “Sonny, how much does the gasoline cost for a car?” He said, “15 liters per month… Per day, per day, I mean, yes. But we have to listen to the speeches, I can no longer do arithmetic. Anyway, but Sonny said, but what… what we do is we give the… the car and the LGU helps with the gasoline. But here it’s the opposite, the LGU provides the car if we help with the gasoline. Okay.” (applause)

Because fuel is expensive all over the world now, so the gasoline burden on the 82 new vehicles is really quite heavy. That’s why when Efren Genuino was given an award because he was a consistent donor to the MPD. I said, “Efren, since you’re donating here to the Manila Police District, you should cover the gasoline for the 82.” (applause/laughter)

Thank you also to the government of Manila for providing the police with an additional five hundred monthly allowance, and then there’s also free schooling for their children. And there’s also yes, and health services, and the housing here in the back, there’s also a large lot and a large project of our ‘Kalinga Pulis’ is the quartering. It was really beautiful what we inaugurated there in Bicutan for the Metro Manila Police. So I said to Sonny Razon earlier, maybe we should put up a quartering here in the back. (applause)

And because I remembered that was December and at that time I mentioned we had, how much, 11 billion surplus at that time. So I said, I am announcing to all agencies, we have a surplus, since the market is expecting us to have a balanced budget since 2008. So what will we do with the surplus? That’s already been discounted by the market. Let’s just spend it for the benefit of our citizens. So line up at the DBM. Get ahead, get that 11 billion. I don’t know if the PNP got any, but they should have gotten some for those quarterings, okay. So the back of the MPD is now included in what they got from the budget. (applause)

And because fuel is expensive worldwide, I would like the men and women of MPD to have affordable food and other necessities like quartering. Secretary Yap is not here. He is… I mean in our celebration, I called him this morning. But Secretary Yap is easy to talk to because he has a budget. So I will just instruct Sonny Razon to talk to Secretary Arti Yap to also set up our store here to sell affordable rice and noodles for the families of our police officers. (applause)

On the national scale, we’ve also started addressing several concerns of the PNP for better law enforcement and a better life for our law enforcers.

Back in 2006, when the government had funds due to our tax reforms, we immediately began rapid addition and training. Didn't we get fifteen thousand new police officers within three years?

And even before adding police officers, you already received a salary increase. You remember that our administration equalized your salaries, making them equal to the salaries of teachers.

And in December, you received what I believe is the largest performance bonus in your history, P7,000, (applause) and Sonny, didn't the subsistence allowance double? It became P180 from P90, the hazard pay also doubled, becoming P240 from P120.

At the same time, we recognize that peace and order is also a result of a widening halo of development, which gives citizens more reasons to follow the law and respect our institutions.

The more people suffer, the more thieves there are. Therefore, the fewer people suffer, the fewer thieves there are.

Our efforts for peace and order should always be viewed in the context of our endeavors for sustainable growth to achieve a better life for our people.

And conversely, peace is better, it's easier to do business. Peace is worse, it's harder to do business. Peace and development are very intertwined.

Today, the Philippines is on a path to permanent economic growth and stability. We’ve created seven million new jobs in seven years, including those jobs obtained in the police force. We’ve achieved 28 consecutive quarters of economic growth in the last seven years. And that’s something that even our neighbors cannot say. There were times during this 28 quarters that… Singapore for instance, experienced negative growth and many of our neighbors and even the United States, there were quarters when they experienced negative growth.

And in the last, in the three quarters of 2007 for which we have had our accounting completed, our economy rose 7.1 percent and this is the fastest growth in more than a decade, in a very, very long time. According to the Grand Thornton survey: business and investor confidence is on the rise. And of course, we all know that the peso was appreciated more than 15 percent since 2006, that is a reason why we have a surplus, because the interest we pay is decreasing in peso terms, because the things we need to import are also decreasing in peso terms, so we have savings and that is what is being put into your housing and our stores.

And therefore the Philippine currency is one of the world’s best performing currencies, right now our problem is not how to defend the peso but how to perhaps slow down the strengthening of the peso. That’s a better problem than the opposite. But we are already using what we have to slow down the increase of the peso, we are avoiding foreign loans.

For example yesterday, I went to Cagayan de Oro, we had a groundbreaking for the new airport, which was borrowed from Korea. But an airport of that size to be put in Bohol, in Panglao, will no longer be a foreign loan, it will be local money instead. The DOTC will borrow from the DBP.

Because if we borrow a foreign loan, of course when we are lent money, the dollar will enter. So it strengthens the peso. So we are avoiding that. On the other hand, we are prepaying our foreign loans. So even if they are not yet due and demandable, as long as we can stop and pay a large penalty for pre-payment, we pay it. So part of the 11.7 billion surplus we saw in November is being used to pay off foreign loans. So that if we pay off the foreign loans, the dollar will come out, so it will also reduce… It will also slow down the strengthening of the peso. But as I said, that's a better problem than the problem of the exchange rate of the peso constantly increasing.

And our stock market has reached historic heights. I hope that it will make our Chinese businessmen even more generous in contributing to our police enforcement.

And for the first time in our generation, our budget is under control, in a generation so we can line up for assistance. We’re lowering our deficit. In fact, our balanced budget was supposed to be in 2010. But according to our economic managers, it’s not possible in 2008. Well, if we had a surplus in November 2007 and if all our agencies didn’t line up because of lack of paperwork, we might be surprised by Gary Teves when the 2007 figures come out, he might say that we already had a balanced budget in 2007. But I’m not waiting for that. But if it happens, thank you. Because as I said, the market is still waiting this year, so if we can use it for the people, for the police, for assistance, I prefer that. Nevertheless, whether we have a balanced budget or not for 2007, what we can say is that we are raising unprecedented amounts of revenue.

So I expect that our unity will continue towards a safer, more peaceful, and more progressive citizenry, especially our premiere city of our country, none other than the City of Manila.

Congratulations to all of you again! And happy anniversary! (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2008). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’s Speech during the 107th Manila Police District (MPD) Founding Anniversary Celebration. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412124219/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=939&Itemid=38