Thank you very much.

Thank you very much Secretary Angelo Reyes for your humorous introduction of me.

You know about my being Gloria the laundress and loving to wash with soap, that was the subject matter of my New Year’s resolution, that I will no longer wash people with soap, especially my cabinet members. Now, Winnie Monsod asked me, “how will you do that?” so I said, if I want to wash someone, I will first count from one to thirty. Well, earlier, it so happened that you were all here, I called Secretary Reyes about something else. So he said, “ma’am, with your permission, can this be my discourse?” so I said, it’s okay. Because inside, I was still in Batangas when he said that — I could count from 1 to 30,000 before I arrived here. So that when I arrived here, I wouldn’t be angry anymore. I wouldn’t wash Angie Reyes. (laughter)

I also thank General Monta for inviting me today and I greet him. I remember last year, wasn’t he the chairman? And I know he was the chairman, because when I was Vice President, in the early days, he was indeed the chairman. Then when I became a guest here in this hall, he was no longer the chairman. I said, “what happened to General Monta?” he resigned as chairman. And earlier I said, “general, didn’t you take a leave?” “no,” he said, “I resigned last year.” because he said, I called for the resignation of the current president. Well, of course many in PM Triple ‘A’ — he said — are in active service. So it would be difficult to bring the whole association with my call, considering those still in active service. But now his desire has been fulfilled, he has returned as chairman. I hope you don’t resign, General Monta as chairman. Don’t ask for my resignation. (laughter)

I also greet Chris Balaweng, your president and representative, the incoming jubilarian, right Chris? And I also greet him because he is leading the AFP modernization program. And I am happy that we have finally put the 5 billion pesos in your trust fund, and this year there was finally a budgetary allocation of another 5 billion pesos, because supposedly 10 billion pesos every year should be in this trust fund.

I proposed that 10 billion pesos should be put in, by the congressmen and senators. But they said there was still 5 billion so we will just add 5 billion and make it a revolving fund. So as you spend the amount, they will keep adding and allocating so that there is always 10 billion available for you to spend on AFP modernization. But if we had AFP modernization earlier, when the law was first implemented, we probably wouldn’t be debating about ‘Balikatan’ in western Mindanao. Nevertheless, it’s just right that we are together here now because we will discuss the things where the Armed Forces of the Philippines is once again on the front page.

Earlier, General Monta mentioned my first time joining you here at pm triple ‘A’ when I became president. Because before I became president, I was a guest of PM Triple ‘A’ many times, whether the association as a whole or your different classes. And even before, when I first went to the anniversary of PM Triple ‘A’ in Baguio and marched with my class, class ’78. Angie was asking, “why did you choose that class?” well, many are also asking. In truth, I chose the class — no, I was invited by class ’78 — because many of them came from class ’78, my aide d’ camps. And so, I remembered, so of course because I was connected to them every day, when they had reunions and wanted to find someone to adopt as a classmate, I was chosen. I remember General Wycoco – he’s not here, right? — class ’68. In truth, I am really older than class ’78. Because I was in college class ’68. So Wycoco said then, “wow! If only we knew you were available to be a member of the class, we would have taken you in class ’68.” “well, sorry Wyc, the new generation has more foresight.” (laughter) and they chose me even before I was president. But through them, I got to know many different classes. First, the contingent classes — class ’76, class ’79, and so on. Then I got to know more and more. So Angie, if I interfere too much with you in promotions, I’m sorry, because I know so many people. And I know who is kind, and I know who is, well, not very kind. But I also know the entire PMA as a whole. And I can say that the heroism of Angie Reyes that he did together with the major service commanders on January 19. The heroism they showed was truly the heroism of the entire Philippine Military Academy Alumni. That’s what General Monta said when I became president, one week after, I was here with you to thank you.

Indeed, seven days, one week after I was sworn in as president, you made me guest of honor at your General Assembly and meeting, kagaya nito. And it was your way then of endorsing my assumption of the presidency. And since then, I am very grateful you have constantly stood by me. Even at times when rumor mills were used to confuse and intimidate the public, most of you openly supported my initiatives for our Armed Forces and for the Filipino people.

Fellow cavaliers, thank you for the unstinting support.

The nation is indebted deeply to the soldier. The Armed Forces’ support for a new president under the principle of constitutional succession, under the principle of people power, under the principle of the duty of the Armed Forces to be the guardian and protector of the people your act to protect the republic and the presidency not only last January 19 but also last may 1st, the bravery of our soldiers in Basilan and Sulu, and your unequivocal support in the face of another recent round of coup rumors — these are expressions of the professionalism and excellence that characterize the men and women of the command.

The PM Triple ‘A’ has played a central role in uniting our soldiers and keeping them beyond the pale of partisanship despite the tempting offers of political adventurers. This tempering role played by your organization has been indispensable to our national stability and growth.

The Filipino soldier is the complete professional — hardworking, easily trainable, resolute and duty-bound. This is a tribute to the PMA, and that is why I’m so happy to have had a chance to be with you so many times when I was senator, VP and now President.

Every time we meet at PMA — whether here, at the alumni, or at the current pma — I always have a souvenir, the soldiers, the toy soldiers. With how often I interact with PM Triple ‘A’ and the PMA itself, my collection of toy soldiers is now a platoon. (laughter) so I can lecture those who ask about ‘Balikatan’ about what a platoon is, what a squad is, what a company is, what a battalion is, what a brigade is, what a division is, what an area command is. My new PSG head, Colonel Esperon, class ’74, said. He is surprised when I lecture, I sound like a soldier. I said, I must have been a soldier in my earlier life. But I don’t believe in reincarnation. Anyway, whether I was a soldier in my earlier life or not — ’cause there’s no earlier life, anyway — I am a soldier today because I am the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.

And being your fellow soldier, and being your commander-in-chief certainly, I have had many moments to be able to observe you as an institution, as individuals, and I can truly say that you internalize and live out the values of courage, integrity and loyalty instilled in the Philippine military academy. Your patriotism shines through even when you have hung up your uniforms. Many of you here are past the age of 56 and still you are there, professional as ever in your second career. Truly, you deserve the accolade of our people.

Today, once more, the Armed Forces is in the frontpage in view of the ‘Balikatan Exercises in southern Philippines. And as president and commander-in-chief, I would like to take this opportunity to set the record straight on this matter. And when I was thinking of what I would say today to set the record straight, I decided to organize the record into ten important policy guidelines:

First, ‘Balikatan’ is purely an exercise in joint military training involving professional troops of the Philippines and the United States. It is primarily designed to strengthen the AFP forces. U.S. forces are not authorized to conduct offensive operations.

Second policy, ‘Balikatan’ is also a facet of the global coalition against terrorism. It is strategically propelled this year by the pertinent U.N. resolutions calling on all member states to cooperate in and contribute resources to the campaign against a common threat. We have been consistent in our adherence to these resolutions, which are indispensable to our own national survival and stability.

Third, ‘Balikatan’ is sanctioned by the constitution and the Philippine-U.S. visiting forces agreement.

Fourth, ‘Balikatan’ is backed up by a consensus in the National Security Council, which includes the leadership of both houses of congress. This is an exercise in strengthening both our national security and the political will behind it.

Fifth, the command structure of ‘Balikatan’ consists of separate U.S. and Philippine units interfaced with the chain of command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. At no point in time will U.S. Forces be allowed to operate independently within Philippine territory. At any time the U.S. Forces will have to follow the command of the Philippine commander.

Sixth, the AFP chief of staff has complete control over all forces under ‘Balikatan.’ this is understood at the political and operational levels of both sides. In this exercise, I have the firm assurance of president bush himself that the American troops will take the cue from the Philippine government.

President Bush called me up about four nights ago, and I told him about these matters. And he said that he will be putting some of these things very clearly in writing in a letter to be forthcoming.

Seventh, the ‘Balikatan’ is time-bound. It will last for 6 months involving some 600 U.S. troops. The bulk of the U.S. troops will consist mainly of support service personnel — 250 of the troops will be deployed in Mactan, Cebu to train our personnel in maintenance.

Eighth, 160 U.S. trainors will be deployed in Basilan to observe our soldiers. Two American trainors of these 160 will accompany each AFP company. The Americans will not be involved in combat operations. And the terms of reference will include an enjoinment that they stay at the tactical headquarters when they go out with their troops in the operations of our troops.

Ninth, human rights violations committed in the course of the exercise, if ever — and I hope there will be none — will be severely sanctioned. For this purpose, to ensure this, i am reactivating the presidential commission on human rights headed by the secretary of justice. And I have asked the secretary of justice, in his capacity as chair of the presidential commission on human rights, to organize a western Mindanao committee to closely monitor the situation and to report any violations for proper action by the authorities. Civilian communities are to be protected and given utmost consideration.

Tenth, impact socioeconomic projects will be conducted in the second-half of the six-month cycle. Because, as it is in central Luzon, ‘balikatan’ has a military aspect and a community development aspect.

I would like the secretary of national defense and the AFP chief of staff — who is not here today, but who is on an unofficial mission — to integrate these guidelines in the detailed terms of reference of the exercise and disseminate them throughout the chain of command.

The more observant of our readers would have noticed that ‘exercise Balikatan’ has lifted the stock market to its highest level in one year. ‘Balikatan’ has notched up the prospects of our national security. And with security comes confidence, investment and a good business climate.

In celebration of this year’s General Assembly, I salute you once again my fellow cavaliers, for your contribution to the security that we are enjoying today for the confidence that has been restored today.

I thank you and congratulate you for your excellent work, and for the courageous lives you have lived very well.

And once more on this day, let me declare my unremitting faith in the Filipino soldier, who is part of the great Filipino worker, the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the PM Triple ‘A’.

Let me add, that in my gesture of respect and admiration for the great Filipino soldier on several occasions, I have expressed my hope of raising the salaries of our soldiers to the same level as our teachers. And I am glad to note that with the excellent testimony of Secretary Reyes and the chain of command of the Armed Forces, the bill increasing the pay of officers and enlisted personnel of the Armed Forces to align this pay with the pay of our public school teachers has passed the committee level of the House of Representatives. And I hope you will all — especially those of you who are not, no longer in active service — will campaign with our legislators and help me persuade congress to pass this bill into law as soon as possible.

Let us continue this very important organization towards meaningful change in the armed forces and the entire country.

And on this day, during our General Assembly of PM Triple ‘A’ once again, of the countless times I have told you, I tell you once again, long live you, true partners for progress!

Thank you all very much.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Annual General Membership Meeting of the Philippine Military Academy Alumni Association, Inc. (PMAAAI). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412231105/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7595&Itemid=38