PROMOTING RESPONSIBLE JOURNALISM

Originally, when you invited me, I had asked Cerge to represent me here today and read my message, and I was going to do a video message. But I remembered what he said, I’d been coming every year to join you, I guess this is not the time to break that tradition. First of all to say, thank you because you’re giving us radio time and television time for our avian flu campaign. Thank you for that support for our serving the people.

And second, because as Cerge says, no other leader has been as close to the KBP as I have been since my days as senator. I would also say that after all said and done the KBP as an organization has been supportive of my administration and I thank you for that.

And I’d also like to take this opportunity to express gratification that we have put up together the full resources of government and your organization to stop and solve the violent and cowardly acts on crusading journalists. I’d like to report the 36 cases involving the slaying of journalists have either been disposed of or are under trial, while 26 are under investigation or follow up operations.

I’d like to think that the five million-peso fund set up for slain journalists contributed to the abatement of attacks on media people. If you recall, my share included reward money for information leading to the arrest of the suspects in the killings, while that of Speaker Joe de Venecia was for the mobilization of quick reaction teams composed of media representatives that could immediately investigate and document pertinent cases.

So we’ve worked together on things that have produced results and we’ll continue to produce results. On the other hand, I was recently criticized for disclosing an intelligence report that a broadcast journalist was instrumental in bailing out a terrorist. Terrorism is evil. And I consider my fight against terror as a duty of my presidency.

Our national security is something that you and I must take seriously. I’m disappointed with the precious overly sensitive of its prerogatives when at the same time, many of our journalists arrogated the license to fire away at anybody without even circumstantial evidence.

We must take heed of the media becoming part of the national malaise and a hindrance to development rather than an important solution to our problems. A press that loses credibility as the watchdog of government and the society becomes a drag to democracy rather than a force of freedom. Yes, we must admit that some segments of the media are pushing the negative angle or stories too far and too often.

As I observed in a speech made before the business community earlier this week, there have been a great deal of positive developments that have not been extensively covered by the media. The portrait of a nation on the verge of economic take off is unassailable yet sadly known to most Filipinos. The backdrop of the peso and the market as the best performers in SouthEast Asia give us now the best opportunity to bring the good news to the people so we can reap their confidence beside that of the world, and so that we can do the patriotic task to convince the public on the need for full implementation of economic reforms next year.

On our part, we shall continue fielding non-tax revenue generating measures alongside palpable cuts in unnecessary government spending. Already, our national government has saved some 37 billion pesos from our budget deficit ceiling, mostly because our skillful treasury operations are better bond prices and our stronger peso have reduced our debt by that amount. And that’s where we have been cutting down on our expenditures.

One of the Congressmen yesterday told me, “that’s good news that we are cutting our deficit not because we’re cutting infrastructure spending, not because we’re cutting social services spending.” In fact, we’re using up the full budget for public works. We’re using up the full budget for the PNP. We’re using up the full budget for the DND. We’re using up the full budget for our social services. Where are we saving? It is on debt service.

I invite the officers of the KBP to meet with our economic managers so that you can hear first hand the good news about our country.

Indeed, there is much that the KBP can do; there is much that broadcast media can do because technology is empowering you more and more. In fact today, a historical event is happening here in Baguio City. I’m told by Cerge that for the first time in the Philippines digital FMHD radio is on the air, broadcasting clear… broadcasting clear and clean radio programming on 105.1 megahertz to broadcast world and their technology partners, broadcast electronics and urban as well as our NTC and KBP. Thank you for making radio history this day.

Some things can be historic in one day, other things can affect history but over some period of renewal. And today, I call on you — let us cast aside the ‘bad boy’ image that the press has acquired. Let us restore its glory as the responsible son of a democratic nation. I appeal to you not to be used wittingly or unwittingly as pawns in political games or destabilization schemes. As Cerge said, one appeal of the KBP, what? Is enough politics already? Yes. But the first one to stop being used in politics or in destabilization must be the media itself.

The coverage of kangaroo courts, lynch mobs and witch hunts assails the peace of mind and the hopes of our people. The public wants winners. I know you know that, because you’re always looking at rating’s. The public wants winners. The economy is the only winner here today amidst these losers who carry no public mandate.

Your conference indeed comes at a time when only a strong republic can enforce discipline and the rule of law and at the same time sustain the vibrancy of responsible press freedom.

Well, Cerge says, I’ve always keen close to you. And I say and I acknowledge, as an organization, you’ve always keen close to me. It’s time that we do something constructive about this closeness. It’s time we put our hearts and heads together in a collective exercise to shape the destiny of this republic for the good of the greater number.

And so in conclusion, I leave you with the appeal — I count on you to promote responsible Philippine journalism. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: Adamson University Library