Thank you very much, Attorney Ave Cruz. And I’d like to congratulate you because earlier you talked about so many achievers among the San Beda Law alumni. And I’ll have to add to those achievers, the youngest bar topnotcher, number one bar topnotcher in the history of our country and that is no other than Attorney Avelino Cruz. Congratulations! (Applause)

Justice Acosta, President of the Association; Father de Jesus, Father Rector and President; Attorney Roque, Chairman of the Board of San Beda College; Rudy Robles, another number one bar topnotcher. I remember very well attending the beautiful long gown/black tie dinner dance when he became number one in the bar. Congratulations! Again. (Applause)

I’d like to greet Senator Nene Pimentel and the other elected officials who are here with us tonight. (Applause) and of course, Justice Nachura and the other very distinguished members of the judiciary, (Applause) and to the entire San Beda Law alumni on your 55th founding anniversary. (Applause)

The law alumni association was founded 55 years ago, because those who graduated then represented the first graduates after four years of the founding of the law school in 1948. And it was in 1948, in the then newly formed San Beda College of Law that our very beloved Dean Feliciano Jover Ledesma, as Attorney Ave Cruz quoted, wanted to produce good Christians as well as highly principled lawyers to take their place among the real apostles of justice. And my family is very honored — Arthur, my brother; Kuya Echo, my cousin and I — we are very honored that one of those whom he asked to join was his classmate in U.S.T. law school, my father Diosdado Macapagal, who at that time was not yet in politics. (Applause) my father was the first bar topnotcher from U.S.T. and the second bar topnotcher from U.S.T. was Roberto Concepcion, and Dean Ledesma recruited both of them to teach at the San Beda Law School. (Applause)

There were other legal luminaries, and we have seen the list of those that we honored tonight, from the list of legal luminaries that taught in the San Beda Law School in that first batch. That group has produced one president, two chief justices, one cabinet member, two very distinguished lawyers and one future head of San Beda itself. So, indeed, no wonder San Beda went on to become one of the best law schools in the country. (Applause)

So, we thank the founding fathers of San Beda Law School for their contribution not just to the College of Law but also to the country. Not only are they role models for believing and investing in the Filipino, they produced role models and outstanding Filipinos in the legal profession whether in business or in the practice of law, or in the judiciary, or in the political world. So, congratulations once again to us, the families of the founders. (Applause)

Congratulations! Also to the Jubilarians, to the Golden Jubilarians like undersecretary Spanky Perez, who handles our search committee. Maybe that’s why there are so many San Bedans (laughter) in our government today. (Applause) And Governor Colet whom I’m very happy to see after so many years, and I see also Mel Mathay belonging to the Golden Jubilee batch. (Applause)

I’d like to congratulate also the Silver Jubilarians here in such big force. (Applause) and of course, we know that Winston Garcia is the President of GSIS in our administration. (Applause)

And then of course, Arthur. You see, I’m not a Bedan but I’m a Bedan sister because Arthur, my brother is a Bedan and I have very fond memories of going to the San Beda school fairs because my brother would invite me. (Applause) And Arthur got married in San Beda, in the beautiful church, in the beautiful chapel. And for a long time, it was closed to weddings but now, I’m glad it’s open again because it’s also one of the most beautiful churches in our country. (Applause)

Another Bedan, though not a Bedan from the San Beda Law School, was the late Senator Ninoy Aquino. Of course, there’s Raul Roco who was from the law school. But I mentioned Ninoy Aquino because today happens to be his birthday. (Applause)

And as I was of course recalling the birthday of Ninoy in my own introspection today, I remembered that I recently pardoned one of the soldiers convicted of killing Ninoy. The pardoned convict had turned 70 years old. I pardoned him in accordance with the practice that started with Memorandum Circular 155, dated November 17, 2004. That circular directed the Bureau of Corrections, the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, and the Board of Pardons and Parole to submit to the Office of the President records of inmates who are 70 years old and above for the purpose of extending executive clemency.

One of the reasons why I enunciated this policy of giving clemency to those 70 years and above was that some of the bishops who were ministering to the prisoners as well as the then head of prisons — I believe it was General Dionisio Santiago — were telling me about how crowded the penitentiary was. And General Santiago was the one who said why don’t we decongest it by giving clemency to those who have been there for such a long time or those who probably won’t be a menace to society anymore — those who’ve turned the age of 70.

The same policy forms the basis for my granting executive clemency to the former president, President Estrada. Both a soldier and a former president were convicted according to the rule of law and pardoned according to the rule of law. The rule of law has prevailed and proved that no person is above the law. And no person is below it either because if you’re going to give that privilege to one then you give it to all similarly situated. And the rule of law must continue to prevail regarding the case of Mr. Estrada so that justice is served and the law upheld.

It is time for the nation to move on and focus on the issues that are important to our future: creating more jobs, lowering prices or at least preventing them from rising, providing affordable housing, and providing access to education for all the children of our nation.

The preoccupation with politics, past and present, does not promote the stability, policy continuity, security, and peace and order that we will need to continue to move our country forward. After all, we all need to fight poverty because poverty is a great injustice to a significant number of our people.

Eradicating poverty is the central mission of this government — many of whom whose members are Bedans — and our society. And as we enter the holiday season, it’s essential that every person of means helps those in need. And the government is going to do everything in its power to be a catalyst for this.

Rice is not only a staple for our people, it’s symbolic of our ability to deliver our promise to feed those less fortunate. So, we are committed to ensuring that the needy throughout our nation have access to affordable rice during this important holiday season. And that’s what we’re going to work on. Because we cannot say that we have moved forward as a nation if we don’t lift up the poor and the hungry among us. We must be a society measured by our ability to live our faith. Just as the San Beda Lawyers are measured by your ability to live out the beautiful mission statement that was read by Attorney Ave Cruz.

Our long-term vision for the Philippines is to be on the threshold of first world in 20 years. And to do so, we will need a robust middle-class. We will need world class infrastructure. We will need strong institutions of government. Yet in the near term, we must address the very real issues of hunger and poverty that affect us here and now.

Those living in poverty have declined, thank God! But we must accelerate the trend to eliminate poverty more aggressively. That’s why during the holiday season and beyond, we will do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most and work hard to protect the poor from high prices. And I ask you, Bedans, to be partners in taking the Philippines to the threshold of the first world. (Applause)

I was so happy when I was listening to our earlier speakers today and they talked about Father Rector and when Father Rector took over, and you all applauded because I’m sure you know more than I what it meant. That he said, what he was going to do was to work on unity. And that’s wonderful because with a people united in working for prosperity, as with San Beda united in working for advancing the San Beda type of Christian education, we can succeed.

I’m glad that Father de Jesus wants to work on unity. Unity is a real aspiration that manifests itself through progress. Whether it is the nation or a school people want to know that we are strong, we are stable, we are growing whether as a nation or as a school.

Is everyone benefiting equally when it comes to the nation? Is there social justice in the land? Do people feel good about themselves and the society in which they live?

Unity of purpose is driven by a common desire to know where we are going, whether it is as a school or as a nation. That our leaders are strong, honest, hardworking and committed to the best interests, whether of the school or the nation.

Unity is about action, not discussion. It’s about working together and not just talking together. Within unity, of course, there is and must be room for dissent, even conflict as part of the process of moving the nation forward because after all we are a democracy.

But at the end of the day, unity is measured by collective hope, commitment and confidence. And so, I count on the Bedan lawyers to help in promoting unity, hope, commitment and confidence both in your beloved, our beloved institute of San Beda and also in our beloved nation.

Thank you very much and happy anniversary to all of you!

Thank you. (Applause)

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria-Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the San Beda College Law Alumni Association Homecoming and Fellowship Night. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135834/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2267&Itemid=38