Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, President of the Philippines, During the distribution of projects to NCR beneficiaries.

Thank you very much Chairperson Bayani Fernando for your introduction.

And I greet our Congressmen and mayors who sponsored your premiums, your health insurance. Here is Congressman Ricky Sandoval of Navotas-Malabon; here is Congressman Chuck Mathay of Quezon City. And the mayors who sponsored you to enter PhilHealth, Mayor Vicencio of Malabon; Mayor Carlos of Valenzuela; Mayor Freddie Tiñga of Taguig; Mayor Marides Fernando of Marikina; I saw that Caloocan, Rey isn't here now but we have him with us this afternoon so you were sent here because he also enrolled many in health insurance. And I also want to greet the private sector who helped pay for your premiums, including the officials of Petron corporation, they are here, let's greet and thank them.

And of course our Cabinet members who are in charge of our programs for the poor, here is Joey Lina of DILG, Dinky Soliman of DSWD, Manolet Dayrit of DOH; as well as Ed Pamintuan, he's not in health, he's in housing of NHA and also President Salud of Home Mortgage — maybe they will advertise their housing for you. But the one in charge of our health insurance for you is Dr. Pinkoy Duque:

And all of you, our beneficiaries, thank you for being here. You number 50,000 this morning. Thank you very much for attending our PhilHealth distribution.

Yesterday I mentioned in the State of the Nation Address that the targets I said last year were achieved and many were even surpassed. Of all the targets, the most effective, most successful program for the poor is none other than our health insurance for the poor.

Because last year I said our target was to have… Oh, another sponsor from Quezon City just arrived, Congresswoman Nanette Daza.

Last year in my State of the Nation Address I said that one of the most difficult things for the poor is when you get sick, right? Medicine is so expensive, doctors are so expensive, especially hospitalization is so expensive. That is a heavy burden in the life of the poor.

So I said we will give you relief. The rich, the workers, they have health insurance: the rich pay for insurance in private insurance, when they get sick the insurance pays their bill. Workers have medicare so their boss also pays for insurance and it is also deducted from their salary premium. But what about those without a salary? What about the self-employed poor? What about the unemployed? What about the urban poor?

So I said last year that we will strive to have a target of 500,000 urban poor with health insurance. When we counted, it wasn't 500,000, but four million 500,000 have health insurance after one year.

Look for example at Mayor Lito Atienza who gave our welcoming remarks. As I understand it last year Manila wasn't included in the National Health Insurance, from zero to 18,000 now. So 18,000 of the 50,000 are from Manila so you now have health insurance.

These 50,000 here today are families, you are the head of the family. But if we average that there are five members in a family, you represent about 50,000 is 250,000 from Metro Manila who are now covered by health insurance.

How will you benefit? When you have a health insurance card, when you get sick or your child, your spouse gets sick, if you go to a national government hospital everything is free — the doctor is free, the operation is free and even the medicine is free as long as it's from the hospital pharmacy. So you don't have to pay anything as long as you go to a national government hospital.

Now some of you want to go to a private hospital, it's still possible because sometimes your illness is severe, maybe the equipment of the national government hospital can't handle it, so you need to go to a private hospital. This will still help. If you go to those class hospitals that have a lot of modern equipment and your illness is very specialized, it's called a tertiary hospital — up to 16,000 pesos will also be paid by the government. So you have a big relief there.

If you go to a secondary hospital, a somewhat ordinary hospital but the national government hospital can't handle it, the government will still pay up to 11,000 pesos. So there is also a big relief in your treatment.

How do you enroll in health insurance? Ah, we have another sponsor here, Congressman Joey Hizon of Manila. Isn't this place where we are, Congressman Joey's district? Congressman, that's you, right? Okay.

How do you enroll in health insurance? The payment for health insurance is supposed to be 200 a month? One hundred a month. One hundred a month for health insurance, 1,200 a year. Now, if you are an employee in a factory or department, it is deducted from your salary so you are automatically covered by Medicare. But for those who don't receive a salary, those who are self-employed, farmers, the urban poor, those with various incomes that are not salary-based, how do you enroll? You can enroll in Philhealth: you can pay 100 pesos a month yourselves. But the poor can't even afford to pay 100 pesos a month, so this is where our local governments come in, this is where our businessmen come in.

You know, these people from Petron here are just one example of many businessmen and many NGOs who are helping this program. The 100 pesos premium that you should pay to enroll in health insurance, if you are too poor, they will pay it for you, you won't even have to pay the 100 pesos a month.

So almost all of the 50,000 here were just given your cards. That's a gift to you – a gift from the local government, a gift from the congressman and from the corporation with a foundation that wants to help the poor. This is because we made this a key program of the Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo administration.

Because as I said yesterday, we want to have a strong republic. But a strong republic is for the weak, for those who cannot afford to get treatment for themselves because of poverty. So my friends, I congratulate you all. I hope you use your health cards well. And when you go to the hospital for treatment, don't forget, because you are loved by a strong republic.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the NCR Awarding Project to Beneficiaries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412224831/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8345&Itemid=38