Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Inaugural Meeting and Induction of Directors and Officers of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI)

[Delivered at the Grand Ballroom, Hotel Intercontinental, Makati City, February 14, 2007]

Thank you very much Donald. And thank you… As chairman, congratulations! As Chairman of PCCI.

Congratulations! To Sammy and to all of the other officers and directors of the PCCI for this year.

Peter Favila and the other officials of the Philippine government; excellencies of the diplomatic corps; movers and shakers of trade and commerce and industry; ladies and gentlemen.

Your changing of the guards comes at a high point in our national life. And I would like to thank you because you kept the flame of growth burning brightly and steadily through challenging times.

I acknowledged your loyalty to the Filipino people about the fall of partisanship. And because there are businessmen like you, I’m optimistic about the future of the nation and the well-being of our people.

Our national agenda is designed to move the nation forward toward greater political stability, economic prosperity and peace and order. The national agenda is focused on creating good paying jobs, stable prices, and bringing the benefits of a strong economy to every single Filipino.

You, of course, are the movers and shakers who will create jobs. Between my Pasig river ferry trip and my appointment here with you, I went to signal hills in Taguig and inaugurated one of the — signal village, I mean — one of the what we call barangay food terminal, where the people of the village — and that’s a big village, a hundred thousand population — the people of the barangay are enjoying prices of their vegetables and pork and other meat products about maybe some of them ten pesos average below what the market outside sells. And that is because we have reduced the cost of delivery from farm to market.

This is an example of payback to the people of our national agenda. Our national agenda is a pro-poor, pro-growth, pro-modernization agenda.

And I thank the PCCI. We’ve done so much together. Together, we have been working tirelessly to build a modern nation that will one day take its rightful place beside the first world countries.

Sammy said earlier, we want to dream of a seven percent growth rate. That is indeed in our Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan. Except that Sammy said, except for the usual five percent. It’s usual in my administration but not before.

Lest you forget — before you and I were working together — it used to be four or three or two or one, and sometimes negative. And in fact, it is the first time for six years, every quarter experienced a growth rate. And that is around five percent, once even six percent.

You and I have a vision for the day when all Filipinos can choose to live and work here in the Philippines, close to family and friends, owning a home with a high quality of life. Through strong international alliances which you helped developed. You’ve gone with me on many of my trips abroad. You have helped me to dialogue with many of our visitors here. You forged so many partnerships with chambers from different parts of the world. You have forged partnerships, we have forged partnerships that have led to billions of investments and help create five million new jobs.

The president of Singapore is here bringing two major investments: one, in an industrial estate; and one in a condominium hotel right here in Taguig.

And we have strengthen, you and I again, our military and security alliances in the region and the world. This has led to major gains for peace in Mindanao; the isolation and tracking down of known terrorists like number one and number two Abu Sayyaf; and a reduction in violent crime.

And indeed, what you have helped me do strengthen our ties internationally has, as I said earlier, led to investments and jobs, led to peace and development in Mindanao.

And that is why today, I take the opportunity once again for us to extol two auspicious developments in the international front: one is the release of our kidnapped workers in Nigeria; and the other is the advent of the first major breakthrough in the six-party talks on North Korea.

On our 24 rescued workers in Nigeria, I would like to personally thank, Nigerian President Obasanjo for taking a direct hand in the release of our nationals even as we pray for the eventual release of the lady and the sub-contractor who are still held.

From the start, we never doubted the capability of the Nigerian government to rescue our workers. And I also wish to commend our diplomatic personnel for being focused and faithful to their task. As soon as the crisis erupted, we sent Ambassador Roy Cimatu to the area, and Ambassador Umpa, our resident ambassador there who has been working very hard. And just yesterday, Undersecretary Conejos arrived to put the finishing touches to the talks with the Nigerian government for the release of our workers.

At the same time, I wish to convey my congratulations to the nations that negotiated the landmark agreement leading to the de-escalation of nuclear arms development in North Korea. This is a good start to pull this armament and the full stabilization of the Korean peninsula which have been in the priority agenda of ASEAN and East-Asia for sometime. The Philippines and ASEAN — and may I convey again the thanks of our ASEAN neighbors, because the president of Singapore was just here, especially to the people of Cebu for the warm welcome and great hospitality you gave them during the summit — the Philippines and ASEAN will continue to extend all support to achieve the aims of peace in the Korean peninsula and stability in the Korean peninsula through peaceful and constructive means. We are for a safer world for Filipinos, many of whom are in Korea, and a more secure and stable region.

The Philippines is a strong player in world security, stability and harmony.

But I hope for the day when you, the business community, of course with government, working to provide the environment in which you can expand your investments; when you the business community create enough good jobs in the Philippines so that hardworking Filipinos do not have to go abroad for work. I see a day when going abroad for a job is a career choice not the only option for work.

With your support, our administration and I have made a tough but necessary decisions to strengthen our economy. And again, I thank the PCCI because you were there through all those difficult times on our tax reforms. As a result of your support which helped us to pass such difficult legislation for the first time in a long time, the government is doing what average Filipino household should be doing — balancing the budget and avoiding going into debt.

In order to balance the budget in 2008, our economic managers were projecting that we should have a deficit in 2007 of only 64 billion pesos, while our deficit last year was 63 billion pesos.

Do we want to advance the balancing of the budget to this year? Well, let me say that’s already been advanced for 2010. So I would rather, rather than balancing the budget for this year, I would rather spend that extra 64 billion pesos to more infrastructure and more social services for the people. Social services to include education, health care, microfinance and also expenditures to modernize our military, for the first time since the soldiers cannot remember, we’re going to buy brand new helicopters.

As a result of what we have been doing in fact to modernize and professionalize our military and our police, you are the ones who tell me that our neighborhoods, barangays and the nation are more secure, more peaceful, more stable. And that is all a result of our working together to fight crime. Because during the dark days of kidnapping, you, the PCCI and the federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of commerce, were the ones who helped me, who begin the advisory council of our police in order to fight this and other heinous crimes.

And indeed, your support has enabled the government to increase the payback to the people. Your work on developing small and medium enterprise has of course increased the payback to the people. And our record lows in interest rates, I hope will further increase that payback so that jobs will be created, not only by the big magnates who composed your council of advisers now — and congratulations! To you for getting them — but even by the small and medium enterprises, many of whom are members in your various chapters all over the country.

I’m very proud of our fruitful and rewarding partnership. And I guess it’s a good time to have your induction today, Valentine’s day, because indeed, you have been a very, very good partner.

Maraming salamat. Congratulations!

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). PGMA’s Speech during the Inaugural Meeting and Induction of Directors and Officers of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PCCI). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412151626/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1919&Itemid=38