Thank you very much, Secretary Dolfo del Rosario and former ULAP President.

Our honorees tonight — Dolfo, Joey and Al, who’s on the way here represented by Alvin — our very important leaders of the Union of Local Authorities: Ric Aumentado, Monching Guico, Leo Bustamante, Jerry Treñas, Allan Zulueta, Carlo Fortuna, Bistek Bautista, James Marty Lim, Marianne Villegas; the different leaders of the local governments; our guests, the leaders of the business community, ladies and gentlemen.

Last week, my office, the office of the president, received a donation from two children, Zeus and Raya Soriano of Tiaong, Quezon, who sent one-half of their savings from each of their piggy banks.

Allow me to read my reply to Zeus who sent me P683.45 which I turned over to the National Treasury:

My dear Zeus,

I extol in my heart your sincere love for the country and concern for your fellow citizens despite your youth.

I hope you serve as an example to those older than you, especially those who do not want to pay taxes or engage in corruption in the government.

You can rest assured that half of your savings, amounting to P683.45, will go to our Bureau of the Treasury, which manages the wealth of our country.

Again, thank you very much and it is a great honor for me to accept your help for our government.

In the same manner, I also asked the business community tonight to be here, to thank them also because a few months ago, soon after I announced the fiscal crisis, they came up with the Bayanihan fund. Thank you very much for your support. And in the same manner, I thank you, my friends in the LGUs for also responding to the fiscal crisis that I announced three months ago.

I’m grateful for your support for our comprehensive tax reforms, the one that you… The manifesto that you presented to the Senate today, the manifesto that you will present to the house tomorrow because these tax reforms are the road out of the crisis.

And I am grateful that you even offered different formulas for deferring or freezing or… Your IRA as a contribution to the economy and the national interest. Whether I will need to take you up on your offer depends on many things. But if indeed we get to pass those eight tax measures, and after all the IRA is the vested and legal right of the local governments, hopefully we will not have to go that far. But I am grateful for your commitment — deferment or no deferment, freezing or no freezing — for your commitment to reorient your development funds to support my 10-point legacy agenda. Thank you for that.

I’m also informed that there is a circular to mayors not to issue business permits unless applicants are certified by the BIR to have paid all their taxes, tama ‘yon Monching? Thank you very much for that. And I’m glad the business community is here to hear that.

Three months ago, I was heavily criticized when I declared a fiscal crisis. But the people have a right to know, and the people have a right also to hear the boundaries of that crisis: it is a crisis if we persist in financing our needs through relentless borrowings, because soon the bulk of our budget will end up servicing our debt.

And if we keep doing that the poor, many of whom are your very own constituents, will suffer in greater numbers and deeper magnitudes.

Not that the solutions are now all being implemented, but a few days ago, I informed the public that while we still have a problem, the solutions are in sight, including the commitment from the business community, the local governments, the legislature, and the ordinary citizens, and congress. Therefore, we have passed the most critical stage. It’s a crisis when you feel that there’s no end in sight. But it becomes just a problem when you recognize it but you know where you’re going and the end is in sight.

Again I was criticized. Too early, some said. But this turnaround towards a solution is not the handiwork of the presidency alone. It was the accumulation of positive responses, the call to patriotism swiftly answered by various institutions and sectors, the ones I mentioned earlier — oh, there’s Julius Herrera, I was looking for him, President of the Vice Governors League. Good evening, Julius — which resulted in visible moves towards accomplishments that now spark our confidence in our capacity to solve the problem.

The synergy of actions after that declaration I made was a spontaneous, exuberant response by the people, the Congress, the Senate, the local governments, the executive branch.

And in turn, I acknowledge your call for assistance. You want assistance in the promotion of investments, you want assistance in tourism, you want assistance in special economic zones, you want assistance in agriculture. And here is the business community to listen to that call.

As local leaders, you do know that business goes where it feels most welcome not only by prospective clients but also by the community at large. The challenge is how you can convert your provinces, your cities, your municipalities, your barangays into highly competitive and attractive business hubs.

As I said, here, I have several of our business leaders. I asked Secretary Purisima to invite them, and I invited them so that they can interact with you and also because I want to repeat before you, the local authorities, and before you, the business leaders, what I said a few days ago in Iloilo before the pro-poor NGOs and the religious leaders: “I’m optimistic about our nation and our people. But to fight poverty and grow our economy, we must purge the system of corruption, we must eliminate government waste, we must increase tax collection, we must invest in our nation through revenue increases dedicated to job creation, education and health care.”

The root cause of our situation today is a festering, entrenched culture of corruption. Like a cancer, it must be cut out if the patient is to survive.

We must collect stolen riches and put corrupt officials on trial for their criminal behavior whoever they are, whoever they work and live.

We cannot ask for the people to sacrifice if the government and the rich get away with crimes that hurt the people and their nation.

We’re all part of the cycle of corruption and despair and must join hands to root out this evil that is strangling our nation.

The nation will grow and prosper tomorrow for the tough decisions we make today.

As we raise new taxes, we need to be assured that the rich pay their fair share.

People who owe their taxes need to pay their taxes. And I ask the business leaders to come here tonight because I want to thank you, business leaders, for helping bring an end to the era of dodging our obligation to the nation.

Of course, many people still don’t pay their fair share of taxes today, either because they are tax evading or because loopholes in the law allow them to avoid taxes.

The government is making sure that all these tax evaders and tax avoiders pay their taxes and meet their obligation to the nation through executive action and legislative action.

Through executive action, the government is increasing the efficiency of its collections and modernizing its technology to collect more taxes.

The people also deserve to know that their money, their tax money is well-spent, and that any new tax money goes to real projects to help the people in education, job creation and health care.

I therefore want to emphasize that all new taxes will be designated funds or dedicated funds or earmarked funds, whatever term you want to use, and they will go straight to dedicated projects for the people so that they can’t be diverted by politicians and bureaucrats and misspent or used to line their pockets through corruption.

We need new revenue to build up the nation and get our economy on solid footing. Without the new funds, we will not be able to invest in our pro-poor agenda and make it a reality.

Dedicated tax increases are merely one element of righting the country and must go hand in hand with measures to weed out corruption and increase revenue collection.

So, where will the taxes go? They will be dedicated, earmarked for job creation, for education and for health. That’s where all new taxes will go.

We are severing our ties to a decadent past where government spending resulted from largely political rather than economic decisions. And together with ULAP, I’m confident we can make government work and serve the people instead of the other way around.

We are all in this together.

Raya and Zeus wrote me because they felt responsible for their country’s future. From these young patriots, we see the future and it is luminous in its prospects.

From a fiscal crisis three months ago — because nobody wanted to face it, that’s why I have to point it out — to a fiscal problem because now we are all facing it, the fiscal turnaround is in sight.

And our partnership will move the Philippines forward from a realm of poverty into a realm of prosperity and dignity, you and I, local officials.

You and I, local officials together with the business community, the legislature and the small citizens, you and I, will go through this historic journey as partners for political stability and unprecedented economic growth.

To you all, congratulations! And thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). PGMA’s Speech during the Oath Taking of Officers of the League of Provinces of the Philippines-Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines (LPP-ULAP). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615133006/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5750&Itemid=38