Thank you very much Secretary Dureza for your introduction.

Governor Miguel Dominguez, thank you very much also for your welcome and the contribution from the province of Sarangani for the victims of the floods in Metro Manila, thank you for the help; Vice Governor Solon and of course our host here, Mayor Yap and Mrs. Yap, thank you very much for your invitation to me; Vice Mayor Wata; all our fellow officials here in Glan; our two national officials, Commissioner of Customs Boy Morales and Commissioner of Immigration Nonoy Libanan who are here to open the CIQ One-Stop Shop in our Glan International Port today. Our fellow citizens here in Glan, Happy Anniversary to all of you!

That is why this is my third visit here in Glan, so my first as senator now, twice as President. And one reason why I am happy with every visit here is because all of you have great support for me. And it's like what Secretary Dureza said, I, as President, love Glan, I, as President, am loved here in Glan. Thank you very much to all of you.

Thank you for the help in the elections because it's like… like what Mayor Yap always says, I always win here in Glan and thank you for your support in the elections and not just in the elections because you have a lot of support for my administration, especially for the good things you have done here for the progress of the city, the province, the region of Mindanao in our country.

In this your 95th Anniversary, we have a very important milestone, your new One-Stop Shop Action Center to serve the Customs, Immigation, Quarantine and Security needs of the BIMP-EAGA. And for your security, I also want to express my congratulations to all of you because there is peace and order here in your city of Glan. You no longer have NPA, you no longer have MILF, you no longer have MNLF, you have no Abu Sayyaf, so congratulations on the peace here in Glan. And we also thank our soldiers headed by General Rey Mapago here, our policemen and the other law enforcers.

And because your peace and order here is beautiful and we now have a good One-Stop Action Center in our port, our international port, this is worthy of the cooperation and commerce of the BIMP-EAGA, our Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines-East Asia Growth Area. On my previous visit here, we opened your international port, and Governor Dominguez and I and Mayor Yap saw off the first boat going to North Sulawesi which is only 150 kilometers away. So bringing goods, coke and other beverages to the Northern part of Indonesia. Now, now that we have the One-Stop Action Center for quarantine and immigration and customs, there will be more trade, and Glan will be one of the most important international ports for our BIMP-EAGA progress.

Therefore, my only purpose to you is that I am sure of your support to continue the infrastructure that will attract investors and speed up the delivery of food and goods to various places in the region, especially our flagship project here, the Jose Abad Santos-Glan-Sarangani Cooperation Triangle or JAGS-CT. We started this project way back in 2006. With our start, the provision of funds for the Glan-Abad Santos Road, it was completed in 2006, the Sarangani portion, the Glan portion, congratulations! Now the Abad Santos portion is under construction. But for me, a big result of our new road is that the products coming from and going to Southern Davao del Sur, in Abad Santos will now pass through the port of Glan because of the road.

I also wanted to say that we should continue to invest in education, health services, and other necessary services so that progress reaches the whole country. But here in Glan, before I even asked you, you have already done it because I now know that here… in Glan, school is free from grade school to high school, even to college. So, congratulations to Mayor Yap for his investment in education, and here in Glan, hospitalization is free, so your health services to our people are also good. And because… so I asked Mayor, maybe your income in the city is very big because you have done all of this, all these services you have are not just ordinary compared to other cities.

However, what is important is prioritization. There are no luxuries in the government's operation, everything is for development and improvement, with no graft and corruption in procurement, so there is no waste of funds. We have seen that with good governance, there is progress here in Glan. You should really be the international port of Southern Philippines going to BIMP-EAGA.

Many thanks and congratulations to all of you!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2009). President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s speech during the 95th Foundation Day Anniversary of Glan, Sarangani and the 10th Lubi-Lubi Festival. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615134147/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=26442&Itemid=38