Thank you, Congressman Benny, Bishop Benny for your introduction. Thank you for inviting me to be here in this festival of praise.

Tonight, indeed, we gather in praise. Praise Jesus he is so good. And I would like to praise the Metropolitan Bible Baptist church for your 30th anniversary.

And to say tonight, to all of you, that I also have much to thank Jesus for. I thank Jesus because he has given you to me especially the biblemode. I thank Jesus for your steadfast commitment to the rule of law. I thank Jesus for Congressman Benny’s speech that he will make on Monday on the rule of law. I thank Jesus for Benny Abante who has been a voice of reason and principles.

I thank Jesus that he has touched the hearts of our people not to seek the turmoil of the streets even though they’re not always happy. I thank Jesus that he touches the hearts of our people to keep to the rule of law, and to fight poverty not through tossing blame but through hard work.

I thank Dr. Janney for reminding us that our life is not futile because Jesus is there and he has saved us. Because our life is not futile, I guess each one of us has to examine what does the lord want each one of us to do as we go to this journey, to this temporary home, to our permanent home in heaven.

In my case, the Lord may be president. And since my very first day as president, I set broad economic, political and social reforms as my goal, as the mission that I see the Lord gave me to do in this temporary home. Because we are not in heaven, we are on earth and there is so much imperfection. I saw these goals as my contribution to the salvation of a country hurting from generations of poverty.

I need Jesus to continue to save us. Today our people seem to live in two countries: one, a country that is poised and equipped for economic take off with our budget deficit going down. But the other country is the one constantly held back by degenerating political structures where inquiries, supposed to be in aid of legislation, are used instead to harass and to bring down constituted authority. Structures that prevent us from achieving sustainable growth. And I ask the lord to continue the salvation that he’s made when he died on the cross for us to manifest itself that salvation in helping survive this degeneration.

We are here on our way to our permanent home. But as we go there, each one of us has a job to do. I have a job to do and because Jesus the Lord already died for us, he has given us the grace, the amazing grace that we need and I call upon that grace, the grace to do my job well.

I thank Jesus because he gives energy to me. And I thank Jesus because he gave me the support of congress. Because Jesus gave me the support of congress, my administration was able to pull off the first phase of our economic reforms. Now, we are on the second phase that will bring to our poor the schools, the water, the electricity, the health services and other benefits of the First Phase. And I call upon the Lord and I claim his salvation that we will be able to provide this to his poor.

I claim his salvation, even us and through the new challenges posed by the sky rocketing oil prices in the world market, we rely on God’s amazing grace to complete a remaining economic reforms. I praise Jesus because his people are waking up to the call for political change to bring about permanent positive change.

And I praise Jesus and I call on Him and I claim His amazing grace for a fresh start for the nation, from the economic travails that are due not only to the challenges in the world but also the political storm that symbolizes the degenerated political system.

Even if I find that I have to govern in such a degenerated political system, I know and you refresh my memories, dear pastors and preachers, that his grace is sufficient.

I thank Jesus for giving us the grace that is sufficient. Sufficient for constant and open dialogue as an instrument to bridge the differences among us. Much of the things we have been doing together, together with the evangelical churches has been about the dialogue or inter-faith dialogue. Dialogue among the faiths, dialogue among the tribes, dialogue among the political ideologies that thrive in this land. And I ask Jesus to transform that dialogue into the unity we need to do his will on our road to heaven.

I know people await, await their blessings in heaven. At the same time, on this temporary journey towards heaven, our people also await governance that will deliver the nation from stagnation. And on my part, I claim the sufficient grace to be able to employ… Continue to employ dialogue in governance, to listen to the voice of the Filipino people just as I dialogue with god through prayer and discernment.

I was listening to the song of our young people tonight from U.P. and it said: ” when I have no one to talk to, where do I go? Where do I turn? ” that song is so meaningful to me because many times I am alone, I have no one to talk to, no one human to talk to. But I have someone who is always there to talk to, and if I pray hard enough I can even hear his silent voice in my ear.

And so tonight, before you who love Jesus and before you who have shown so often your love for me as your sister in Jesus, let me proclaim once again my trust is in the Lord Jesus and in his divine will.

Pray for me that his amazing grace will live in the work that I need to do for the Filipino people.

Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2005). PGMA’s Speech during the “Jesus Saves Festival of Praise” and 30th Anniversary of the Metropolitan Bible Baptist Church (MBBC) and Ministries. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615092641/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=5119&Itemid=38