Maraming salamat, thank you very much Secretary Vince Perez.

Father Silva, General Manager of Electric Cooperatives; newly inducted officers of PHILRECA, NAGMEC and NEA Council of Leaders; officers and staff of NEA and DOE, ladies and gentlemen, my beloved countrymen.

I just came from Marinduque. Their big problem is the PPA. I explained to them that the President’s power is to lower the PPCA which is part of the PPA. There will be no PPCA for small islands like Marinduque, so there is nothing to lower the PPCA there. Because from the beginning, from the start, small islands were already subsidized by NAPOCOR. I explained to them that the subsidy for Marinduque is almost P10 per kilowatt hour. Where else can we find a way to lower the electricity rate in provinces like Marinduque? The answer is here in our meeting today.

Only the Energy Regulatory Commission or the utility distributors themselves, such as the electric cooperatives, can lower the PPA. That is why today, I have promulgated Executive Order 119, which I signed last August 28. This E.O. conditionally condones the energy generation-related loans of our electric cooperatives. We want to drive down the cost of electricity in the rural areas to ease further the burdens of our people, and to perk up investments in the countryside.

I am hereby, by my promulgation conditionally condoning 18 billion pesos worth of loans, often tucked into the electric bills reaching our consumers. This condonation, and the conditions that go with it, are bold decisions. But bold decisions make a strong Philippine republic.

The condonation I am granting is conditional, because in return we now demand better services, reforms and the permanent commitment to integrity and transparency. The majority of the cooperatives, including the cooperative today, this morning — the Marinduque Electric Cooperative. Is the Marinduque Electric Cooperative here? No? But they weren't there either — have largely met these standards, and the condonation in those well-behaved or norm following cooperatives can proceed without further pre-requisites. Just make sure you pass on your savings in the form of lower electric bills.

Some cooperatives are complaining about the conditions set forth in the Executive Order, but my answer is — strong institutions require strong discipline. And a strong Philippine republic requires strong institutions. We cannot have wimps in an industry that is pivotal to global competitiveness. It is a tight field. One must shape up or ship out. For one, the revocation clause in this EO is not onerous. Rather, it is a challenge and an opportunity to surmount the odds.

As president of a strong Philippine republic, I would be wrong to condone massive loans to the government without exacting a greater public benefit in return.

This is my bill of particulars: transparency in all transactions immediate sanctions for violations of NEA rules and regulations speedy action on negative audit reports efficient, reliable power service dramatic reduction of systems losses acceptable levels of collection efficiency fully justified electric rates.

Corruption will not be tolerated. Our people deserve the best. You have elected the best and the brightest in your group to the leadership of PHILRECA and NAGMEC. I shall gladly work with them.

Allow me, however, to personally congratulate the person who above all has valiantly pursued the ideals that have spurred this meeting. His sense of sacrifice and commitment to reforms is undisputed. He has embraced a life of service that speaks of deep devotion to our republic.

I refer to father Francisco Silva, he started his work as administrator of the NEA a year and a day ago on 9/11. So, he is the terrorist of the inefficient cooperatives. And I ask for your full and unrelenting support for him. He has been with us for one year of pride and achievement. Oh, two day, it’s already the 13th. He rescued AKELCO and Boracay and lighted up the tourism industry. He started the rescue of the five cooperatives, the five areas where we have those who stood-up to be recognized. He has rescued them from darkness. On a higher plane, he brought the light of honesty and transparency to the rural electrification sector.

I trust Father Silva. I trust in his noble intentions and his competence to get the job done. Together with Vince Perez, he is taking the industry to new heights of service and excellence.

This event affirms our focus to turn our economic priorities to the domestic market and to the small and medium enterprises. That is what we will focus on promoting this next twelve months. We are turning our economic priorities inward as we seek new horizons of productivity in the countryside to drive the wheels of development. And I am glad you are here as our partners.

Under Father Silva’s leadership, we shall prevail against the elements that have so long run this industry aground. We shall provide new hope to our people. We shall win the battle against stagnation and poverty. Thus, to our electric cooperatives, and especially to Father Silva, I say: stay with me. I need you to help me build a strong Philippine republic.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2002). PGMA’s Speech during the Signing Ceremony of Executive Order 119 and Induction of Officers. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100409211609/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=8383&Itemid=38