Thank you very much Secretary Puno for your introduction. Thank you very much also for that… You came here for Christmas even though your family lives abroad, they came here because we want to avoid another Peninsula. (laughter/applause) Thank you. Please sit down.

General Razon, our chief of police; (applause) General Versoza who is now in charge of housing. He used to be an enforcer, according to Secretary Puno, now he’s a housing manager; (applause) General Barias whom everyone calls Richard Gerey. (laughter/applause) We were together at a Christmas party last night, the singing, Gerey’s dancing was like Richard Gere in Chicago. (laughter) But I said after Peninsula there’s a ‘k.’ (applause)

Mayor Tinga of Taguig City. (applause) Taguig is truly a Global City, Mayor Tinga, (applause) and is a big help to the police, hasn’t given them any headaches. In fact, one selling point of Taguig — the only rallies in Taguig are the “go kart” rallies; (laughter/applause) Attorney Joe Tale, the Chairman of Gawad Kalinga (applause) and other officials of Gawad Kalinga; other government officials, here is Thelsa Biolena representing DSWD; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

We are all happy that our brave police officers are together under the leadership of the number one chief of police, Director Sonny Razon. (applause) And we are here because your courageous and faithful defense of the country and the constitution deserves a reward from the people. (applause) That’s why we are glad to award the latest infrastructure of the PNP for good housing for our police men and women in Metro Manila.

This is the first of, as we heard, seventeen housing buildings to be built in Camp Bagong Diwa. General Versoza’s presentation was good, wasn’t it? That was to ask for an additional fund. (laughter/applause) But I told Ronnie Puno, our budget projections should have around 50 billion in deficit by the end of November. But instead of a 50 billion deficit, we have a 12.0 billion surplus. (applause) so I told Ronnie, ask Nonoy Andaya for what you need this month of December from what you presented. (applause) so that these buildings, which are so beautiful, are also in Gawad Kalinga colors, will be followed by others here in Taguig, and those mentioned Camps, Panopio in Quezon City — I asked Ronnie, where is Panopio? — across the street from Araneta Center, imagine how beautiful the location is.

In San Miguel, Bulacan. What is the history of this San Miguel Bulacan? It is a large property, 1,600 hectares, three times the size of Taguig, right, Freddie? That was foreclosed by a bank, offered to the Central Bank as dacion en pago and the Central Bank gave it to the national government as a dividend instead of a cash dividend. So this 1,600 was divided into four parts — 400 hectares for the police; (applause) 400 hectares for the soldiers; (applause) 400 hectares for the teachers; (applause) and 400 hectares for other government employees. (applause) so that will really be a big government city, and are you starting land improvement already?

That one in Camp Castañeda, in Silang, Cavite. That’s behind the PNP Academy. There’s a lot of land behind the PNP Academy. And if you have a house there, it’s like you’re already in Tagaytay, so it’s a very beautiful place. And the one in Baras, Rizal, that’s what the chief of police Sonny showed, he has a model in front, it’s a new development.

And we thank the Gawad Kalinga foundation and salute — (applause) those Gawad Kalinga colors are very characteristic, those benetton colors, we call them Gawad Kalinga colors — and we also salute the housing board, especially the Chairman, Deputy Director General Jess Verzosa, because this building was completed early. (applause)

And as the year ends, it symbolizes that it’s time for the nation to move on and focus on issues that are important to our future: Creating more jobs, including the recruitment of police officers; keeping prices down. So here, on the roof, together with the Gawad Kalinga program, you will plant vegetables there to help reduce demand and keep prices down; (applause) providing access to education for all our children; and providing affordable housing.

It’s wise to address the root cause of the perennial issues on performance, efficiency and discipline by first making sure that the basic needs of individual personnel are taken care of. Then the other dimensions of transformation programs will follow when the foundation for individual transformation has been laid.

In your dedication of life for the country, you should no longer worry about the roof that will shelter your family. All police personnel and their families deserve to reside in decent and dignified living quarters or housing units. (applause) And this quartering project is our way of addressing the housing needs of personnel who are yet to get their own off-base housing units. Imagine, many of our police officers live in squatter areas. Sometimes, you even have neighbors who are hatchet men of syndicates, so you should definitely have decent housing.

As champions of the community, you are the ones guarding the community against criminals and other threats to peace and order. You demonstrated your loyalty to duty and work during the attempted uprising at the Manila Peninsula in Makati.

Those who attempted [it], it’s clear that the actions of these few desperate men reveal just how out of touch they are with the hopes and dreams of the average Filipino. Filipinos want things like this — political stability, a bright future in the economy, and social justice. The actions of these misguided men undermine each and every one of the genuine aspirations of Filipinos, real Filipinos. Instead of working together to bring the nation together by working within our democratic process, their actions merely are fuel for selfish motives for personal gain.

But in the end, with your fighting faith, the rule of law prevailed. Thank you very much. (applause) The transgressors will not hold this nation hostage with impunity. Geary Barias, Ground Commander, was there. General Santiago of SAF was also there, thank you very much as well. (applause) Perhaps General Ramboanga misses the action. But never mind, general, what you are doing is also good for our society as head of AFPSLAI, helping to contribute housing here.

Those who instead of serving, cause trouble, they will be punished with the full force of the law. Justice shall be served and the interests of the people upheld.

You also showed stability and capability when the bombing at the Batasan was quickly resolved.

For the excellence and bravery you have shown here and in other threats to law and order, the Filipino people thank you. (applause)

The immediate resolution of the case in Congress shows that we have been meeting with success in the end to put an end to the legacy of political violence in the Philippines. We are following the recommendations of the Melo Commission. We reported to the United Nations the investigations and prosecutions conducted by Task Force Usig. We followed this up with the Presidential Task Force Against Media Harassment. Now Task Force Usig — isn't that right, Sonny? — has 144 cases of killings of militants and media personnel that are being investigated or are being prosecuted. Through your thorough prosecution, we are able to give justice for the murders of activists and media personnel, and we show the world the true democracy and human rights that exist in the Philippines. Long live the PNP! (applause)

We condemn the killings of activists and journalists. Whether a former president, member of the uniformed services, or an average citizen, all men and women in this nation are equal before the law. The death of any Filipino citizen in pursuit of their political right to political expression violates human liberty.

And so, I instruct you — continue to bring perpetrators to justice. While we work with congress to pass new laws to protect victims and jail criminals, and exhort the nation to leave behind its terrible legacy of political violence and clan vendettas. Thanks to you, political killings are way down this year but we should not rest until we reach zero.

We can claim advances in human rights because the Philippines is the most democratic country in the region. We praise the seminars and proposals of the PNP to strengthen your policies and practices that defend the rights of every citizen.

The role of the police in pursuing terrorists and hard-core communist rebels is also very important.

The Abu Sayyaf stand in the way of bringing peace, stability and order to southern Philippines, while the communists rebels have spent years as a low level threat.

Many police officers have sacrificed their lives to protect the people against rebellion and terrorism. We commend our police for your heroic efforts. We mourn for those policemen who have been caught in the line of fire. We condole with their families.

It should not be forgotten that in times like these, the human rights of the police are being violated, especially if they are killed or wounded by traitors… Those traitorous ways. In fact, terrorists and rebels have been responsible for a wide range of human rights abuses, in their killing of more than nine hundred civilians since 2001.

We will not stop until terrorism, rebellion and crime are suppressed. And in all of this, all the male and female police officers are helping the national government. We have so many female police officers who were given our Christmas gift earlier and I saw in your little babies, at least you still have a life, you have a love life. (laughter/applause)

You are making a great sacrifice to defend our countrymen. It is only right that you be given more equipment and the ability to fight evil.

The Filipino people look to you for the highest standard of service in our country. Through your sense of professionalism and commitment to your mandate, our nation has arrived at the gates of permanent political stability under the rule of law and criminal justice. For every criminal brought to the bar of justice, for every case resolved under due process, good credit must go to the police officer on the beat and on patrol. Congratulations! Thank you very much. (applause)

With the growth of the economy and the national treasury under the reforms we are promoting, we are able to implement the primary goal of raising the ability, equipment and income of our police. That is why we are directing the chief of the PNP to increase the police force, increase your vehicles, and increase your equipment.

Our economy has reached a new level of maturity and stability with some of the strongest macroeconomic fundamentals in a generation. When did we ever have a budget surplus of 12.7 billion? (applause) Six years ago seems so long ago, no one thought we could get more revenues; no one thought we could cut down on tax cheats; no one thought we could strengthen the peso. Now they are complaining because the peso is too strong; No one thought we could move the stock market; No one thought we could bring our public sector consolidated budget into balance; no one thought we could lower our national debt. It’s lower now because of the strong peso; no one thought we could raise employment, but we have created one million jobs a year. From January to November, as I said earlier, the national government recorded a surplus of p12.7 billion and that is where the additional housing for our PNP will come from. (applause)

As we heard in 2006, last year, during the time of Oca Calderon we started accelerated hiring to add fifteen thousand new law enforcers within three years because we already had a budget, we already had tax revenues. And we will buy 2,500 patrol cars nationwide. (applause) Last year, five hundred were purchased, this year another five hundred are being given to police stations across the country. Through these projects, we are returning to the people the fruits of a more vibrant economy, a more stable country, and a larger national treasury that we have worked hard for.

Over the next three years, we will translate the positive results of our reforms to real benefits for the people. We will increase investment in our country and our people to: first of all, to improve our infrastructure to create an environment in which businesses feel confident to expand and employ more people because more jobs means less poverty; number two, improve social services such as health insurance subsidies for indigent families and anti-hunger programs, like our family vegetable gardens; third, boost educational support in our efforts to reduce poverty by investing in better school buildings, new textbooks and teaching materials, and training programs for teachers and school administrators; and fourth, cutting red tape and continuing to eliminate corruption from the system of which the police transformation program is a very important part.

And of course we will continue to fight against terrorism.

And peaceful and safe homes, streets, and communities will also be made, thanks to our police mothers and sisters. (applause)

As everyone who spoke earlier said, it is only right that our police enjoy the benefits of development. Housing is being prioritized first because, as we said, most police officers are just renting and sixty-seven thousand police officers do not have their own homes. And as we said earlier, there are still those living in slums, neighbors of criminals. What kind of environment is that for transformation? You shouldn't be placed in this danger of becoming neighbors with syndicates.

Therefore, we are directing Chief Sonny Razon and DDG Versoza to ensure that the housing here in Camp Bagong Diwa is completed immediately, and as you said, you need money, so other agencies already know that we have a 12.7 billion surplus, so get ahead of Nonoy Andaya. (laughter/applause) Then that's the report, it was reported earlier what needs to be done for the housing project in four other areas in Quezon City, Bulacan, Cavite and Rizal. The report stated that what is needed is to provide funds. So do that now, process the papers at the DBM.

During the holiday season and beyond, we should do everything in our power to bring rice to those who need it most — so we have a Christmas offering where almost everything given here is rice — and work hard to protect the poor from high prices.

We are directing Sonny Razon to coordinate with the NFA to have outlets here in this neighborhood of Tindahan Natin where cheap rice and cheap noodles are sold. And there are also cheap medicines sometimes in areas near police camps.

We are also authorizing the granting of a ten thousand peso performance bonus to all government employees. (applause) The 10,000 is if the agency can afford it from its own budget. (laughter) Those without their own budget are guaranteed by the DBM that up to 7,000 is available. But I don't know, can your budget afford ten? Seven for you, oh 7,000. Okay. But you have housing, other agencies don't have any yet. (applause) And your 7,000 is higher than the 5,000 last year. And back then, the PNP was not included when there was a national government bonus. So we have to remember because six years ago, what we enjoy now didn't exist six, seven years ago. There is a big difference in our economy and the state of our national treasury.

In the name of the Filipino people, we want to reiterate, thank you to all the police not only in the NCR, but in different parts of the Philippines. We expect that we will continue to be united for a safer, more peaceful and progressive nation.

So, long live our police officers, both men and women! Thank you all. (applause)

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2007). President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo’ s Speech During the Inauguration of the First Three Buildings Under the “Pulis Kalinga” NCRPO Quartering Project. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615135525/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2307&Itemid=38