Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the Thanksgiving Lunch with the Officials of the Intellectual Property Office (IPO)

[Delivered at the Heroes’ Hall, Malacañang, February 20, 2006]

Thank you. Thank you very much.

Thank you, Raul. Please sit down.

To all of you, to all of us, congratulations!

I’m glad over our country’s upgrade in the U.S. anti-piracy watch list. Upgrade or downgrade, depending on how you want to call it but in any case, we are in an improved situation.

And as mentioned earlier by our previous speakers while we appreciate the U.S. government’s recognition of our efforts to protect intellectual property rights, we mustn’t lose sight of the fact that protection of IPR is first and foremost in the interest of the Filipino people.

The protection and promotion of IPR means giving more impetus for Filipino creativity and I’m glad to see members of the Filipino creative community here.

Fighting piracy is fighting poverty because it enables Filipino excellence and enterprise to rise in the global arena, expanding opportunities and jobs along the way. Upholding IPR promotes diffusion of knowledge, develops local talent and creativity, and at the same time encourages more foreign investors to endow their strong qualities in the Philippine market.

We appreciate the help of you– civil society and private groups — in this vigilant campaign against piracy and we must not relent in our combined efforts. We are matching gains in our economy such as a strong drive in the law and order front and we expect this to multiply confidence, investments and jobs.

Of course, the protection and promotion of IPR also means as I said more investments, more jobs, more opportunities and more revenue for the government that could translate to improved basic social services.

Filipino excellence in all fields will be protected by the long run adherence to global intellectual property standards, which we intend to keep improving until we are finally off the watch list altogether. To sustain the advances we have gained, which the U.S. government has come to recognize, we have to do some more things. And let me read from the letter of the united states trade representative who sent Secretary Favila the official announcement of the downgrading or upgrading of our status, whatever you call it. And it says here:

“The U.S. will soon convey an updated intellectual property action plan to your government that will outline priority areas where we believe the Philippines should continue to make progress including vigorous enforcement of your optical media act and timely and effective prosecutions of suspected intellectual property infringers. We hope we can work together on this issues and other issues.”

Speaking of vigorous enforcement of the Optical Media Act, John was suggesting that we triple the efforts of our police agencies in the raids of violating establishments and the arrest of culprits.

And speaking of timely and effective prosecutions of suspected intellectual property infringers, John was also saying that we intensify the effort to bring offenders to justice and make them face the consequences of their nefarious acts. At the same time, since many of you creative individuals and organizations are very good at communicating, we must continue to inform our people that patronage of pirated and counterfeit products fuels criminality, stunts economic growth, and worse, undermines the moral fiber of our nation.

We should continue to further expand the regulatory framework for the protection of intellectual property rights, John says, by encouraging local government units to pass their respective anti-piracy ordinance.

How do we triple police action given that we have to fight drugs and we have to fight kidnapping as well. I am not directing the PNP and the NBI, through the DILG and the DOJ, to triple the manpower complement of their respective anti-piracy teams. Because if they’re gonna triple something it must be to triple the anti-kidnapping and anti-drug teams.

However… Because I was asking General Lomibao, “how many people do you have fighting drugs and how many people do you have fighting piracy?” Lomibao has a hundred people dedicated to fighting drugs; 20 people dedicated to fighting piracy. So maybe he can still expand by another 20 the fight against… For the fight against intellectual piracy. But I just want him to make sure that he also increases by at least 20 those fighting drugs.

And then as far as bringing offenders to justice and making them face the consequences of their acts, I’ve been discussing this matter with Secretary of Justice Raul Gonzalez for two days now. I asked him the same thing, “how many people do you have prosecuting piracy and how many people do you have prosecuting drugs?”

He has ten people prosecuting drugs and six people prosecuting piracy. Now that’s quite a big percentage prosecuting anti-piracy which is why we’ve gotten convictions. So rather than asking him to triple the prosecutors against piracy — imagine if you gonna have a hundred people on drugs and a hundred twenty people against intellectual piracy. I mean, you know, there are certain proportions we have to keep in mind — the solution that Secretary Gonzalez found is that he will deputize all the provincial prosecutors to prosecute for piracy as well. So as of today, therefore, he has 94 deputized prosecutors to fight intellectual piracy.

And of course, to inform our people that patronage of pirated and counterfeit products fuels all these undesirable things like criminality, stunted economic growth and the undermined moral fiber of the nation, what we could do is for John and the IP coalition and the press secretary to formulate an information drive together and I think the IP coalition will be a very very good leader in this effort to espouse intellectual integrity.

And then finally, to expand the present regulatory framework, I do hope that local for the protection of intellectual property rights to local government units can also be encouraged by you because local government units are autonomous under the local autonomy code, so I can’t direct them to do what they’re supposed to do but certainly they answer to the people because they’re elected by the people. And as NGOs, pos and the private sector and civil society, I would encourage you to dialogue with them and ask them to work on their own ordinances for the protection of intellectual property.

Finally, I congratulate the IP coalition because you’ve been so active and I congratulate all these gentlemen in the table and in the other tables as well: we have Secretary of Justice and the Director of NBI; we have Secretary of Trade and the head of the IPO and the Optical Media Board; we have our Police Chief PNP and NCR and the new CIDG; and we’d like to thank also the Supreme Court represented here by Justice Velasco; and all of the other agencies and offices of government that altogether contributed to our new status as a simple country in the watch list and not as a priority country in the watch list.

Let’s continue to work together, expand our efforts even with almost the same resources so that we can completely get out of the watch list and improve the lives of our people.

Thank you.

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Thanksgiving Lunch with the Officials of the Intellectual Property Office (IPO). Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412215159/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2403&Itemid=38