Thank you very much, Secretary Ging Deles. Service to all of you, please.

Thank you very much Secretary Ging Deles, the former chairman of the Anti-Poverty Commission who helped me steer the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples. But she is no longer chairman of the Anti-Poverty Commission because she is now my Presidential Adviser for the Peace Process.

With us also are some of our Cabinet members — Secretary Mike Defensor who is helping with the housing of our many indigenous people. He just arrived from there after our National Anti-Poverty Commission meeting which, truly, for our indigenous people, there is no other but our new Secretary and Anti-Poverty Commission who is now the Overseeing Secretary of the NCIP, no other but the son of Davao City, Secretary Camilo Sabio.

We also have with us your partner, the Secretary of the Department who has long helped you because I will not forget that I went to his office with no funds before, the NCIP, the funds for your meetings came from my Department, the head now of this Department, Secretary Dinky Soliman of the DSWD.

And our Secretary who is committed to schools and teachers for you, the DepEd Secretary, DJ De Jesus. And the Secretary who will provide many jobs for your communities, your products, your dances, your culture, the Secretary of Tourism, Secretary Dick Gordon.

Thank you also to all the commissioners under our chair, Chairman Ben Lingating. Thank you for your… Thank you for the good work. And because we will have a giving of certificates of ancestral domain titles, their representatives and our beneficiaries, Datu Roilito Gawilan, Datu Rio Besto and Timuai Carlos Pendaupan. Our Secretary of National Defense, Secretary Ed Ermita. To all of you, my brothers and sisters, a warm welcome from me to all of you.

I also thank you for your support and recognition of the reforms and initiatives made by my administration regarding the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act or IPRA. Of course, I will implement it because when I was a senator, the principal author of the IPRA was no other than Senator Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. When I was a senator, the bill I filed was the Ancestral Domain Bill. Then the chairman of the committee, Senator Flavier, expanded it and made it Indigenous Peoples Rights, not just Ancestral Domain.

So, I am happy that we are partners, principal author… Ah, principal sponsor was Senator Juan Flavier, principal author or main drafter was me when I was a senator.

Therefore, based on what I saw in the early years of the completed law, the implementation seems not to be good. So, when I became president, my Executive Order number one, my order to Presidential Adviser Howard Dee was to reorganize the Commission on Indigenous Peoples. And of course now the law is there, the reorganization is there, we are pushing our I.P. sector agenda.

I also want to congratulate the very important medium-term Philippine development plan for indigenous peoples that was given to me earlier by Chairman Ben Lingating. I always say that peace and progress always go together. If there is peace, we can take good care of our farms, seas, forests, mountains. More investors will come to the country because it is easy to attract them to establish businesses.

However, businesses are dismayed when what happens shows deep conflict. Deep conflict among the indigenous people, the lowlanders, between the NPA and the soldiers, between the MILF and the Christians, even in EDSA 2, EDSA Tres, even in Congress and the Supreme Court as a result of the impeachment case against Chief Justice Davide.

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity — I’m sure in behalf of even our indigenous peoples who long for peace and stability – appeal to our leaders not to sit and wait out the situation.

I know that there are issues of high principles involved on both sides, but there is no higher principle in a democracy than the welfare of the people. These calls for a valiant patriotic effort to set aside strong countervailing beliefs and hurt pride and willfully come together for the nation. Everyday of intransigency sets back the opportunities for national advancement, for economic stability, and its attendant harvest of more trade, investment and jobs. Let’s act now and as one nation. This is a time for statesmanship and sacrifice.

I invite my Secretary of Agrarian Reform, Obet Pagdanganan, to join me on stage. Peace — and the Secretary of Agriculture, Cito Lorenzo, from Mindanao. A son of Mindanao, a son of Davao and Bukidnon. Many of you are from Davao and Bukidnon, Cito Lorenzo from Davao and Bukidnon — peace and progress, stability is also the purpose of this congress to improve this rule for peace and progress.

Regarding the issue of ancestral domain, as Chairman Lingating said, we have set a target of one hundred thousand hectares of land per year for this certification. And yesterday, a newspaperman from the indigenous community asked me, “how much have we achieved in the certificate of ancestral domain?” I told him maybe tomorrow — because today and yesterday it was done — maybe tomorrow you will know because that is really one of our announcements at our I.P. Congress. And I want to say to him and to all Filipinos, three hundred and sixty thousand hectares of Certificate of Ancestral Domain have been completed.

And this will be increased because of the CADTs that we will award later to the beneficiaries from Mindanao. The CADT for the kitaotao I.P. communities, more than one hundred thousand hectares. For the miarayon I.P. communities, more than eleven thousand hectares. Aromanin manobo I.P. communities — where are you? — more than five thousand hectares.

I’m hereby instructing the Land Registration Authority to exempt CADTS from land registration fee requirements. Through the inclusion of CADTS and CALTS, the inclusion of CADTS and CALTS under the handog titulo program.

I am also instructing the PCSO to immediately release the second ten million pesos for the delineation of ancestral domain. But our assistance to the I.P. communities does not end here.

Secretary Pagdanganan, Obet is here because while the overlaps between IPRA and the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law are still being studied, Obet has temporarily stopped the implementation of CARP in ancestral domain areas. We will continue to improve the delivery of the most needed services, including the construction of infrastructure, to increase opportunities for your progress and that of other vulnerable sectors.

It seems you are already familiar with KALAHI. For those who are not yet familiar with the Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan–Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services or KALAHI-CIDSS program, it is the flagship program of my administration to eradicate poverty. Life will not improve for our poor if the delivery of services is fragmented. To speed up the flow of goods from the countryside to the market, we continue to build not only small services like livelihood programs but also bridges and farm-to-market roads, small bridges, small roads, but also big bridges and big roads like the Bolton bridge which is almost finished.

And regarding the Davao-Bukidnon road, they say—oh, there’s Undersecretary Rasuman, our Undersecretary from the DPWH from Mindanao—they say the Buda road is now really beautiful, completed during our administration.

We are also accelerating the delivery of basic services for the benefit of humanity. Here in Davao, more than three thousand indigenous people are now beneficiaries of the National Health Insurance Program or PhilHealth.

Currently, throughout the Philippines, throughout the population, more than 54 percent of our population is now covered by health insurance.

We have halved the price of many medicines that are commonly used by our poor. These medicines, half-priced medicine, which our poor often buy, are available in government hospitals in various parts of our country.

Included in our goals is the establishment of schools in two hundred I.P. communities and the placement of twenty teachers from DepEd in each municipality with indigenous residents. That is why Secretary DJ De Jesus is here.

The Department of Agriculture — those of us from Bukidnon and Davao, and if you include his grandfather, he's also from Zamboanga — the D.A. has allocated 90 million pesos for its programs and projects in I.P. communities.

Our goal is also to improve the participation and coordination of I.P. communities and our police force to enhance peace and security in the communities. All of this and many more that were mentioned — those who spoke earlier — are being done by the government to improve the lives of our countrymen.

In the past two and a half years of my presidency, I have gained enough experience to understand what we really need to do to change lives, boost our economy, and eradicate poverty.

We really need big reforms, and one of these reforms is the reform of Indigenous Peoples Rights. And perhaps because many of our indigenous peoples are from Mindanao and it is sometimes difficult to wait for funds from Manila. Perhaps one of our big reforms is to achieve federalism in our country.

Big reforms, but we also need unity — reconciliation. Hopefully, with our gathering here today, with our working together for a livelihood and for the progress of our Lumad, Muslim, or Christian brothers and sisters, we can also achieve reconciliation in our country. Because with big reforms and true reconciliation, that is the path to our country's true progress.

Congratulations to our I.P. congress!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). PGMA’s Speech during the Mindanao Wide Indigenous People’s Summit for Peace and Development. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100615141220/http:/www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=7168&Itemid=38