Sponsorship Speech of Honorable Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo Senator of the Philippines On the amendments to the BOT law

[Delivered before the Senate of the Philippines, January 25, 1994]

Partly as a result of the concentration of the Ramos administration on economic recovery and growth, there has been much attention given to the problem of infrastructure.

In the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, infrastructure refers broadly to social overhead capital, that is, public works which the government is called upon to provide as essential support to the business ventures which the private sector undertakes for the promotion of economic growth. The duty of the government is to provide the infrastructure for private business investments and it calls for the construction and maintenance of roads, bridges, irrigation, power plants, ports, airfields and other public works.

The Ramos administration has purposed a multi-year public works bill dovetailed to social and economic development.

I recall that when my father, Diosdado Macapagal, was President of the Philippines, in his first year in 1962, a public works law was enacted, but it became inoperative because of a proviso that all releases must be simultaneous which was an impossibility. In effect, there was no public works measure at all.

In the construction of public works, he availed himself of old isolated Republic Acts authorizing the construction of some projects. The deficiency of these laws was their lack of synchronization with the overall socio-economic program.

Within the straitjacket of this limitation, he undertook a public works program to meet as far as practicable the government’s role of providing the social overhead that could assist private enterprises.

To remedy the lack of public works law, as well as the dearth of funds, he supported and approved on June 22, 1963, Republic Act No. 3741 which would authorize private parties to undertake public works — perhaps the first BOT law in the Philippines. This mode of financing was used in the construction of the Manila North Diversion Road to Bulacan and vital portions of the Pan-Philippine Highway.

Indeed, more than ever since then, the growing demands and imperatives of the times have forced government to re-evaluate its role vis-à-vis that of the private sector.

On July 10, 1987, for instance, Executive Order No. 215 allowed the private sector to generate electricity. In July 1990, Republic Act No. 6957 was enacted into law, authorizing the financing, operation and maintenance of infrastructure projects by the private sector. The enactment of the law was in cognizance of two important facts:

1. That the provision of adequate physical infrastructure is not only an essential part of government’s social responsibility to the people, but is also a basic component of economic growth and development without which, growth or development of any economy is least likely; and

2. That the government’s available resources are not enough to meet the present and future infrastructure need of the populace; hence, while the provision of infrastructure is a function of government traditionally, the private sector with its vast resources and expertise is now tapped to help the government undertake its function.

Defects of R. A. 6957

The new law, Republic Act No. 6957, was seen as a milestone in the process of giving the private sector a greater role particularly in areas that bear heavily on the economy. However, it still embodied much of the culture and attitude typical of the manner in which government bureaucracy operates. While it is true that it conveyed the signal that the government intends to liberalize this function, the law itself did not provide an environment conducive enough for private sector participation.

For instance, Section 4 of the law provides that all national projects to be undertaken under the BOT scheme must be duly approved by Congress. Such requirements will make BOT proposals vulnerable to political pressures, thereby subjecting these proposals to undue delay and uncertainty. This condition poses an obstacle to the private sector participation.

Fortunately, Congress was forthcoming in addressing this concern. Having realized the problem, the Eighth Congress passed Joint Resolution No. 3, expressing the generic approval of all infrastructure projects that are submitted for the BOT scheme, thereby eliminating any delay or uncertainty that the need for congressional approval may entail.

But this remedial measure was not enough. Three and one-half years after its enactment, very few infrastructure projects have been undertaken under the BOT, most of them in the power-generation area. Only one project, in fact, has been completed so far — the 200-megawatt gas turbine plant established by Hopewell Energy (Philippines) Corporation in Navotas, Metro Manila. And while several projects are in the works, the general sentiment is that the implementation of the BOT scheme in the country is less than satisfactory.

Against this backdrop, we propose some amendments to the present BOT law to make the same more flexible and to broaden its scope. The highlights of the proposed amendments are as follows:

First, the policy of providing incentives in the form of reasonable government undertakings and a climate of minimum government regulations and procedures.

The present Declaration of Policy states that government is to provide for the most appropriate favorable incentives to mobilize private resources without qualifying on what type of incentives it is willing to offer.

The amendments we propose qualify the incentives by providing that such will not be limited to financial incentives but shall include other reasonable government undertakings and a climate of minimum government regulations and procedures.

The amendments address two important factors which have deterred foreign investment initiatives in the BOT scheme, namely, the lack and/or perceived lack of government support to the project and the procedural maze which BOT proposals go through for approval.

As to the issue of government support, the present BOT law provides that financing from foreign sources shall not require a guarantee by the government. Under the amendments, the type of government guarantee prohibited is specifically identified as DIRECT which it defines as “an agreement whereby the national government and/or any of its agencies or local government concerned assumes responsibility for the repayment of any debt for the project directly issued by the project proponent.” As only direct government guarantee is prohibited, the implication is that indirect government guarantee can be made available. This credit enhancement need not take the form of financial incentives. For instance, the government can make a promise to the project proponent that once the facility is already constructed and is in operation, under the management of said project proponent, it is assured of the absence of competing roads along the same route. The risk of obtaining an unstable flow of return on investment due to competing roads is thereby removed.

As to the issue of lengthy approval process which BOT proposals go through, there is no doubt that the protracted procedure serves as one of the biggest deterrents in attracting investors to undertake the scheme. People in the know would comment that it takes more than a year just to get a BOT proposal approved.

Under R.A. 6957, the list of all national projects must be duly approved by Congress. However, fortunately, as I said earlier, in Joint Resolution No. 3, passed by both Houses of Congress, a list of all projects that can be eligible for direct implementation under the BOT concept is given, doing away with the process wherein projects for BOT implementation will have to be submitted to Congress for approval.

Under the proposed amendments, congressional approval is removed in the law itself. Instead, the list of such national projects shall be submitted to the Investment Coordination Council of NEDA for their information. In case the project requires government financing and direct government guarantee, the financing aspect of the contract shall be subject to the review and approval of the ICC, provided that in case such projects are not acted upon within 30 days upon submission of the requirements, without fault on the part of the project proponent, it shall be considered as automatically approved.

The second proposed amendment is to expand the definition of the BOT scheme to include variations thereof.

Republic Act No. 6957 offers two alternative schemes for private investment in the infrastructure sector, namely, the Build-Operate-Transfer or BOT and the Build-Transfer or BT.

The BOT scheme is a contractual arrangement whereby the contractor or project proponent in the proposed amendments undertakes the financing, including the construction of a given infrastructure facility, and the operation and maintenance thereof. The contractor operates the facility over a fixed term during which it is allowed to charge facility users tolls, fees, rentals and charges sufficient to enable the contractor to recover its operating and maintenance expenses and its investments in the project, plus a reasonable rate of return thereon. The contractor transfers the facility to the government agency or local government unit concerned at the end of the fixed term which shall not exceed 50 years.

The BT scheme is a contractual arrangement whereby the contractor or project proponent under the proposed amendments undertakes the construction, including financing of a given structure facility, and its turnover after the completion to the government agency or local government unit concerned which shall pay the contractor its total investments expended on the project, plus a reasonable rate of return thereon.

The BT is best suited for projects which, because of some strategic or security reasons, must be directly operated by the government. This scheme may also be adopted in cases which do not require massive capital outlays and therefore can be easily amortized by the government. However, investors are rather cautious of undertaking projects under BT schemes because, considering the cash strapped status of the government, they fear repayment problems.

Under the amendments that we are proposing, the law is made applicable to other variants of the BT scheme. One variant is the Built-Operate-Own scheme which is a contractual arrangement whereby a project sponsor proponent is granted a franchise to provide a service via a given infrastructure project which is financed, constructed, operated and maintained by the project proponent. The project proponent provides, in exchange for the franchise, an acceptable level of service in return for income or tolls received for the service provided.

The advantage of this scheme is that the project proponent, knowing that it can retain ownership over the facility, will necessarily build the project at less cost and efficiently operate and maintain it. And to be able to get an even higher return on its investment, it will introduce innovations and expand the facility.

Some of the BT variants include the Build-Transfer-Operate or BTO, Contract-Add-Operate or CAO, Develop-Operate-Transfer or DOT, and Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer or ROT.

Under the BTO, the public sector contracts out the building of an infrastructure facility to a private sector. Once the facility is commenced satisfactorily, title is transferred to the implementing agency. The private entity, however, operates the facility in behalf of the implementing agency under an agency agreement.

Under the CAO, the sponsor adds to an existing infrastructure facility which it is renting from the government. It operates the expanded project over an agreed franchise period.

Under the DOT, some positive externalities of a new infrastructure project, which is to be built by a private sponsor, are internalized by giving that entity the right to develop adjoining property. And under the ROT, an existing facility is turned over to the private sector to refurbish, operate and maintain for the franchise period, at the expiry of which, the legal title to it is turned over to the government.

Under the proposed amendments, BOT and all the other variants shall be covered under the general term of “private sector infrastructure schemes.” This would allow the BT schemes to attract as many and as varied investors as possible considering the peculiar interest and capability of each. The would-be investor may choose a particular variant based not only on his own willingness to share in the project risk, but also mindful of the socio-political implications of the project and the host country’s legal structure. This way, the market for this project will be broadened, thereby also increasing the probability of a BT project materializing.

The third proposed amendment is that major players under the BT scheme are identified and defined. The current law identifies the players as the contractor but does not explicitly define them.

Under the amendments, three entities which control each phase of BT operation are identified and defined.

First is the project proponent, or the contractor, which, under the present law, is a private sector entity which shall have the contract and the responsibility for the entire project and undertake to provide the financing of the total project cost without direct government guarantee except as otherwise provided in the law itself.

The constructor under the current law, is a duly accredited group responsible for the construction and/or supply of equipment for the project. The constructor may or may not be affiliated to the project proponent. R.A. 6957 provides that in case of foreign constructors, Filipino labor shall be employed or hired in the different phases of the construction where Filipino skills are available.

The facility operator is a company duly registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission, whether or not it is likewise the project proponent, which is responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility. The facility operator shall be tasked with the collection of the tolls, fees, rentals or charges from the facility users. Should the operation of the facility require a franchise, the ownership of the facility operator must be in accordance with the Constitution.

These three entities are not mutually exclusive in the sense that the proponent can be the contractor or the operator as well, or could be both, provided however that in case of the operator, its ownership must comply with the constitutional requirement.

Section 11 of Article XII (National Economy and Patrimony) provides in part that “no franchise, certificate or any other form of authorization for the operation of a public utility shall be granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associations organized under the laws of the Philippines at least sixty per centum of whose capital is owned by such citizen, nor shall such franchise, certificate or authorization be exclusive in character or for a longer period than 50 years.

By identifying the key players under the BT scheme, the would be investors are notified of the extent of involvement that can be made by them under the current legal and financial structure.

The fourth proposed amendment is that the BT projects using ODA financing can avail themselves of government guarantee of up to 50 percent of total project cost.

The inability of government to provide counterpart funding for Philippine Assistance Program funds leads to a slow utilization of Official Development Assistance (ODA). Without the required counterpart funds, the Philippines is in danger of losing some $900 million in official development assistance.

Under Republic Act No. 6957, financing from foreign sources for BOT projects is not given government guarantee. The proposed amendment will provide for an exception; in cases where partial financing comes from ODA, government guarantee to the extent of not more than 50 percent of the cost is made available. This will serve as an additional incentive for the investors to avail of ODA funds since the government partially shares the project risk.

The fifth proposed amendment is that the payment under build-transfer (BT) scheme is made flexible. The BT is similar to BOT except that as soon as the physical facility is built, the BT private sponsor turns it over to the government. The government then pays the private sector his total investments plus a reasonable rate of return.

The proposed amendments provide for a more flexible repayment scheme which may be made over a scheduled period of time according to the terms of its guarantee and provide for all or part of such payment to be made other than in monetary form. Payment in non-monetary form would allow our cash-strapped government to fulfill its obligation.

The sixth amendment clarifies the concept of a reasonable rate of return on investment and maintenance and operating cost.

Under the current law, the rate of return is not defined, thereby resulting in the interpretation that the rate is limited to the current ceiling of 12 percent as defined under the 1936 Public Services Act. Assuring an inflation rate of 10 percent, this translates to a current return on investment of 22 percent. However, this ignores the different rates of return arising from different degrees of risk. Certainly, a cap on the investor’s profit is a disincentive.

The amendments provide a realistic approach to determining reasonable return on investments and operating and maintenance cost of capital in the domestic and international markets. Such rates may be predetermined and stated in the contract itself.

The fear of possible abuse is unfounded inasmuch as the investor himself realizes that the rate of return will necessarily have an upper limit set by market forces. He will not charge an amount not financially acceptable to the market since this would place his entire investment at risk.

The seventh proposed amendment is that new proposals for national projects which are not parts of the medium-term infrastructure plan of agencies may still be pursued under certain conditions.

In the present BOT law, the lists of all national projects must be under the medium-term infrastructure program of the agencies concerned. In the proposed amendments, even new proposals for national projects which are not covered by the medium-term development plan of the agencies concerned, provided no government financing or guarantee is required, may still be pursued. In this case, a copy of the proposal and eventual contract shall be submitted to NEDA within a period of 30 days from the receipt and/or signing thereof.

The intention of this amendment is to remove curtailment of private sector initiative. In other countries, public works which are not parts of any long-range plan are built upon the initiative of the private sector. The best ideas may come this way. The long-term plan of any country is greatly influenced by capital constraints. We do not mean that government should grab every opportunity before it. Rather, it should be capable of evaluating the offer in the context of need and not it the context of a predetermined plan.

The eighth proposed amendment clarifies direct negotiation and provides for unsolicited proposals.

Republic Act No. 6957 explicitly provides for public bidding of projects but are silent on negotiated contracts. There is a conflict of opinion whether or not direct negotiation is allowed under the present BOT scheme. Some say it is not while others opine that it is, as provided in Section 14 of the implementing rules and regulations. The amendment clarifies the issue on direct negotiation and provides for unsolicited proposals.

Under our proposed amendment, direct negotiations would be allowed if the public bidding fails or there are unsolicited proposals for local government projects approved by the local development council and no government funding or guarantee is involved. Unsolicited proposals refer to proposals of the private sector for projects not included in the medium-term infrastructure program of the agencies. In the proposed amendments, new and/or unsolicited proposals for national projects eligible for implementation which are not included in the list of projects eligible for financing under the law and which does not involve government financing or direct government guarantee may still be pursued and implemented by the agencies concerned provided a copy of each proposal and the eventual contract is submitted to the NEDA Board for their information, within 30 days from receipt and/or signing thereof.

The object of the amendment is to protect proponents which have already incurred costs in the conceptual design and in the preparation of the proposal, and which may have adopted an imaginative method of construction or innovative concept for the proposal. The amendment also aims to harness the ingenuity of the private sector to come up with solutions to the country’s infrastructure problems.

The ninth proposed amendment provides for a two-envelope or two-stage system of public bidding.

Under R.A. No. 6957, upon the approval of a project, a public bidding is conducted. Hence, the law requires the bidder to undertake a feasibility study, including the preliminary engineering design of the project he is interested in. The bidder is also required to make a full public disclosure of his plans, even if he is not assured that the project will be awarded to him. Hence, there is always hesitation to submit a unique or different technical proposal because of the fear that they might only be publicly bidded out.

The proposed amendments introduce the concept of a two-envelope/two-stage system in public bidding whereby the bidder submits a first envelope which contains the technical proposal and a second envelope which contains the financial proposal. The procedure for this two-envelope/two-stage system shall be outlined in the implementing rules and regulations.

Finally, the last amendment expands the membership of the committee that will make the implementing rules and regulations. It would now include the DENR, DA, DOTC, DOE, DTI, CCPAP and representatives from the private financial institutions.

The BT is no panacea to our infrastructure financing woes. Still, if properly implemented, it can reduce a problem which has remained a major stumbling block in the country’s development.

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Senate of the Philippines. (1996). Speeches of the senators : ninth congress 1992-1995 . Manila : Senate.