Toast of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines To Pinoy expats

A TOAST TO PINOY EXPATS

I ‘m truly proud of the Bay Area Filipino community. You’re always proving that the Filipinos stand tall no matter what job needs to be accomplished, no matter how difficult the challenges may seem.

You honor our country with your sense of nationhood and vibrant community spirit even as you have been deepening your involvement in the political processes of your adopted nation. As far as that’s concerned, I refer here to a distinguished list of Filipino-Americans now serving in high level positions like Dennis Normandy, president, Public Utilities Commission. The mayor said Dennis Normandy handles about what? 35 billion dollars worth of assets, public utilities in San Francisco. And then there’s Jackie Lingad Ricci, who not only organized this but she’s president of the juvenile probation commission, congratulations Jackie. And the newest high level appointee, Agnes Briones, director, small business administration. I don’t know if she’s here but she was earlier here with me at the University of San Francisco.

May I repeat my congratulations to those who won in the recent elections led by Joe Estevez, Frank Batara, Ruth Asmundson, and I will add Rodel Rodis – I don’t see him, I’m sure he’s somewhere here – who gained a seat as a trustee of the San Francisco community college district.

I also want to thank you, Filipino community; for successfully lobbying for the retention of the Philippines as a worthy investment country of Calpers, America’s largest pension fund. I gave a special award to Ambassador del Rosario for that but I wanna be here to thank all of you. And may I have a special thanks to the veterans who traveled to Sacramento for rising once again to our country’s defense in the twilight of your years. I’m going to give a special mention about you once again to President Bush when I see him in Santiago.

And even as I speak of the Filipino-American veterans, congratulations to the American Legion War Memorial Commission for hosting the commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Leyte landing right here in the Bay Area.

Speaking of President Bush. Last week, he called me up, and we both agreed that we must keep our friendship strong.

There is new leadership in Southeast Asia. In Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and of course, because of your support, with me again in the Philippines. There is renewed leadership in America after President Bush’s reelection. We look for America to reengage with Asia, to inspire confidence through multilateral action and work hand in hand with the Asian region and the Philippines toward greater understanding.

America under President Bush has a unique opportunity to strengthen international relationships and work with traditional friends like the Philippines. Because you know cause you’re always in touch with your relatives. We know in the Philippines, America remains a strong ally and a friend of our people. And we know that there are always ways to enhance our historic relationship.

Early this week, 21 economies unanimously elected the Philippines to head APEC’s counter-terrorism task force. This honor affirms the international community’s trust and confidence in our capability and earnestness to fight terror. We want to move forward with President Bush on this. We want to move forward too with him on the quest for peace in Mindanao and for broader global cooperation in trade and economic issues.

I’m glad that the new mayor of San Francisco will soon be leading a trade delegation to the Philippines.

Also last week, the U.N. General Assembly unanimously approved a resolution initiated by the Philippines on inter-faith dialogue. This is also a moral and diplomatic victory for all Filipinos who share a deep abiding faith in the lord. But I am aware and you’re aware that the Philippines is at a critical juncture and there’s only one path to take if we are to turn the country around: the path of fiscal restraint, the generation of new revenue, and rooting out of corruption in government.

I am undertaking these efforts and they are geared to building confidence in our markets and attracting investments, and expanding our international reserves so that i can create more jobs.

Ninety five percent of you voted for me, and therefore you elected me in may on a very issue-specific platform of economic reform, pro-poor investments and the political will to change the system. You know Lupita Kashiwahara was my personal campaign manager. I chose the campaign on a very specific platform because so many years of broken dreams have left the nation politically cynical and economically frustrated.

Because of this I see that success in achieving my goals will be based on restoring faith in our institutions of government and making real progress in poverty alleviation. However, in order to do this we need Congress to pass the economic reforms and we must tackle corruption wherever it may be found, be it in the military, on the civilian government, on the private sector if we are to restore any sense of fairness in the system.

I want to assure you that we are not close to the situation faced by Argentina because of a very well-managed maturity profile of our international debt obligations. Less than thirteen percent of our debts are due this coming five years. Nonetheless, our fiscal challenge is one that must be addressed because the total debt level is very high.

And I mentioned our Congressmen here, because I thank them for passing the bill raising the excise tax on alcohol, cigarettes and tobacco products and the lateral attrition bill – kind of hard to understand what that is. So boy, I decided to give a new name to the lateral attrition bill, something self-explanatory – the accountability reform bill. They were recently passed by the lower house. What is this lateral transition bill that’s why I’m calling it now the accountability reform bill because it sets out both incentives for tax collection performance for those revenue agents who collect more than the targets but it sanctions and remove from their position those government officials who fail to meet their revenue targets.

The alcohol and cigarette tax, well, that’s self-explanatory. It’s now on second reading in the Senate, and the senate said that they will pass an even more stringent version than the House of Representatives.

These are the two pieces of legislation of eight that I am asking Congress to pass on revenues, and of course this two will not be enough to address our deficit challenge. So these… Our Congressmen had committed to bring the same pressure to bear on Congress with the remaining six legislative measures that are included in our tax program. Daghan salamat, dako gid nga salamat, aton mga Congressmen.

And while we’re taking steps on a number of fronts to generate more revenue, we’re also focused on reining in spending. In fact, we’re optimistic that we’ll be able to stay within our full year fiscal deficit ceiling, but controlling the deficit is not enough. The starting point in our effort to address our fiscal problem begins with the acknowledgment that the root cause of our situation today is an entrenched culture of corruption.

Incidentally, I was greeting former mayor of Milpitas. I had to greet the former mayor of Daly City, Mike Guingona, whom I also saw earlier.

Anyway, speaking of corruption in the Philippines. Many people and in companies in the Philippines still don’t pay their fair share of taxes, and much of this is because they are aided and abetted by a system of inadequate tax revenue regulations and government corruption. That’s why we’re making sure that both corrupt officials and tax dodgers are caught and their ill-gotten gains and taxes collected and used for the public good.

Because of all these that we’re doing, I anticipate that in the first quarter of 2005 tax collection efforts will continue to improve. And I am let me tell you, optimistic about our country and our people. When I see you I become even more optimistic. Your regular remittances play a major role in keeping our domestic economy from sliding down. Thank you. This is a big thing not only for your families but for every Filipino.

And while your continuous remittances indeed serve well to keep our economy afloat, I encourage our overseas Filipinos to make additional efforts to overcome the massive challenge that our country faces today.

I know that the Filipino-Americans make up one-third of our overseas Filipinos but you send two-thirds of our remittances home. And can you imagine what an additional 20 dollars a month remittance can do from you to further uplift our nation. With an additional 20 dollars remittance from each of the seven million Filipinos abroad per month, this will amount to more than 140 million dollars. Our 1.68 billion-dollar in a year this is approximately 100 billion pesos in our currency. Surely this will help in the continuous progress that we aspire for our country.

And so, I appeal to you, let’s help each other. Help your relatives more. Go beyond the call of duty because in the end these concerted efforts will benefit an entire race from which a new generation of Filipinos will emerge to carry on a legacy of love for family, love for country, love for life.

And finally… Finally, I would like to greet all of you the best of the holiday season. May you be blessed with the gifts of love, peace and joy this Christmas.

Thank you very much, thank you very much, thank you very much, thank you very much.

Long live every Filipino.

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2004). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2004 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].