Vin D’ honneur Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On meeting the challenges of change through unity and cooperation

[Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 9, 2003]

MEETING THE CHALLENGES OF CHANGE THROUGH UNITY AND COOPERATION

Let me be direct and to the point.

I have faith in our country. I have hope for the future. I am optimistic the Philippines will yet emerge as a prosperous, modern nation within our lifetimes.

We have the hardest working people in the world, the most adaptable and the most congenial to employ.

Our country is strategically located for commerce.

Ours is a vibrant democracy, with a few changes, it will be well up to the challenges of the 21 st century.

As you know, I have decided not to seek the Presidency in 2004. This decision wasn’t easy, but it was the right one. Now, no one needs to envy me except for the greatest privilege of all – to serve our country to the utmost of my energy and ability without worrying about the political fallout. And indeed, I want an end to envy and a start of cooperation.

I believe that the things that need to be done for this country – and the world at large – require the power of cooperation. This is the only power that can change a nation and the world.

There is a power that commands fear. This kind of power only invites constant challenge. And then, there is the greater power that invites respect, this is the power that convinces and grows with the cooperation it inspires, by spreading the circle of its benefits. This is the power I seek.

Sometimes, you have to give so as to keep. The “Good Book” says that in giving, we receive. That is certainly my hope.

By giving, I hope to gain the power that can make life better for those who never had it good, and even for those who never had it so good. I want the rising tide that lifts all boats, whether they’re yachts or “ bangkang papel .”

I want the Filipino worker to be the most productive possible, to be paid commensurately.

I want the ordinary people to enjoy a decent standard of living – with ever increasing security, comfort and joy.

I want the rich to profit from real and productive investments, not from clever schemes that subtract rather than add to the national wealth.

I want justice to be so pervasive that it will not be taken for granted, just as injustice is taken for granted today.

I want intelligent laws that conduce to peace, progress and prosperity.

All these things I want are things that make up a strong republic.

In a world without borders, we need a strong state to protect our vital interests. The world is not getting smaller, it is getting tighter, and the competition more keen.

National security cannot be attained nor economic progress achieved, without a strong republic. The last decades have shown that the free market is not so much a sure-fire formula for progress, but rather the condition in which all progress must be achieved. It will be a struggle.

By stepping off the political stage in 2004, I take, a step higher in the office I still keep and thereby command a wider allegiance to the policies and projects needed to improve our country.

It will profit me nothing if I succeed, but my successor will inherit a better positioned country, a country better positioned to complete its rebuilding.

I sow, my successor reaps. This is the majesty of democracy. At the time one is given, the steward must make the most of the talents one is given by the Lord.

During the first 20 months as president, I made many good reform-oriented decisions for the people. As a consequence, I made many powerful enemies for myself.

I gave all the Internal Revenue Allotment or IRA to the local government units without regard to their political affiliations. I deprived myself of the billions of patronage funds that used to come from withholding a percentage of the IRA, yet I was accused of ambition.

I pursued land reform, most extensively in Negros Occidental, including the land of my husband’s family, and we were accused of greed.

I moved to cancel the PIATCO contract to spare future generations from its onerous conditions, and I was accused of shortsightedness.

I moved to abolish the Public Estates Authority and fired all its key officials, and I was accused of indecision.

I vowed to carry out whatever will be the final Supreme Court ruling on the MERALCO case, while ensuring the financial viability of the corporation, and I got it from every direction.

I provided land for an unprecedented number of urban poor families, even if I was accused of insincerity.

I can say that we made substantial progress since I assumed the presidency. Inflation is under control, exports are up, we are making deep inroads against crime and stemming the tide of corruption in government.

We have established ourselves as major players in the region, successfully integrating trade policy with development.

We have turned around our image abroad, and stepped up our obligations as global citizens to combat terrorism.

We have stabilized our macroeconomic condition. Now, some may ask, “What can I accomplish in a year-and-a-half left?”

The power of one if fearless and focused, is formidable, but the power of many working together is better.

That is why, I stepped away from the destructive politics that has prevented us, prevented the unity indispensable to the salvation of the state.

But, together with you, the nation’s leaders, across the broad political and economic spectrum, and together with our friends from all over the world, the tasks I have set in the short time left will build on the work accomplished in the equally short time that has passed. The measure of an administration’s success is not its length but its achievements.

I hope to oversee the further strengthening of the economy, the creation of more jobs, the encouragement of more business activity unhampered by corruption and red tape, supported when needed by fiscal and trade policy to promote industrial development.

I shall work to heal the deep divisions in our country, and hope to make major progress in the solution to the Communist insurgency, and in the final integration of the Muslim component of our society.

And I expect to see the cleanest and most orderly elections at the end of my term. During that election period, the time I would have wasted on political debate if I were a candidate, will instead be spent on continuing our programs of reforms and recovery up to the last minute of my presidency.

A true leader of this country cannot afford to play politics anymore and ignore the spreading and paralyzing climate of cynicism.

This nation has been rent by political divisions, self-interests and unfulfilled potential. We take one bold step forward, only to find ourselves two steps back. I could go on with politics as usual, or I could arrest the downward spiral of division and despair.

I don’t believe that anyone wants one’s country to fail. I think many are just unaware, but someone was needed to tell it like it is; someone who could make the right decisions without threatening anyone’s political ambition. Someone had to break the ice. Someone had to make the sacrifice.

A new national dialogue on change and reform was critical, but how do you turn divisiveness into dialogue. I declared the unimaginable: I announced I would not run for the presidency in 2004.

This nation is at a crossroad: quite simply, it must reform or perish.

We must shake loose the grip of the status quo and set our country free and on the road of true prosperity.

But let me be clear: I don’t want the unity of blind submission. I want the unity of conscious cooperation. I expect a vigorous debate, but it must be a debate on alternative ways of change.

There can be no falling back. Only the vested interests have something to fall back on, though not for long. Either this country moves forward or dies.

In the vision that guides my administration, I see a country liberated from the grip and greed of past. I see this happening through a revolution in the way we think, and in the way we do politics and economics.

At the center of this revolution must be a commitment to reforms and to putting the people first. In the debates, no topic shall be sacred, no idea or ideology beyond question. We must keep trying something better and new.

I shall do everything in my power to succeed – and trust me, that liberated power is considerable. Relieved of the burden of political ambition, this office has the power to make and unmake.

Today, I am sharing with you that vision that guides my administration. Starting tomorrow and in the weeks to come, I will take the challenge of development to the people and ask for their support – not for the presidency in 2004, but for my initiatives. Starting tomorrow and the weeks to come, I will present to the people the series of programs that I believe need to be embraced, if this nation is to succeed. I will not let an election year impede reforms, stop progress or take this nation back one step.

I may not be running for president, but that will not diminish my efforts one bit.

So, I ask everyone to work with me to insure that we can revolutionize our nation through reforms, honest dialogues and lasting change.

On that note, may I propose a toast to unity and cooperation – within this country and among all nations of the world – as the way to peace, progress and justice. Mabuhay!

Source : Adamson University Library

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2003). A Compilation of selected presidential speeches of Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, 2003 . [Manila : Office of the Press Secretary, Bureau of Communications Services].