Vin d’ Honneur Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines During the celebration of the 108th anniversary of Philippine Independence

[Delivered at the Rizal Hall, Malacañang, June 12, 2006]

His Excellency Archbishop Filoni; Excellencies of the diplomatic corps; Vice President de Castro; other officials of the Philippine government; Secretary Romulo and Mrs. Romulo; other members of the Cabinet and their ladies; Chief Justice Panganiban and the other members of the judiciary; officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines and the Philippine National Police; elected members of the Philippine government; ladies and gentlemen.

Today, we again honor our forefathers whose sacrifices over 108 years ago brought us independence. We also honor our countrymen and countrywomen whose sacrifices over a period of our independence have protected our freedoms and preserved our democracy. We shall continue to protect our heritage and we shall never take our independence for granted.

We know that with independence comes responsibility. Responsibility to preserve peace and order. Responsibility to preserve democratic principles. Responsibility to ensure that all Filipinos have access to the opportunities to feed their families and educate their children. And responsibility to protect our Constitution.

Democracies can be lively but they must not be divisive.

The fight for independence was not a fight amongst ourselves. It was a fight against foreign power that still could not recognize that we were more than a people. We were a nation united in shared values and shared pride.

There are those who dishonor the memory of those who fought for independence through misguided initiatives that threaten to tear our nation apart. But we shall work without distraction to build a better life for all Filipinos, and we shall continue to seek unity in achieving that paramount goal.

We have upheld the sturdy pillars of democracy and no harangues or political noise can overcome the truth that we have achieved economic progress under an umbrella of free enterprise and human freedom. Many of those who shout in the streets have done nothing for this nation except foment strife and stagnation. But time will eventually expose them as false prophets whose primary platform is self-interest and national division.

Our nation is at a crossroads. We’ve achieved much including the graduation of 1.6 million Filipinos from poverty. Greater things stand before us but we must put an end to politics as usual and work to shape a Philippine Republic that truly offers opportunity for all. We owe it to our forefathers to unite in the struggle to bring greater levels of peace, equality and opportunity to all corners of our nation.

We have created a nation that is truly outward-looking. And our relations with those countries such as Spain and the United States who have been a part of our history have never been better. They are our partners in commerce as well as our partners in peace, as well as in the fight against terror. And to this we’ll add our thanks to the American business community for recognizing our efforts to reduce corruption.

Our nation has withstood many challenges during the years of our independence and none has been greater in the fight to preserve our democracy. We have a unique opportunity to bring peace to a region of our country that has seen too much bloodshed in a fight to tear our country apart. With the graduation of three of the Muslim provinces from the list of the 10 poorest provinces in our country, I am excited by the prospects for peace in Mindanao and I commend all parties — members of the diplomatic world, the countries you represent — I commend all of you for your recognition that we now our country can achieve more good for the Filipino people if we put down our guns and work together in harmony.

Our people will soon be called upon to make a decision that can bring an end to the political deadlocks that have stalled our efforts to take our nation to the next level. The choice is for us to make whether we continue to live up to the vision of our national heroes or continue to watch helplessly while our political system degenerates and our economy is trapped on the mire of uncertainty.

Our forefathers did not sacrifice to create an independent nation where politics take precedence over progress. I hope the memory of our struggle for independence will drive international solidarity, represented by the excellencies of the diplomatic corps here today present, will drive international solidarity behind the direction we want to take our country in the years ahead.

On this note, I ask your excellencies, the diplomatic corps and our fellow Filipinos in this hall to join me in a toast to international solidarity and to the future of the Philippines.

Mabuhay!

Source : www.op.gov.ph

Macapagal-Arroyo, G. (2006). PGMA’s Speech during the Vin d’ Honneur in Celebration of the 108th Anniversary of Philippine Independence. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20100412213018/http://www.op.gov.ph/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=2808&Itemid=38