Vin d’Honneur Speech of Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo President of the Philippines On deepening democracy and competitiveness

[ Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 23, 2001 ]

For the second time in 15 years, democracy in the Philippines was lifted up to the light of global scrutiny and was found remarkably, singularly, swift yet decisive, prudent and vigorous, bloodless yet uncompromising. The political crisis that culminated in the dramatic events of the past week was a political crisis that sent the economy into a downspiral. And in a new century where democracy and the market have become inextricably linked, where democracy and the market have become the truest currencies, the political consequences of economic decline are dire and unequivocal. This is true for the nation as it is true for the rest of the world.

In the last few months, we have seen democracy in action and in defense of the market. During my administration, I hope to invigorate the market in order to deepen democracy. Democracy and the market will be the guiding principles of my domestic and foreign policies.

Today, the Philippines faces several realities that characterize its international and regional environment to which we have to respond in order to achieve our goals. The first reality is that China, Japan and the United States and their relationships will be a determining influence in the security situation and economic evolution of East Asia. Second, more and more Philippine foreign decisions have to be made in the context of ASEAN. Third, the international Islamic community will continue to be important for the Philippines. Fourth, the coming years will see the growing importance of multilateral and inter-regional organizations to promote common interest. Fifth, the defense of the nation’s sovereignty and the protection of its environment and natural resources can be carried out only to the extent that it asserts its rights over its maritime territory and get others to respect those rights. Sixth, the country’s economic growth will continue to be friendly to both domestic and foreign direct investment. Seventh, a country like the Philippines can benefit most quickly from international tourism. And eighth, overseas Filipinos will continue to be recognized for their critical role in the country’s economic and social stability.

These realities have been with us for varying lengths of time. As in other matters of state, my administration will resist the temptation to take adventurous initiatives and directions for the sake of appearing to be innovative.

In the Department of Foreign Affairs, I shall avoid the practice of using ambassadorships as political concession. Non-career appointments will only be made at the ambassadorial level and those who will be appointed will be selected on a basis of competence alone. In this regard, I would like to announce the appointment of Mr. Roberto Romulo as Senior Adviser on International Competitiveness. Bobby Romulo, known to most of you as former Secretary of Foreign Affairs of President Ramos and Chairman of the e-ASEAN Task Force, will assist me in developing policies related to enhancing the Philippines ability to harness the full benefits of participating in the global new economy. His brief includes foreign policy, international trade, finance and investment as well as information and communications technology strategy.

I have also designated former President Fidel V. Ramos as my personal and special representative with the rank of Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the World Economic Forum in Davos. President Ramos has also agreed to continue representing me and the country in other important international events.

And inasmuch as immediately securing the support of our friends and allies is critical, I am asking the following distinguished members of Philippine society to serve as my special envoys: former Ambassador Alfonso Yuchengco, Special Envoy to China, Japan and Korea; former Secretary Rizalino Navarro, Special Envoy to Singapore, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Vietnam as well as Australia and New Zealand; Mr. Paul Dominguez, Special Envoy to Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia; and, former Ambassador Raul Rabe, Special Envoy to the Americas and the Organization of Islamic Conference; and, Ambassador Cesar Bautista, Special Envoy to Europe.

Your Excellencies, we are indeed faced with a remarkable opportunity to advance the cause of the Filipino people in the new millennium. Under this administration, I am committed to build on what has been accomplished − the democracy that was worked for and fought for by President Aquino, the competitiveness that was worked on by President Ramos; and I hope to move the country forward deepening democracy, deepening the democratic process, deepening our competitiveness and bringing prosperity to the greatest number of our people.

I ask you, therefore, to raise your glasses in a toast for the good future of the Philippines and the friendship between the Philippines and the countries that you all represent.

Mabuhay!

Source: University of the Philippines Main Library