MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 71

DIRECTING THE SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT, TO TAKE IMMEDIATE AND EFFECTIVE MEASURES TO ENSURE THE PROHIBITION AND ELIMINATION OF THE WORST FORMS OF CHILD LABOR THROUGH THE PHILIPPINE TIME-BOUND PROGRAM AND OTHER INITIATIVES PURSUANT TO THE ILO CONVENTION 182

WHEREAS, the Philippines upholds the inherent rights of children, including their rights to be protected against abuse and exploitation and to be defended and given assistance by the government and civil society groups;

WHEREAS, an estimated 250 million children around the world are being exploited, half of whom are working full time and out-of-school and at least 50 million engaged in worst forms of child labor; in the Philippines, statistics reveal there are 4 million working children, one-fifth of whom find their work risky or dangerous;

WHEREAS, the Philippines, as one of the countries which ratified ILO Convention 182 Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor, has actively involved government agencies, employers’ and workers’ groups, non-governmental organizations, local government units, academe, media, church-based organizations, women’s and working children’s organizations, families and communities in undertaking programs and activities to combat the worst forms of child labor in support of national and international initiatives;

WHEREAS, the National Program Against Child Labor represents the finest efforts of the Philippines’ network of social partners in eliminating the worst forms of child labor and transforming the lives of child laborers, their families and communities towards their sense of self-worth, empowerment and development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Secretary, Department of Labor and Employment shall, in addition to her regular duties, be in charge of the national monitoring of ILO Convention 182 by taking immediate and effective measures to ensure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labor, through the Philippine Time-Bound Program and other initiatives under the National Program Against Child Labor.

SEC 2. Support Agencies. The ILO Convention 182 National Monitoring Team may seek the assistance and support of any Department, Bureau, Office or any government agency, and engage civil society in the attainment of the time-bound program objectives to effectively and efficiently eliminate worst forms of child labor.

SEC 3. The Secretary shall also exercise the following functions:

a. monitor the planning, implementation and evaluation activities for the time-bound and other programs on worst forms of child labor at the national, regional and local levels;

b. involve the participation of partners and stakeholders in every process of program management to ensure commitment to, and responsibility and accountability for the various program components;

c. ensure that the time-bound program is consistently formulated within the context of the National Program Against Child Labor (NPACL) and other national socio-economic plans and programs relating to child labor;

d. develop policy/legislative agenda on the elimination of the worst forms of child labor;

e. source out financial resources from funding institutions to effectively achieve program objectives; and

f. take immediate policy measures to ensure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labor through preventive interventions, provision of direct assistance, recovery and social reintegration, ensuring access to free basic education and appropriating vocational/technical training and other basic services, identifying and reaching out to those at risk, and taking account of the special situation of girls.

g. Ensure the effective exchange of data, information, or any pertinent report between and among government and non-governmental agencies involved and supporting ILO Convention 182.

SEC 4. The amount necessary for the initial implementation of this Order shall be charged against the existing appropriation of DOLE. Thereafter, the amount needed for the operation shall be included in the budget of DOLE in the succeeding General Appropriation Act.

SEC 5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2 nd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary