MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 17

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF GRP PANEL FOR THE REVIEW OF THE OF THE GRP – RPMP/RPA-ABB PEACE AGREEMENT

WHEREAS, a Peace Agreement was signed on 6 December 2000 between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines (GRP) and the Rebolusyonaryong Partido ng Manggagawa sa Pilipinas/Revolutionary Proletarian Army/Alex Boncayao Brigade (RPM-P/RPA-ABB) on the basis of their mutual trust to pursue a peaceful settlement of the present armed conflict and hasten the progress and development of the county;

WHEREAS, the Peace Agreement provides for the implementation of confidence-building measures and of various development projects among others, to pursue the peace process between the parties;

WHEREAS, the implementation of the Peace Agreement has been affected by the political transition of the country;

WHEREAS, in line with the efforts of the Administration to reconstruct the peace process, and with the need to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of the Peace Agreement,

The following are hereby directed:

SECTION 1. Creation of the GRP Panel. There is hereby created a GRP Panel to Review the aforesaid Peace Agreement towards its effective implementation in accordance with the policy thrusts of the Macapagal-Arroyo Administration, in particular on the peace process and the national agenda on poverty alleviation, and in the light of the political, economic and social imperatives facing the Government.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Panel shall be chaired by the National Security Adviser with the following Members:

To ensure proper coordination, the conduct of the review shall be supervised by the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (PAPP).

SEC. 3. Secretariat Support. The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP) shall provide the needed secretariat and administrative support to the GRP Panel in the conduct of the review.

SEC. 4. Review Report. The GRP Panel, through the PAPP, shall submit to the Office of the President, its findings and recommendations within thirty (30) days from the approval of this Order, including the appropriate Action Plan for the efficient implementation of the Peace Agreement covering, among others, institutional and administrative arrangements, program and project schedules and funding sources for the implementation of the Agreement.

SEC. 5. Cost. The budgetary requirements for the conduct of the review and preparation of the report of the GRP Panel shall be drawn from the existing budget of the OPAPP.

SEC. 6. Sunset Clause. The Panel shall cease to exist after the submission, and approval by the President, of its Review Report.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6 th day of June in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and One.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Senior Deputy Executive Secretary