MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 83

EXTENDING THE TERM OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT CENTER HOUSING PROJECT UNTIL DECEMBER 31, 2005, AND DIRECTING IT AND OTHER CONCERNED AGENCIES TO COMPLETE THE PROJECT WITHIN THE EXTENSION PERIOD

WHEREAS, pursuant to Proclamation No. 137, series of 1987, it declared a certain portion of the National Government Center site at Quezon City, consisting of One hundred Fifty (150) hectares (184 has. per actual survey), open for disposition;

WHEREAS, provisions of Proclamation No. 248 necessitates major adjustments in the activities and timetable of the National Government Center Housing Project (NGCHP), foremost of which are the formulation and setting up of unexpropriated lots and consolidation/subdivision titles, and finally conveying the individual titles to beneficiaries;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Executive Order No. 145, series of 2002, the National Government Center Housing Committee was abolished and its functions transferred to the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC);

WHEREAS, pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 50, series of 2002, the term of the project shall only be until December 31, 2002.

WHEREAS, the completion of the project necessitates its extension beyond December 2002 and the strengthening of the existing Project Office under HUDCC to make the project more responsive to the needs of the housing beneficiaries;

NOW THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of thePhilippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Extension of the National Government Center Housing Project. The term of the NGCHP is hereby extended until December 31, 2005 to ensure the realization of the objectives of Proclamation Nos. 137, 248 and 1169.

SEC . 2. Support Agencies. In addition to HUDCC as the implementing arm of the project, the following agencies are hereby ordered to perform their specific functions:

a. Home Guaranty Corporation.(HGC) – being the Project Trustee, to provide all the necessary financial assistance needed for the fast-tracking of the project such as the expropriation, reconstitution, consolidation/subdivision of titles chargeable to the NGCHP Trust Fund;

b. Office of the Solicitor General – to handle or give priority to legal cases needed for the fast-tracking of the project and in dealing with expropriation of un-acquired lots, reconstitution of burn/lost titles and assist in the ejectment of the non-beneficiaries of the project;

c. Department of the Interior and Local Government/Local Government of Quezon City – to assist in the prevention of the professional squatters and squatting syndicate, new entrants and the likes, and facilitate the reconstitution of burn/lost titles and other development requirements of the project;

d. Land Registration Authority and Land Management Bureau – to assist in the land verification, technical research and transfer of titles, administrative reconstitution of burn/lost titles and consolidation/subdivision of titles within the project and exempting the project from the existing policy subdivision approval limited to four-lots.

e. Department of Health – to provide additional health facilities/structure to project beneficiaries;

f. Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board – to assist in the resolution of Home Owners Association (HOA) disputes pursuant to the new HGC charter.

SEC . 3. Faster Implementation of the Project. The HUDCC is hereby directed to fast-track the implementation of the Project. If deemed necessary, HUDCC through its project office, is authorized to enter into agreements with concerned agencies and private entities to ensure the project completion.

SEC . 4. Saving Clause. All provisions of Memorandum Order No. 151 and Memorandum Order No. 391 not inconsistent herewith shall remain valid and effective.

SEC . 5. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect on01 January 2003.

Done in the City of Manilathis 13 th day of January, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary