MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 19

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 107 CONSTITUTING THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT CHORALE (OP CHORALE)

The Chorale shall be under the direct supervision of the Office of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Administration and Finance.

The Chorale shall be the Official choir of the Office of the President (OP Proper) and with the approval of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Administration and Finance, shall play vital roles and represent OP in various events and special occasions of the Office especially during official functions of the President, the First Family, and other OP Officials in Malacañang or in any place requiring their participation, by providing musical entertainment. It shall likewise represent the Office of the President in other activities/events within or outside of OP where chorale presentations are involved, as may be requested by, or upon prior approval of the Deputy Executive Secretary for Administration and Finance.

In order to effectively carry out its goals and objectives, the Chorale shall hold at least two practice sessions every week, with each session lasting for at least two (2) hours, at the Social Hall, Mabini Building or in any available venue in Malacañang complex. Extra rehearsals shall be determined ahead of time as the need arises.

The Office of the President shall provide necessary funds for the acquisition of costumes and other chorale paraphernalia, transportation, refreshments during rehearsals and special activities, and allowances / honoraria not exceeding the allowable daily allowance per official performance and engagement.

For official engagements, the coordinator of the chorale shall be notified at least one (1) week before the actual performance, unless participation is urgent and there is no material time to notify. All concerned Offices / Units in the Office of the President are enjoined to coordinate with the Chorale for their participation during official functions of the President, the First Family and other OP officials within or outside Malacañang.

Heads of the Primary units in OP arc hereby enjoined to give their full support to the Chorale and to all of its activities.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary

June 22, 2001