MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 13

AMENDING MEMORANDUM ORDER NO 462, DATED JANUARY 30, 1998, PRESCRIBING THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE DRESS CODE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Special Order No. 79-01, dated March 8, 2001, and existing government laws, the following Guidelines on the Dress Code in the Office of the President of the Philippines (Proper), is hereby prescribed to amend OP Memorandum Order No. 462, dated January 30, 1998, to wit:

I. COVERAGE

This Memorandum Order shall cover the officials and employees of the Office of the President (Proper), whether permanent, casual, or temporary.

II. SCHEDULE OF UNIFORM DAYS

1         For Ladies

Days

Attire

Footwear

Knee-length pencil skirt (Moss green)

2         For Gentlemen:

A. PSO VI to Director level:

Days

Upper Garment

Pants

Shoes

Others

Santana with colored OP Logo: embroidered

B. PSO V and below:

Days

Upper Garment

Pants

Shoes

Others

Santana with colored OP Logo: embroidered

C. In accordance with the President’s call for austerity, the wearing of Jusi Barong Tagalog on Mondays for Filipiniana shall be set aside. Instead, the more practical white long sleeved-Santana is prescribed as this will preserve the dignified appearance for personnel working in the premier Office of the President.

D. The textile with OP Logo shall be supplied to all OP male personnel for uniformity purposes.

III. PROHIBITED ATTIRE AND OTHER PROHIBITIONS

Pursuant to CSC Memorandum Circular No. 19, series of 2000 (Res. No. 002515), the following attire shall be prohibited for all government employees when performing official functions inside the workplace:

The wearing of “maong” pants, although generally prohibited, may be considered as appropriate attire when paired with a collared polo/shirt (for male employees), or any appropriate blouse or shirt (for female employees).

The following shall also be prohibited during office hours and within office premises:

IV. EXEMPTIONS

A. In accordance with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 19, s. 2000 (Res. No. 002515) the following exemptions may be allowed:

1. When the nature of work of the official or employee demands that he/she wears clothing other than those prescribed above;

2. When religious affiliation or creed or any legitimate practice by the employee in relation thereto, requires him/her to wear a particular clothing;

3. Physical disabilities, and other legitimate health reasons;

4. Pregnant female employees are allowed to wear maternity dress during the period of their pregnancy;

5. Employees who lost a loved one can wear mourning clothes during the period of mourning;

6. Other circumstances analogous to the foregoing.

B. Female employees of the Internal House Affairs Office (IHAO) who do not perform office functions involving paperworks or whose nature of work demands the wearing of other clothing may be exempted from wearing the prescribed uniforms. Likewise, female personnel of the Malacañang Clinic whose nature of work demands that they wear appropriate clothing such as sterile suits are exempt from wearing the prescribed uniforms. Doctors, nurses and other clinic personnel who wear white uniforms shall be required to wear Filipiniana attire on Mondays and the prescribed uniform for Tuesdays. The wearing of white uniform during Wednesdays and Thursdays shall be strictly complied with.

V. SANCTIONS

A. To ensure strict compliance of the wearing of the prescribed uniforms, the Deputy Executive Secretary for Administration and Finance or her authorized representative shall assign personnel to act as uniform checkers in various offices in the OP.

B. The names of officials and employees found violating the provision on the wearing of the prescribed uniform shall be submitted to an Evaluation Committee to be created by the DES for Administration and Finance.

C. The Evaluation Committee shall require a written explanation from the violators and evaluate the same. The Committee shall submit to the DES for Administration and Finance, a report of its findings and recommend the appropriate penalty to be imposed.

D. The penalties to be imposed shall be as follows:

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

Executive Secretary

Manila, April 16, 2001