MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 58

ADOPTING A SET OF HOUSE RULES GOVERNING THE USE OF THE OP (PROPER) PHYSICAL FITNESS CENTER AND ITS EQUIPMENT

The following house rules are hereby adopted to govern the use of the OP (Proper) Physical Fitness Center and its equipment:

Monday – Saturday

8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

2. The following equipment shall be available in the Physical Fitness Center:

a. Two (2) units Recumbent Bike

b. Two (2) units Treadmill

c. One (1) unit Elliptical Edge

d. One (1) set Truster with option and accessories

e. One (1) set SIS 3 Multistation with leg option and accessories

f. Two (2) sets of Dumbbells

3. Interested officials and employees shall register with the Physical Fitness Committee created under Special Order NO. 661-01, dated 16 October 2001, through the Career and Personnel Development Division (CPDD), Personnel Office, which shall be in charge of briefing the participants, scheduling their sessions in the Fitness Center, and checking compliance with the following requirements:

a. Malacañang Clinic Certification/Clearance;

b. Waiver absolving the OP from any responsibility for what may happen to the personnel inside the Physical Fitness Center during the regular sessions; and

c. Official fitness outfit:

and of enforcing the following rules:

a. The Physical Fitness Center shall be maintained clean and environment-friendly; hence, eating and smoking are strictly prohibited inside;

b. Officials and employees shall be allowed to enter the Physical Fitness Center with prior Medical Clearance from the Physical Fitness Committee through the Malacañang Clinic daily (Monday-Saturday: from 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) as scheduled without extension, replacements nor transfer of privilege/s for the use of the Center;

c. Assistant Secretaries and above shall be allowed to use the Physical Fitness Center anytime any day during the week with prior information to the Committee through the CPDD. Directors and below shall be allowed to use the same as scheduled;

d. Proper care should be exercised in the use of the pieces of equipment and facilities (i.e., intentional dropping of weights is strictly prohibited);

e. Equipment must be used only for the purpose for which they are intended;

f. Users shall observe silence inside the Physical Fitness Center;

g. Lockers shall be provided for the purpose;

h. Shower rooms shall be provided separately for ladies and gentlemen; and

i. Children and outsiders shall not be allowed inside the Physical Fitness Center.

j. Cabinet Secretaries, Undersecretaries and guests from other line agencies may use the facilities of the Physical Fitness Center through special arrangements with the OP Physical Fitness Committee.

By authority of the President:

Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, April 18, 2002