MALACAÑANG Manila BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 76

LIFTING THE “HOLD IN ABEYANCE” ORDER ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION NO. 770, s. 1996

WHEREAS, mass housing has been reaffirmed by this government as a centerpiece program in its poverty alleviation efforts pursuant to Executive Order No. 20 dated28 May 2001;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 770, series of 1996 excluded twenty thousand and eight (20,008) square meters, more or less, from the operation of Proclamation No. 451, series of 1953 (which had reserved certain parcels of the private domain of the government as radio station site in what is now Pugad Baboy, Valenzuela, Metro Manila), and accordingly released such area as housing site open to disposition to designated beneficiaries;

WHEREAS, through a memorandum from the Office of the President dated 09 June 1997, the implementation of Proclamation No. 770 was held in abeyance pending resolution of certain concerns raised by the then Office of the Press Secretary; and

WHEREAS, it has been determined that implementation of Proclamation No. 770 can begin subject to necessary adjustments with regard to the Philippine Broadcasting System (PBS) transmitter station found in the area.

NOW , THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Lifting the Directive Holding in Abeyance the Implementation of Proclamation No. 770. The directive contained in the memorandum from the Office of the President dated09 June 1997 holding in abeyance the implementation of Proclamation No. 770, or any order or issuance to that effect, is hereby lifted.

SECTION. 2. Implementation of Proclamation No. 770. Proclamation No. 770 shall be implemented subject to the condition that the present PBS transmitter station shall remain undisturbed in its present location pending transfer thereof to another suitable site.

SECTION 3. Designation of HUDCC as Lead Implementing Agency. HUDCC is hereby designated to take the lead in implementing this Order. It may call on relevant agencies for support and assistance to effectively implement its functions.

HUDCC’s functions under this Order shall include the following:

In effecting the disposition of the land subject hereof, HUDCC shall ensure participation of the duly organized beneficiaries’ association and other stakeholders.

The funding requirements for the various activities that must be undertaken in connection herewith shall come from HUDCC and shall be included in its budget.

SECTION 4. Remittance of proceeds of disposition to TELOF. Proceeds of the disposition of the land shall be utilized for the development of the socialized housing site covered by this Order and the improvement of telecommunication facilities of TELOF.

SECTION 5. Relocation of PBS Tower . The HUDCC is hereby directed to assist the PBS in relocating its transmitter station to a location outside of the area covered by Proclamation No.451. The funding requirements of such relocation shall be identified by the Department of Budget and Management in coordination with the Office of the President.

SECTION 6. Separability Clause. All previous issuances inconsistent with this Order shall be deemed revoked or amended accordingly.

SECTION 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23 rd day of September, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary