MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 74

DIRECTING THE HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COUNCIL (HUDCC) TO FORMULATE AND ADOPT CERTAIN GUIDELINES AND IMPLEMENT POST-PROCLAMATION ACTIVITIES IN THE AREAS PROCLAIMED AS SOCIALIZED HOUSING SITES

WHEREAS, one of the Administration’s priority concerns is to provide land to deserving landless and homeless Filipinos;

WHEREAS, pursuant to this priority concern, the Administration has launched a program that regularizes the tenurial status of informal settlers or occupants in certain socialized housing sites;

WHEREAS, there is a need to orchestrate the various activities in the proclaimed sites, particularly the complementary roles of the National Government Agencies (NGAs) and the Local Government Units (LGUs) concerned, in order to expedite the implementation of Republic Act No. 7279, otherwise known as the Urban Development and Housing Act (UDHA), and the National Shelter Plan;

WHEREAS, the magnitude and extent of the program in terms of area, location, and number of families affected require the active participation and support of the heads of the key agencies for the implementation of projects in these proclaimed sites;

WHEREAS, it is desirable that the Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), People’s Organizations (POs) and Private Sector (PS) representatives on the proclaimed sites be given maximum participation in the planning and development of their housing community in order to demonstrate a new and effective alternative method of implementing a social housing project within a proclaimed area;

WHEREAS, there is a need to ensure that lands proclaimed by the President are disposed of to the intended beneficiaries in the most expeditious, equitable and participatory manner;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order and direct the following;

SECTION 1. The Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) shall confer with the Local Government Unit (LGU), within fifteen (15) days from the issuance of the Presidential Proclamation, for the purpose of facilitating and expediting the conduct of post-proclamation activities necessary to dispose of the proclaimed site to their actual bona fide occupants, to the end that these informal settlers are finally granted the titles to the lands they are occupying at the earliest possible time and in order that these lands are developed as a viable community through participatory planning and utilization of appropriate development schemes.

SEC 2. The HUDCC, in coordination with the concerned LGU within whose territorial jurisdiction the proclaimed site is situated, shall primarily exercise the following powers and functions:

SEC 3. Within ten (10) days from such meeting, the HUDCC shall execute with the LGU concerned the necessary memorandum of agreement or understanding detailing their respective roles and functions relative to the conduct of post-Proclamation activities, with complementarily, coordination, and efficient project implementation as principal considerations.

SEC 4. The HUDCC may call on government departments or agencies, such as the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the National Housing Authority (NHA), the Presidential Commission for the Urban Poor (PCUP), and the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC), which are hereby enjoined to provide the necessary assistance in facilitating and implementing the activities in the proclaimed site.

SEC 5. The HUDCC shall ensure that the LGU concerned, through its local housing board, if any has been constituted, or its equivalent, shall function as the local post-Proclamation secretariat and shall implement the policies and work plans drawn up pursuant to the provisions of the pertinent Presidential Proclamation and this Order.

The LGUs without local housing boards shall create their respective housing boards, or their equivalent, within thirty (30) days from the effectivity of this Order.

SEC 6. The funds necessary to carry out the requisite activities in the proclaimed sites shall be incorporated in the annual budget of HUDCC and the other participating agencies under the General Appropriations Act.

The LGU concerned shall likewise provide the necessary funds to carry out its role and tasks relative to the proclaimed site and this Order. Additional funding requirements for operations shall be incorporated in the LGU’s regular budgets as part of its socialized or mass housing programs as mandated by pertinent laws.

SEC 7. In order to ensure that only qualified occupants shall be awarded the lots for disposition, the HUDCC, through the local housing board concerned, shall institute the following containment measures:

For purposes of this Order, “new settlers or occupants” shall mean individuals who enter or occupy portions of the proclaimed area after the conduct of initial survey and tagging by the concerned agencies in the pre-proclamation phase. The HUDCC shall ensure compliance with this provision and may institute the proper actions and remedies for this purpose.

SEC 8. In order to facilitate the early development of the areas for disposition, the DENR shall, upon written request by the UUDCC, immediately undertake the necessary boundary, topographic, structural and subdivision surveys of the proclaimed areas and shall, upon approval thereof, issue the corresponding special patents on similar documents.

SEC 9. The HUDCC shall submit periodic reports to the Office of the President, through the Office of the Executive Secretary, relative to the status of post-proclamation activities in each of the proclaimed sites pursuant to its mandates under the pertinent Proclamation and this Order.

SEC 10. All previous issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Memorandum Order shall be deemed revoked or amended accordingly.

SEC 11. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13 th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary