MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 53

TRANSFERRING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HIGHWAYS THE OVERSIGHT FUNCTIONS ON THE PRESIDENT’S BRIDGE PROGRAM

WHEREAS, Memorandum Order (M.O.) No. 234, s. of 1994, as amended, established the Oversight Committee on the President’s Bridge Program (PBP) to serve as the policy coordinating body for the implementation of the program;

WHEREAS, owing to the need to reduce special project committees and in order to establish clear lines of accountability, the Oversight Committee on the PBP was abolished and its primary oversight functions transferred to the Executive Secretary pursuant to M.O. No. 26, s. of 2001, as amended;

WHEREAS, the oversight functions on the PBP involve technical matters which are within the DPWH’s area of expertise;

WHEREAS, under Section 31, Chapter 10, Title III, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987, the President has the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Transfer of Oversight Functions . The functions assigned to the Executive Secretary in connection with the President’s Bridge Program (PBP) under Memorandum Order No. 26, series of 2001, as amended, are hereby transferred to and shall be assumed by the Secretary of the Department Public Works and Highways (DPWH).

SEC. 2. Primary Responsibility. The DPWH Secretary shall oversee and monitor the effective and efficient implementation of the projects under the PBP, including the Salam “Peace” Bridge Project, the Tulay ng Pangulo sa Barangay Project, and the Tulay ng Pangulo sa SZOPAD Project.

SEC. 3. Bridge Site Selection. The selection of eligible bridges shall be made by the Executive Secretary.

SEC. 4. Monthly Accomplishment Reports . The DPWH Secretary shall submit to the Executive Secretary monthly accomplishment reports on the projects covered by the PBP.

SEC. 5. President’s Bridse Program Office . A President’s Bridge Program (PBP) Office shall be established under DPWH as a special program management unit to assist the DPWH Secretary in his functions pursuant to this Order. The PBP Office shall have the following functions:

(a)    Plan, implement and oversee the operational details and administrative arrangements necessary for the effective and efficient implementation of the Program consistent with the principles of transparency and accountability;

(b)   Conduct a comprehensive review of all existing loan agreements and submit its recommendations to the DPWH Secretary with the end in view of maximizing the utilization of the ODA funds;

(c)    Prepare monthly accomplishment reports to the DPWH Secretary on the status of the projects under the PBP;

(d)   Obtain support and assistance from appropriate departments, bureaus, government-owned and controlled corporations, local government units, regional development councils, private organizations and individuals for the attainment of the Program’s objectives; and

(e)   Execute and perform such duties which the DPWH Secretary may order from time to time.

SEC. 6. Funding . The Secretary of Budget and Management shall regularly release the allotments and disbursement authority intended for the projects under the President’s Bridge Program, as authorized in the General Appropriations Act, covering both loan proceeds and local counterpart funds.

SEC. 7. Internal Audit . An internal auditor for the PBP shall be appointed by the Executive Secretary. Such internal auditor shall have the duty, among others, of reviewing and checking the disbursements made from the proceeds of applicable loan agreements as well as the Government of the Philippines counterpart funds. The internal auditor shall report to and shall be under the supervision of the Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 8. Repeal . Memorandum Order No. 234 dated September 20, 1994, Memorandum Order No. 474 dated April 17, 1998, Memorandum Order No. 26 dated August 22, 2001, Memorandum Order No. 26-A dated December 10, 2001 and all other orders, rules, regulations and issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Memorandum Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 9. Effectivity . This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of February, in the year of our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary