MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 682

DECLARING FEBRUARY OF EVERY YEAR AS THE CIVIL REGISTRATION MONTH

WHEREAS, the system of civil registration was established in the Philippines on the 27th of February 1931 through the enactment of Act No. 3753, “An Act to Establish a Civil Register”;

WHEREAS, Act No. 3753 requires the continuous and compulsory recording of births, deaths, marriages and other acts and events concerning civil status of persons;

WHEREAS, the registered documents have legal and administrative values in monitoring population growth, and in planning for social and economic development;

WHEREAS, the observance of Civil Registration Month shall remind the citizenry of their duty to register acts and events concerning status of persons, enhance nationwide awareness and appreciation of the legal, administrative and statistical values of civil registry documents and underscore the necessity for Congress to provide adequate funds for enforcement and administration of laws on civil registration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare February of every year as the Civil Registration Month, and hereby authorize the Civil Registrar General to promulgate the necessary implementing rules and regulations which all local civil registry offices in the country may observe in connection with the activities and programs that may be locally held.

All agencies and instrumentalities of the national government and local government units, including government-owned or controlled corporations, the private sector and the citizenry are hereby enjoined to support actively the activities and programs for the Civil Registration Month.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) OSCAR M. ORBOS Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia