MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 463

DECLARING 1990 AS CLARO M. RECTO CENTENNIAL YEAR IN CONSONANCE WITH THE DECADE ON FILIPINO NATIONALISM AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION.

WHEREAS, the year 1990 marks the birth centenary of the late Claro M. Recto, the Father of the Philippine Constitution and one of the foremost leaders and statesmen of our people;

WHEREAS, Claro M. Recto rendered signal service to our country and people as legal adviser to the first Philippine Senate; Representative for the third Parliamentary Independence Mission to the United States; Senator for the fifth senatorial district; majority floor leader and President protempore of the Senate; President of the 1934 Constitutional Convention; Commissioner of Education, Health and Public Welfare; Minister of State for Foreign Affairs; and Ambassador Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Europe and Latin America, 1960;

WHEREAS, Claro M. Recto had served our country with great distinction in peace and war, supporting actively the underground movement during the Japanese occupation;

WHEREAS, it is important that the valuable contributions of this great leader to the promotion of our national progress during his stewardship of the government be inculcated in the minds of our citizenry, particularly the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the spirit of service and self-sacrifice demonstrated by Claro M. Recto should always be remembered by the present and future generations of Filipinos; and

WHEREAS, it is of prime importance that the heroic deeds and unquestioned loyalty and patriotism of this man from Tiaong, Quezon be emulated.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 1990 as CLARO M. RECTO Centenary Year in consonance with the Decade of Filipino Nationalism, and designate the National Historical Institute to take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities in coordination with the Executive Committee created for the purpose:

1. Prepare the general program of the centenary and submit a copy of the same to the President of the Philippines;

2. Promote and direct commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines;

3. Collect, edit and publish the important speeches and written articles that have not yet been published;

4. Erect a fitting monuments or memorials in honor of Claro M. Recto in Tiaong, Quezon;

5. Coordinate with the Bureau of Posts relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and cause the issuance of commemorative medals for Recto Centenary.

The National Historical Institute is hereby authorized to accept or receive donations and other conveyances of funds, materials and service gratuitously for use in the furtherance of its purposes and objectives subject to the provision of Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 373 dated January 9, 1974.

The Institute is likewise empowered to call on any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions relative to the centenary celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (SGD.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia