MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 913

PROCLAIMING THE SECOND WEEK OF JUNE AS “AGRARIAN REFORM WEEK”

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 6657, otherwise known as the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law of 1988, was promulgated on June 10, 1988 and took effect on June 15 of the same year;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 6657 has declared the policy of the State to pursue the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP) in order that the welfare of the landless farmers and farmworkers will receive highest consideration and that the nation can move towards sound rural development and industrialization;

WHEREAS, since the inception of the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program, lands were distributed and component support services were provided on a wide scale to farmers and farmworkers of a country, thereby improving the quality of life and enhancing the dignity of our rural folks and ushering countryside development;

WHEREAS, to sustain this growth and to realize the full development of our rural communities, it is imperative that we preserve the gains of and institutionalize the annual celebration to highlight and invigorate further this centerpiece program of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the Second Week of the Month of June of this year and every year thereafter as “Agrarian Reform Week.”

The Department of Agrarian Reform is hereby mandated to be the lead agency in the celebration of “Agrarian Reform Week.” All other PARC-member agencies are directed to participate and coordinate with the DAR in this regard.

Farmers’ conventions, seminars and fora are hereby encouraged. Appropriations for this purpose may be sourced from the Agrarian Reform Funds.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia