MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 866

DECLARING MINDANAO AS THE ORCHID CENTER OF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, cutflowers, particularly that of orchids, have demands in the world market, specially in the US and European markets;

WHEREAS, our cutflowers (orchids) industry is a potential export commodity which, if properly developed by the private sector with government assistance, could enhance our foreign exchange earnings;

WHEREAS, Mindanao, specifically Davao, is blessed with a distinct advantage of being located outside of the typhoon belt and with tropical climate that is highly conducive to the natural growth of orchids;

WHEREAS, Mindanao, specifically Davao, is the home of the world-famous Waling-Waling variety of orchid, which particular variety has consistently been used as the mother plant in breeding most of the beautiful orchid hybrids that are now marketed around the world and which resulted to a situation where other countries are currently the ones cashing-in on what should have been the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been chosen as the host for the 9th Asean Orchid Congress to be held in 1994;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare Mindanao as the Orchid Center of the Philippines and order:

1. The Department of Agriculture, particularly the Bureau of Plant Industry, to assist technically the growers of cutflowers and ornamentals;

2. The Department of Trade and Industry to assist the industry in the exploration of foreign markets for orchids and other cutflowers; and

3. The Department of Tourism to assist the industry to advertise/promote orchids and other cutflowers in the Philippines and abroad.

This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of February in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia