MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 6

IMPLEMENTING A UNITED NATIONS GOAL ON UNIVERSAL CHILD IMMUNIZATION BY 1990.

WHEREAS, the 29th Session of the United Nations General Assembly and the World Health Assembly in 1974 established the goal of Universal Child Immunization by the year 1990;

WHEREAS, there is a need for all nations to attach high priority to the needs and development of children as integral elements of national plans and policies;

WHEREAS, it is imperative for the international community to reaffirm its increased commitment to child survival, particularly through universal immunization by 1990 in order to reduce mortality in children resulting from preventable diseases;

WHEREAS, the United Nations Children’s Fund at its Executive Board session in 1985, urged world leaders to provide increased commitment to accelerating the implementation of the child survival and development revolution and achieving universal immunization by 1990 in order to reduce dramatically the number of deaths among children from preventable causes;   cda

WHEREAS, the Philippines as a founding member of the United Nations reaffirms its commitment to the objectives of the United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization, particularly the goal of achieving universal immunization of young children and continuing the momentum of primary health care; and

WHEREAS, it is essential to integrate into the health strategy for the Filipino people the basic goal of “Health for All by Year 2000 Through Primary Health Care,” particularly to achieve higher levels of immunization.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order that national support be given to the international goal of Universal Child Immunization by 1990 as adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1985 on the recommendation of the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, and also direct the following:

1. With the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Social Services and Development as lead agencies, all government ministries, agencies and instrumentalities are hereby enjoined to mobilize their network to achieve this goal to immunize every Filipino child against the six diseases – polio, measles, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, and tuberculosis – which have caused considerable number of childhood deaths and disabilities; and

2. All non-governmental organizations, professional and civic organizations, the religious sector and all responsible Filipinos to work together and promote this endeavor within existing national health delivery system.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia