PROCLAMATION NO. 227

PROVIDING FOR THE OBSERVANCE OF THE MONTH OF MARCH AS “WOMEN’S ROLE IN HISTORY MONTH”

WHEREAS, the House of Representatives has designated under Resolution No. 20 the month of March, 1988 and every month of March thereafter as “Women’s Role in History Month”;

WHEREAS, said Resolution No. 20 highlights the historical contributions which Filipino women of every class, religion and ethnic background have made to the growth and strength of the nation in countless recorded and unrecorded ways;

WHEREAS, Filipino women have played and continued to play a critical economic, cultural, political, and social role in every sphere of our nation’s life by constituting a significant portion of the labor force working in and outside of the home;

WHEREAS, Filipino women have played a unique and meaningful role throughout our history by providing the majority of the nation’s volunteer force and have been particularly important in the establishment to early charitable, philanthropic, cultural, and political institutions in the country;

WHEREAS, Filipino women of every class, ethnic, and religious background served as early leaders in the forefront of every major progressive social change movement, not only to secure their own right of suffrage and equal opportunity but also to create a more fair and just society for all;

WHEREAS, it would be fair and fitting that those contributions of the Filipino women be given due recognition.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby call upon the people of the Philippines to observe the month with appropriate ceremonies and activities. Towards this end, the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women is hereby designated as the Secretariat to coordinate its nationwide observance.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia