MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 459

DECLARING 1990 AS ELPIDIO QUIRINO CENTENNIAL YEAR IN CONSONANCE WITH THE DECADE ON FILIPINO NATIONALISM AND DESIGNATING THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE CELEBRATION

WHEREAS, the year 1990 marks the birth centenary of the late Elpidio Quirino, the second President of the Republic of the Philippines and one of the most foremost leaders and statesmen of our people;

WHEREAS, President Quirino rendered signal service to our country and people as representative in the Lower House of Congress, member of the Philippine Senate, U.P. ex-officio member of the Board of Regents, delegate to the Constitutional Convention, Senate Protempore, Vice-President, Secretary of Finance, Secretary of Foreign Affairs, and President of the Philippines (1949-1953);

WHEREAS, it is important that the valuable contributions of this great leader to the political emancipation of our people and the promotion of our national progress during his stewardship of the government be inculcated in the minds of our citizenry, particularly the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, President Quirino had served our country with great distinction in peace and war, supporting actively the guerrilla movement during World War II;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the spirit of service and self-sacrifice demonstrated by President Quirino should always be remembered by the present and future generations of Filipinos; and

WHEREAS, it is of prime importance that the heroic deeds and unquestioned loyalty and patriotism of this man from Vigan should be emulated;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 1990 as ELPIDIO QUIRINO Centenary Year in consonance with the Decade of Filipino Nationalism and designate the National Historical Institute to take charge of the celebration and to undertake the following activities in coordination with the Executive Committee created for the purpose:

1. Prepare the general program of the centenary and submit a copy of same to the President of the Philippines for her information;

2. Promote direct commemorative celebrations throughout the Philippines;

3. Collect, edit and publish the important speeches and state papers of President Quirino that have not yet been published;

4. Erect a fitting inspiring monuments or memorial in honor of President Quirino in places where it should be erected;

5. Conduct a nation-wide contest in painting and the sculpture and in music that shall appropriately and properly honor Quirino;

6. Coordinate with the Bureau of Posts relative to the issuance of commemorative stamps and cause the issuance of commemorative medals for Quirino Centenary.

It is thereby authorized to accept or receive donations and other conveyance of funds, materials and service gratuitously for use in the furtherance of its purposes and objectives, subject to the provision of Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 373 dated January 9, 1974.

The Institute is likewise empowered to call on any department, bureau, office or agency of the government, including government owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions relative to the centenary celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia