MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 207

DECLARING THE CALENDAR YEAR 1988 AS “THE YEAR OF THE FAMILY”.

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines recognizes the Filipino family as the foundation of the nation, and provides that the State “shall strengthen its solidarity and actively promote its total development”;

WHEREAS, the same Constitution declares that “Marriage, as an inviolable social institution, is the foundation of the family and shall be protected by the State”;

WHEREAS, the strengthening of family life, taking into account not only its temporal interests but also its spiritual, intellectual, moral and social dimensions, is the concern of all sectors of Philippine society intent on promoting the common good;

WHEREAS, the initiative and zeal of the non-government agencies committed to the preservation and impairment of family life would be greatly enhanced by the assurance that the Government stands firmly behind their efforts;

WHEREAS, the people should be reminded of the need to maintain eternal vigilance in the preservation of the stability of the family, and should be kept constantly aware of the insidious threats to that stability; and

WHEREAS, a tri-sectoral approach enjoying the support of the Government is likely to be more effective than individual and uncoordinated undertakings;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period corresponding to the calendar year 1988 as “THE YEAR OF THE FAMILY”.

I hereby direct all government agencies to incorporate into their programs for this period measures designed to bring about an improvement in family life. I enjoin the churches, the academe, and the business community to undertake similar activities towards the same end.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia