MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 624

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 24, 1990 TO AUGUST 23, 1991 AS THE JORGE B. VARGAS CENTENARY YEAR IN CONSONANCE WITH THE DECADE ON FILIPINO NATIONALISM

WHEREAS, the government, in observance of the Decade of Filipino Nationalism and Culture (1988-1998), has initiated a determined move to preserve Filipino cultural heritage through the perpetuation of the ideals of our illustrious nationalists;

WHEREAS, 1990 marks the birth centenary of the late Jorge B. Vargas, a public servant, civic leader, art patron and nationalist;

WHEREAS, the heroic deeds, sacrifices, patriotism and idealism of Jorge B. Vargas must be preserved and propagated;

WHEREAS, to insure the successful celebration of the centenary of the late Jorge B. Vargas, there is a need to create a body that shall take charge of the planning and execution of the commemorative activities of the Jorge B. Vargas Centenary Year;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from August 24, 1990 to August 23, 1991 as the “Jorge B. Vargas Centenary Year” in consonance with the Decade of Filipino Nationalism under the auspices of the National Historical Institute (NHI). For this purpose, the National Historical Institute shall undertake the following activities:

1. Prepare and take charge of the general program of activities of the Centenary and submit a copy thereof to the President;

2. In coordination with the Postal Services Office, work for the issuance of a commemorative stamp and the installation;

3. Holding of the First University of the Philippines Master Artists Exhibition at the National Museum;

4. Initiate and sponsor the holding of an International History Conference at the University of the Philippines to evaluate the contribution of Jorge B. Vargas in the development of the Filipino nation, including the creation of the Jorge B. Vargas Professorial Chair at the UP College of Law;

5. Holding of a Boy Scout of the Philippines (BSP) Vargas Memorial Jamboree at the Foggy Heights, Tagaytay City and a Jorge B. Vargas Athletic Tournament;

6. Conduct a nationwide contest for the best biography of Jorge B. Vargas;

7. Take all other measures necessary for the successful execution of the programs and activities adopted in celebration of the Centenary including the conduct of fund drives; and,

8. Call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance or information as it may need in the performance of its functions.

The National Historical Institute may constitute an Executive Committee, composed of representatives from other government offices and the private sector, in undertaking the above-mentioned activities. It is hereby authorized to accept or receive donations and other conveyances of funds, materials and services gratuitously for use in the furtherance of its purposes and objectives subject to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 373.

For this purpose, all donations, bequests, and gifts received by the National Historical Institute for the implementation of its programs and activities pursuant to this Proclamation shall be free from all forms of taxes and shall be deductible in full from the income of the donor for purposes of computing his income tax liability, subject to the pertinent provisions of Section 94 (a) (3) and (b) (2) and (29) (h) (2) (c) (i) of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia