MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 588

AUTHORIZING THE INSTITUTE STUDIES ON DIABETES FOUNDATION, INC. TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL, MEMBERSHIP AND FUND CAMPAIGN FROM JULY 1, 1990 TO JUNE 30, 1991

WHEREAS, about two million Filipinos today are afflicted with diabetes and many of whom are unaware that they have such a disease;

WHEREAS, diabetes presents a continuing and increasing threat to the health of the Filipino population;

WHEREAS, the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc., a charitable non-profit organization established in 1989 for purposes of conducting continuing education and researches on diabetes and assisting indigent diabetes, is dependent on voluntary contributions to fund its scientific and humanitarian services;

WHEREAS, the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc. is currently pursuing its researches on the prevalence of diabetes among our people particularly, the children and youth; providing continuing education to medical practitioner on scholarship basis; and actively providing free treatment and hospitalization to indigent diabetics;

WHEREAS, in order to achieve fully its scientific objectives and to ensure that a greater number of indigents enjoy its services, the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc. needs the financial and moral support of the general public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc. to conduct a national educational, membership and fund campaign from July 1, 1990 to June 30, 1991.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race and creed; employees, students, teachers and school children; and corporations, institutions, and other enterprises, public or private, to give generously and lend their full support to the educational, membership and fund campaign of the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc.

For this purpose, all donations, bequests and gifts received by the Institute for Studies on Diabetes Foundation, Inc. for the implementation of its program and activities shall be free from all forms of taxes and shall be deductible in full from the income of the donor for purposes of computing his income tax liability, subject to the pertinent provisions of Section 94(a)(3) and (b)(2) and 29(h)(2)(C)(i) of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed hereto.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 19th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia