MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 122

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE TUBERCULOSIS SOCIETY, INC., TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL AND FUND CAMPAIGN DURING THE PERIOD FROM AUGUST 15, 1987 TO AUGUST 14, 1988.

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., complements and supports the government’s National TB Control Program aimed at controlling tuberculosis, one of the leading causes of death in the country;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., in undertaking its prevention, treatment and health education activities, seeks to eliminate tuberculosis as a major obstacle to the physical, social and economic well-being of our people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., has expanded its domiciliary and dispensary program to bring the benefits of its services to more areas, and to a greater number of people;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., can achieve its humanitarian objectives only with the participation and involvement of the community; and

WHEREAS, the attainment of the humanitarian objectives of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., will redound to the health and welfare of every Filipino;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, Inc., to conduct a national educational and fund campaign during the period from August 15, 1987 to August 14, 1988.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, to support actively, and give generously of their time and resources to the anti-TB cause, to hasten the control of this debilitating disease, minimize human suffering among the afflicted, and promote national strength and prosperity through a healthy citizenry free from the dangers of the disease.

I also call upon and authorize the Department of Education, Culture and Sports and its school officials and administrators, teachers and students, both in public and private schools, to participate in the Anti-TB Educational and Fund Campaign in the distribution of tickets and TB seals.

Furthermore, I hereby authorize all government corporations and financing institutions and all government offices to appropriate from their funds, donations to the PTS in support of its worthy cause.

It is hereby reiterated that all donations and contributions to the Anti-TB fund campaign and its various projects and activities shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

To enable the Philippine Tuberculosis Society to use its full resources in the fight against tuberculosis, I hereby decree that all its income from whatever sources shall be tax-exempt.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(SGD) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President: (SGD) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia