MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 873

AUTHORIZING THE ASSOCIATION FOR NON-TRADITIONAL EDUCATION IN THE PHILIPPINES (ANTEP) TO CONDUCT A NATIONAL FUND CAMPAIGN FROM JANUARY 1, 1992 TO JANUARY 31, 1993 AND EVERY YEAR THEREAFTER

WHEREAS, the Association for Non-Traditional Education in the Philippines (ANTEP) is a national non-governmental, non-stock, non-profit organization composed of private and public schools, colleges and universities seeking to help our national government fulfill its mission of offering meaningful learning opportunities for all Filipinos;

WHEREAS, ANTEP is actively committed to promote alternative education to broaden the access to the benefits of education to as many citizens as possible, including the out-of-school youth, underemployed, unemployed and cultural communities, to empower people to utilize their own resources, thereby sustaining self-sufficiency and self-reliance and participate in those activities that lead them to a healthy, productive and fulfilling life;

WHEREAS, through the provision of training and research, dissemination of publication and literature on nonformal and non-traditional education and other capability-building activities, ANTEP assists formal education institutions in building up and enriching the human and material resources of their neighboring communities through relevant education and functional literacy;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Association for Non-Traditional Education in the Philippines to conduct a national fund campaign from January 1, 1992 to January 31, 1993, and every year thereafter.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, irrespective of nationality, race, or creed, except students and teachers , to assist in this humanitarian endeavor by giving generously of their means. Likewise, I authorize all government financial institutions and government-controlled corporations to donate portions of their funds to the ANTEP in support of its services.

For this purpose, all donations, bequests and gifts received by the Association for Non-Traditional Education in the Philippines (ANTEP) for the implementation of its programs and activities shall be free from all forms of taxes and shall be deductible in full from the income of the donor for purposes of computing his income tax liability, subject to the pertinent provisions of Sections 94(a) (3) and (b) (2) and 29 (h) (2) (C) (1) of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia