MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 241

PROCLAIMING THE YEAR 1988 AS THE 225TH ANNIVERSARY OF FILIPINOS IN THE UNITED STATES.

WHEREAS, historical research has documented that Filipinos settled permanently in the continental United States, specifically in Louisiana, as early as 1763 by way of the Manila-Acapulco galleon trade from 1565 to 1815;

WHEREAS, the documentation of subsequent arrivals of Filipinos in the United States during the 18th and 19th centuries substantiates a significant finding that Filipino American historical ties predated the establishment of the official relationship created by the Treaty of Paris in 1898;

WHEREAS, the year 1988 marks the 225th year of the Filipino presence in the United States – a testimony to the pioneering spirit and the courage and perseverance of the Filipinos in meeting the challenges of a new life;

WHEREAS, persons of Filipino heritage are now estimated to be more than one million and a quarter, constituting the largest Asian/Pacific American ethnic group in the United States;

WHEREAS, their achievements and contributions in the fields of education and the arts, sports, medicine and nursing, agriculture, agrobusiness and engineering, the military and civil service, have enhanced the culture and quality of life in the United States, thereby earning recognition for themselves and admiration for their country of origin;

WHEREAS, Filipino Americans, while being part of the multi-cultural American society, still take pride in their cultural heritage and maintain their ancestral ties with the motherland.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim the year 1988 as the 225th Anniversary of Filipinos in the United States and hereby call on all Philippine government offices in the United States to extend their cooperation and assistance to Filipino Americans in celebrating the occasion.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia