MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 406

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM 1990 TO 2000 AS THE “DECADE OF PHYSICAL FITNESS AND SPORTS”

WHEREAS, Section 19(1), Article XIV of the 1987 Constitution provides that: “The State shall promote physical education and encourage sports programs, league competitions, and amateur sports, including training for international competitions, to foster self-discipline, teamwork, and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry”;

WHEREAS, a ten-year program of mass-based sports and projects for physical fitness will benefit the children and youth of the country from ages below 1 year to 24 years who constitute 62.5% of the total population;

WHEREAS, there is a need for evolving and implementing a comprehensive ten-year sports and physical fitness program which is mass-based and to include among others: pre-Regional, Regional and National Palarong Pambansa; sectoral physical fitness activities; the encouragement of indigenous sports; identification, training and preparation for Asian, SEA and world competitions, particularly the Olympic Games; and cooperation between the government and private sector in order that sports will be integrated into the national life of our people; and

WHEREAS, team and individual sports develop discipline, uprightness and the will to achieve among children and the youth;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from 1990 to 2000 as the “Decade of Physical Fitness and Sports” and direct the Department of Education, Culture and Sports to be the lead agency in the development of the program and implementation thereof during the Decade.

All Heads of Departments, Offices, Agencies, Local Governments, and the Instrumentalities of the government are hereby directed to support the Decade of Physical Fitness and Sports.

Non-governmental Organizations, National Sports Associations, and the Private Sector are hereby requested to lend their cooperation in making the Decade a dynamic vehicle for the formation of desirable values in our youth and the development of a healthy citizenry.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of May, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia