MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 830

DECLARING THE FOURTEENTH OF DECEMBER 1991 AS A NATIONAL DAY OF PRAYER AND RENEWAL

WHEREAS, the Filipino nation has, in its long history and as enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution, always sought and implored Divine help in building a just, humane and progressive society;

WHEREAS, we, as a people of faith, believe that it is by God’s grace alone, by God’s power alone, that truth, justice, freedom, love and, therefore, peace, can become truly part of the life of persons, part of the life of communities;

WHEREAS, this Administration, including the leaders of Congress, continually enjoins the Filipino people to work with all our might, to pray with all our hearts, but to always leave space for God to work in;

WHEREAS, as individuals and as a nation, we must take time out in prayer to turn our hopes and aspirations, our sorrows and fears, our deep remorse and renewed resolve, our thanks and joyful praise, and most especially our love – all towards God, and allow Him to work in our hearts in our daily tasks; and

WHEREAS, the coming together of all faiths in a day of prayer is a fitting occasion for this purpose;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the 14th of December 1991 as a National Day of Prayer and Renewal.

I invite all churches, religious communities, and religious and civic organizations throughout the Philippines to organize for their respective faithfuls fitting activities in celebration of this day, emphasizing the many areas that we share and that unite us as a people of faith.

All national and local publications, television and radio stations are requested to participate in generating awareness and disseminating information on the themes and activities in relation to the National Day of Prayer and Renewal.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of November in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO

By the President: (Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia