M A L A C A Ñ A N G MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 43

AUTHORIZING THE BANTAYOG NG MGA BAYANI FOUNDATION, INC. TO CONDUCT A FUND CAMPAIGN FOR ONE YEAR.

WHEREAS, the Bantayog ng mga Bayani Foundation, Inc. was established for the primary purposes of creating a monument and establishing and maintaining a park to perpetuate the names and memories of those who offered their lives during the Marcos era of terror and repression from December 30, 1965 to February 25, 1986, specifically, but not exclusively, under certain circumstances, as well as to establish and maintain a fund for the benefit of the families and heirs of those who died under such circumstances;

WHEREAS, to accomplish its laudable purposes, the Bantayog ng mga Bayani Foundation, Inc. needs funds and resources and deserves the support of the government and the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the Bantayog ng mga Bayani Foundation, Inc. to conduct a fund campaign for a period of one year upon the promulgation of this Proclamation.

I call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, regardless of race or creed, to support actively and give generously of their resources to such a worthy cause, so that the programs, projects and objectives envisioned by the Bantayog ng mga Bayani Foundation, Inc. can be attained.

Government agencies and instrumentalities and government owned or controlled corporations are requested to lend their cooperation to the aforesaid fund raising campaign.

All donations and contributions to the fund campaign shall be exempt from income, gift, amusement, and all other taxes, and the same shall constitute allowable deductions in full for purposes of computing the maximum amount deductible under Section 30, paragraph (h), of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(SGD) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia