MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 382

ESTABLISHING THE INTERNATIONAL BENIGNO “NINOY” AQUINO, JR. HUMAN RIGHTS AWARD AND CONSTITUTING A SEARCH COMMITTEE FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, the world witnessed the act of sacrifice that ignited the flame of freedom among Filipinos and international community for the courage and patriotism of Senator Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino, Jr.;

WHEREAS, there is need to perpetuate the achievements and sacrifices of the late Senator Aquino through the establishment of an International Award System on Human Rights which will accord recognition to international human rights advocates who have contributed to the promotion and recognition of human rights worldwide; and,

WHEREAS, there is need to constitute a search committee that will implement the Award System.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishment of the International Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino, Jr. Human Rights Award. There is hereby established the International Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino, Jr. Human Rights Award to be given to outstanding citizens of the world who are advocates of universal human rights, which shall hereinafter be referred to as the Ninoy Aquino, Jr. Human Rights Award.

SEC. 2. Creation of the Search Committee on the International Benigno “Ninoy” Aquino, Jr. Human Rights Award. For the purpose, a Search Committee hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”, shall be created to define the mechanics and criteria and determine the possible awardees.

The Committee shall be chaired by the Chairperson, Commission on Human Rights with the following as members:

1. Undersecretary, Department of Foreign Affairs; 2. Undersecretary, Department of Justice; 3. Undersecretary, Department of Education, Culture and Sports; 4. Undersecretary, Department of the Interior and Local Government; 5. Chief, Office of the Presidential Protocol; and, 6. Three (3) private sector individuals who are recognized experts in the field of human rights advocacy, promotion and protection to be appointed by the Committee Chairperson, one of whom shall serve as Vice Chairperson of the Committee.

SEC. 3. Secretariat Support. The Commission on Human Rights shall provide the technical, administrative and secretariat support to the Committee.

SEC. 4. Functions of the Committee. The Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

1. Determine the nature and scope of the award; 2. Formulate the mechanics and selection process for the award system; 3. Draw up the operational guidelines to implement the award; 4. Coordinate with appropriate United Nations bodies and fora (e.g. United Nations High Commissioners on Human Rights and Refugees, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) and other international bodies to generate support and assistance for the award; and, 5. Submit nominees to the President for the awards

The Committee shall constitute an advisory body for the award system to be composed of men and women of impeccable character and integrity and proven track records in human rights advocacy, promotion and protection which shall assist the committee in the selection and screening of nominees for the award.

SEC. 5. Funding. An initial amount of ONE MILLION PESOS (P1,000,000.00) shall be released from the President’s Social Fund to the Commission on Human Rights for the funding requirements of the Committee, subject to the usual government accounting and auditing procedures.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of February, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.