MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 57

PRESCRIBING THE GUIDELINES FOR THE ADVANCE PAYMENT OF ONE-HALF (1/2) OF THE AMOUNT OF THE CHRISTMAS BONUS AND CASH GIFT FOR CY 1993 UNDER REPUBLIC ACT NO. 6686 TO GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL

I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1.0. COVERAGE

1.1. All government personnel whether under regular, temporary or casual status, and contractual personnel whose employment are in the nature of a regular employee, who have rendered at least a total of four (4) months of service including leaves of absence with pay in the government from January 1 to May 15, 1993 and who are still in the government service as of May 15, 1993 are entitled to the benefit herein authorized.

Government personnel with pending cases, whether or not they are under preventive suspension, those on leave without pay and those absent without official leave (AWOL) shall not be entitled to the benefits herein authorized.

2.0. RULES AND REGULATIONS

The benefits herein authorized involves the advance payment of one-half (1/2) of the amount of the Christmas Bonus and Cash Gift for CY 1993 under R.A. No. 6686. Said benefits shall be deducted in full from the total amounts due the official/employee during the regular payment of the Christmas Bonus and Cash Gift for CY 1993.

2.2. Officials/employees who availed of the benefits herein authorized and who resign and/or are separated from government service for whatever cause before October 31, 1993 shall be required to refund the amount received.

For this purpose, the head of the office/agency concerned and such other officials/employees who took part in the grant of subject benefits shall cause the deduction of the above advance payments from any benefits, including against the last salary, due the official/employee whose government service ends before October 31, 1993.

2.3. An official or employee who is on full-time or part-time detail with another government office/agency or special project shall receive his benefits under this Order from his mother agency. In the case of personnel paid from project funds, the benefits shall be drawn from the same source where he draws his salary.  No one shall receive the benefits under this Order from more than one source.

2.4. Officials and employees who are employed on a part-time basis are entitled to the benefits provided herein corresponding to the basic salary he is actually receiving and a pro-rata amount of the P1,000.00 Cash Gift. Those, who by the nature of their employment, are on part-time service in one agency is equivalent to one-half day service, shall be entitled in each agency, provided that the total benefits shall not exceed the equivalent amount provided in this Order.

The benefits under this Order of an official/employee who has transferred from one agency to another shall be paid by his new Office.

3.0. RELEASE OF FUNDS AND PAYMENT OF SAID BENEFITS

3.1. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to release the necessary funds to concerned government offices out of the amounts provided for the purpose in R.A. No. 7645, the 1993 General Appropriations Act.

3.2. Agencies, however, may use whatever cash is available from their Common Funds to pay the benefits herein authorized without waiting for the receipt of the Advice of Allotment and Notice of Cash Allocation for the purpose.

4.0. FUNDING SOURCE

In the case of the personnel of regular government offices and agencies, the amounts required shall be taken from the approved appropriations for the purpose under the General Appropriations Act for CY 1993.

4.2. In the case of government-owned and/or controlled corporations (GOCCs) and government financial institutions (GFIs), the amounts required shall be sourced fully from their corporate funds.

4.3. In the case of local government units (LGUs), the amounts required shall be sourced fully from their respective local funds.

5.0. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE HEAD OF AGENCY

The head of concerned government offices/agencies shall be held responsible and personally liable for any payment of the benefits herein authorized not in accordance with the provisions of this Order, without prejudice, however, to the refund of any excess payment by the employee concerned.

6.0. AUTHORIZED DEDUCTIONS

The benefits herein authorized shall not be subject to GSIS, Pag-Ibig Fund premiums and income tax deductions. These deductions will be made when the remaining one-half (1/2) of the benefits for CY 1993 is granted on or after November 15, 1993.

7.0. CASES NOT COVERED

Cases not covered by the provisions of this Order shall be submitted to the Secretary of Budget and Management for appropriate evaluation and resolution.

8.0. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 1st day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.