MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 220

CREATING A COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE CONDUCT OF A PHILIPPINE EXPOSITION IN PRINTEMPS, FRANCE IN 1996

WHEREAS , the Philippine Government, in its desire to sustain the positive image established during the Philippine Festival of Arts and Culture in France in 1994, has decided to hold a Philippine Solo Exposition in France in 1996;

WHEREAS , the Philippine and French Governments are committed to the promotion of mutual understanding through enhanced bilateral cultural, tourism and trade relations;

WHEREAS , the forthcoming exhibition provides a major opportunity for attracting prospective investors, businessmen and tourists from France and other European countries and shall further heighten world awareness of the history and culture of the Filipino people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Coordinating Committee for the Printemps Philippine Exposition. A Coordinating Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) for the Printemps Philippine Exposition is hereby created under the Office of the President, to be composed as follows:

The Committee shall also include representatives from the private sector to be appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Chairman.

SEC. 2. Functions of the Committee. The Committee shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities.

a. Act as the coordinating body between the private sector and various government agencies to ensure that all the requirements for the Exposition are attended to and implemented

b. Ensure that the economic advantages of the Exposition area are maximized through a concerted and cost-effective country team approach.

c. Select the theme and theme message of the Exposition as may be acceptable to both the Philippine and French Governments.

d. Ensure the safety and protection of government and personal properties, exhibit materials and special effects needed to complete the cultural Exposition.

e. Call on any department, bureau or office of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, to render such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

f. Seek the assistance of and coordinate with private entities, associations, foundations, cooperatives, and other non-government organizations, including private museums, in mounting the Exhibition and meeting the requirements for the exposition.

SEC. 3. Secretariat. The Committee, through the Chairman, shall establish a Secretariat to service its technical and administrative requirements which shall be composed of personnel detailed to the Committee from member agencies with the Committee Chairman determining the number desired and duration of their assignment. The Secretariat shall be located at the premises of the Center for International Trade Expositions and Missions (CITEM).

SEC. 4. Funding. An amount of TWO MILLION (P2,000,000.00) PESOS which shall serve as the initial Philippine Government contribution to the project, is hereby allocated from the President’s Contingent Fund. The government agencies or instrumentalities represented in the Committee are hereby authorized to draw from their respective budget, additional funds needed to finance the project.

SEC. 5. Term of the Committee. The Committee shall cease to exist upon termination of the project in April 1996.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3 rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.