MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 254

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE HOST COMMITTEE FOR THE 1996 WORLD AMATEUR GOLF TEAM CHAMPIONSHIPS

WHEREAS, the Philippines won the bid to host the 1996 World Amateur Golf Team Championships, referred to as the World Golf Championships, to be held at the Sta. Elena Golf & Country Club (Ladies) on November 7-10, 1996 and at the Manila Southwoods Golf & Country Club (Men) on November 14-17, 1996;

WHEREAS, hosting the World Amateur Golf Team Championship is a signal honor to the country and the Filipino people;

WHEREAS, the holding of the said golfing event will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill and economic benefits to the country;

WHEREAS, the said event, now recognized as the Golf Olympics, will attract not only top caliber players from various regions but also thousands of golf enthusiasts and tourist from all over the world, thereby supporting the government’s tourism program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby constitute a Philippine Hosting Committee for the 1996 World Amateur Golf Team Championships.

SECTION 1. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of the President of the Republic of the Philippines Golf Association (RPGA) as the Over-all Chairman, the Secretary of the Department of Tourism as the Co-chairman and with the following as members, all to be appointed by the Chairman: six (6) representatives from the RPGA Board of Directors; three (3) representatives from the Department of Tourism; and, two (2) representatives from other private agencies or associations.

The Chairman shall be authorized to create a Secretariat and such other committees as may be necessary, and appoint the members thereof.

SEC. 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Oversee and undertake all the necessary plans and promotions for the hosting of the World Golf Championships; and

2. Coordinate with and assist the tournament organizers with respect to hosting requirements.

SEC. 3. Honoraria. The Committee shall be authorized to pay honoraria to those who will render services for the World Golf Championship, subject to the usual accounting, auditing and other pertinent rules and regulations.

SEC. 4. Support From Other Government Agencies. All concerned government departments, agencies and offices, including government-owned and – controlled corporations whose assistance may be sought by the Committee, are urged to extend their support and resources to the 1996 World Golf Championships.

SEC. 5. Funding. The amount necessary for the event, including the operations of the Committee and its Secretariat, working groups and advisory boards, shall come from sponsorships, donations, grants, contributions, proceeds from tournament-related activities, or other forms of assistance from any private or government entity.

SEC. 6. Accounting of Money Received. The Committee is authorized to open an account with a government bank which shall be the depository of the proceeds raised under Section 5 hereof, which shall be disbursed in accordance with existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 7. Coordinating Agencies. The Committee, through the Republic of the Philippines Golf Association and the Department of Tourism, shall coordinate the effective implementation of this Order.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14 th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.