MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 120

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF LUNGSOD SILANGAN

WHEREAS, the government’s vision of Philippines 2000 aims to provide all localities with opportunities for self-development and to widen their access to productive resources;

WHEREAS, Lungsod Silangan, consisting of 180,723 hectares covering the provinces of Rizal, Laguna and Quezon, was identified as one of the first new towns to be established with the end in view of alleviating the problems of Metro Manila;

WHEREAS, the Human Settlements Development Corporation (HSDC), by virtue of P.D. No. 1396 dated 02 June 1978, was tasked to have, as its initial project, the development of Lungsod Silangan Townsite;

WHEREAS, the HSDC has undertaken a divestment/phase-out program and has entered into a Trust Agreement with the Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran-Processing Center Authority (KKK-PCA) to assume its remaining activities;

WHEREAS, the Government recognizes that Lungsod Silangan is a suitable site for urban development;

WHEREAS, there is now a need to reactivate and fast-track the development of Lungsod Silangan to harness its potentials;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by Law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Task Force. There is hereby created a Presidential Task Force for the Development of Lungsod Silangan, hereby referred to as the “Task Force”.

SEC. 2. Composition. The Task Force shall be chaired by the Executive Secretary with the Chairman of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council as Vice-Chairman. Its members shall be composed of the following:

a. Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

b. Secretary, Department of Agrarian Reform;

c. Cabinet Officer for Regional Development, Region IV; and

c. Director-General, National Economic and Development Authority.

The Task Force is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions.

SEC. 3. Functions. The Task Force shall have the following powers, functions, duties and responsibilities:

a. Establish the parameters and provide the Terms of Reference (TOR) for the development of Lungsod Silangan;

b. Adopt a process of maximum consultation with all concerned agencies to ensure that their needs, concerns and ideas are considered in the formulation of the parameters or Terms of Reference;

c. Oversee and facilitate the completion of a development Plan for the Lungsod Silangan area;

d. Formulate innovative schemes to provide opportunities for the private sector to prepare the Lungsod Silangan Development Plan and implement projects within the Lungsod Silangan site;

e. Act as the interim central coordinating body and undertake issue resolution on the development of Lungsod Silangan;

f. Submit regular accomplishment reports to the President; and,

g. Perform such other tasks as may be instructed by the President.

SEC. 4. Secretariat Support. The Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran-Processing Center Authority (KKK-PCA), in coordination with the Presidential Management Staff (PMS), shall provide the technical and administrative secretariat support to the Task Force. To assist the KKK-PCA in fulfilling its functions, it may create a planning group composed of duly designated representatives from the following agencies:

a. Department of Agrarian Reform;

b. Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

c. National Economic and Development Authority;

d. Department of Public Works and Highways;

e. Department of Trade and Industry;

f. Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council;

g. Public Estates Authority;

h. National Mapping and Information Resource Authority;

i. Provinces of Rizal, Laguna and Quezon;

j. Municipalities of Antipolo, San Mateo, Baras, Tanay, Montalban, Sta. Maria, Infanta, Real and General Nakar.

SEC. 5. Funding. Expenditures of the Task Force related to the development of Lungsod Silangan shall be sourced from the unobligated portion of the interest earnings of the HSDC-KKK-PCA Trust Fund.

SEC. 6. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.