MALACAÑANG MANILA BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 284

CREATING THE INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO IMPROVE THE LAND AND WATER INFORMATION AND REFERENCING SYSTEM IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, there is need to review the present land and water information and referencing system in the country with a view to enhancing its responsiveness to the requirements of an efficient land titling system, tax mapping program, monitoring system for land and water environment and other government programs requiring accurate and sufficient information;

WHEREAS, the conduct of such review shall require the collaborative efforts of various government agencies to allow a comprehensive review of the system;

WHEREAS, there is need to establish a mechanism whereby these agencies can work together to accelerate the review and thus, enable government to address with dispatch the critical need for the above information system;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Inter-Agency Committee on Land and Water Information and Referencing System . An Inter-Agency Committee in hereby created to conduct a review of the present land and water information and referencing systems in the country with a view towards enhancing its use and management.

SEC. 2. Composition . The Committee shall have the following composition:

SEC. 3. Scope of the Review . The Committee shall undertake a review of the state of land and water information and referencing systems in the country towards determining the following:

1 Level of their responsiveness to the requirements of an efficient land titling system, tax mapping, monitoring system for land and water environment and other government programs requiring accurate and sufficient information on land and water;

2. Required level of integration of the land and water information and referencing systems of concerned agencies to ensure their maximum accessibility to both government and private sectors;

3. Appropriate institutional framework for the implementation of the system, including the agencies’ individual accountabilities thereunder;

4 Terms of Reference of the project which the Committee may recommend to address and improve gaps in the present system;

5. Appropriate funding source and scheme to implement said project; and

6. Other review parameters which the Chairman may deem necessary.

SEC. 4 . Secretariat . The National Mapping and Resource Information Authority of the DENR shall provide secretariat support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. Technical Working Group . The Committee shall constitute a Technical Working Group composed of representatives from the NAMRIA, Land Registration Authority, DA, DAR, DILG, DOF, NEDA, DPWH, DOST and HLURB to provide technical support in the conduct of the review. In addition, it may tap the services and assistance of other government agencies to accomplish its tasks. Resources persons from the private sector, including those from Interlink Asia of Australia, may likewise be invited for the same purpose.

SEC. 6. Reporting . The Committee shall submit to the President its review and findings, including its recommendations and draft action papers, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Order.

SEC. 7. Sunset Clause . The Committee shall cease to exist after it has rendered its report to the President and turned over its working papers and other documents used in the review, to the Agency identified to undertake the above project.

SEC. 8. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of August the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.