MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 322

AUTHORIZING CERTAIN GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO UNDERTAKE ACTIVITIES IN PREPARATION FOR THEIR CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS IN 1997, 1998 AND 1999

WHEREAS , several offices/agencies have been established by the First Philippine Government under President Emilio Aguinaldo during the 22 March 1897 Tejeros Convention; 17 April 1897 Naic Assembly; in President Aguinaldo’s 23 June 1898 Proclamation; and the Proclamation of President Aguinaldo as President by the First Philippine Congress on 23 January 1899;

WHEREAS , these offices/agencies include the Philippine Army created on 22 March 1897 during the Tejeros Convention; the Ministries of War, Interior, Finance, and Justice (now the Departments of National Defense, Interior and Local Government, Finance and Justice), created on 17 April 1897 during the Naic Assembly; Department of Foreign Affairs, Navy and Commerce (now the Philippine Navy and Department of Trade and Industry, respectively), Public Works, Education and Hygiene (now Departments of Public Works, Education Culture and Sports and Health, respectively); Agriculture and Manufacturing (now Department of Agriculture) created through the 23 June 1898 Proclamation of President Emilio Aguinaldo; Department of Communication (now Department of Transportation and Communications) created during the 20 January 1899 Ratification of the Malolos Constitution; and the Office of the President created during the 23 January 1899 Official Proclamation of the Presidency of President Emilio Aguinaldo by the First Philippine Congress;

WHEREAS , to ensure the successful celebration of the 100th Founding Anniversary of these agencies and to heighten awareness on the significance of these centennials, there is need to supplement the efforts of the National Centennial Commission (NCC) by creating a body in the respective agencies which shall initiate plans and programs, coordinate with multi-sectoral components from business, education, culture and media, and oversee the successful implementation and completion of their respective Centennial Celebrations; and,

WHEREAS , Administrative Order No. 263 dated 26 March 1996 authorizes the grant of anniversary bonuses to government personnel of agencies which are celebrating milestone anniversaries, which shall be sourced from their respective savings from released allotment for operating expenditures.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order as follows:

Section 1. Agency Centennial Celebrations. The Departments of National Defense, Interior and Local Government, Finance, Trade and Industry, Justice, Foreign Affairs, Education, Culture and Sports, Health, Agriculture, Public Works and Highways, Transportation and Communication, the Philippine Army, the Philippine Navy and the Office of the President Proper shall undertake programs and activities in preparation for their respective Centennial Celebrations in 1997, 1998 and 1999, in close coordination with the NCC and the National Historical Institute (NHI).

Sec. 2. Creation of Committees. The above-mentioned agencies shall create their respective Committees to take charge of the preparations for the Centennial Celebrations. These Committees shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Act as principal coordinator for all activities related to their Centennial Celebrations;

2. Recommend to the Secretary/Head of Office all programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted for the purpose;

3. Constitute sub-committees and working groups which shall undertake the implementation of the programs and projects;

4. Coordinate with the NCC and NHI and other concerned government agencies, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations and their subsidiaries to ensure well-coordinated, synchronized and successful implementation of their respective Centennial Anniversary plans, programs and activities; and,

5. Prepare the fund requirements and source funds for its Centennial programs and activities, as necessary.

Sec. 3. Fund Raising Activities. The Committees of the above-mentioned agencies may, when deemed necessary, engage in fund-raising activities to augment funds for its Centennial Programs and activities, in coordination with the NCC. These Committees are likewise authorized to manage whatever donations, contributions and other forms of financial assistance received from the government and private sectors. A Trust Fund shall be set up solely for the purpose with a Government depository bank of their choice and with their respective Secretaries/Heads of Office establishing appropriate guidelines for the utilization of said Fund.

Sec. 4. Centennial Commemorative Items . Whenever appropriate and upon clearance from the NCC, the agencies are hereby allowed to coordinate with concerned agencies for the provision of commemorative notes, coins, stamps, centennial plates and the installation of historical markers, such as the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Philippine Postal Corporation, Department of Transportation and Communications, among others.

Sec. 5. Centennial Anniversary Bonus. Pursuant to the provisions of AO 263 S. of 1996, the above-mentioned agencies are likewise authorized to grant Centennial Anniversary Bonus to its officials and employees in an amount not to exceed P3,000.00 and subject to availability of savings from released allotment for operating expenditures.

Sec. 6. Monitoring of Centennial Anniversary Activities. The National Centennial Commission shall coordinate and monitor all Centennial Anniversary activities, plans and programs of the above-mentioned agencies.

Sec. 7. Supplementary Provision. All of the abovementioned Sections shall be deemed consistent and supplementary to Executive Order No. 128 s. of 1993, Proclamation No. 804, s. of 1996 and E.O. 312, s. of 1996.

Sec. 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20 (Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.