MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 402

ESTABLISHMENT OF A MEDICAL CHECK-UP PROGRAM FOR GOVERNMENT PERSONNEL

WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 5 of P.D. No. 1597, s. 1978 (Further Rationalizing the System of Compensation and Position Classification in the National Government), which continues to be applicable in accordance with R.A. No. 6758, s. 1989 (Prescribing a Revised Compensation and Position Classification System in the Government), all government employees may be granted allowances, honoraria and other fringe benefits;

WHEREAS, keeping a healthy workforce is among the primary concerns of the government considering that the physical well-being of its employees has a significant impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of public service delivery; and,

WHEREAS, the Civil Service Commission also issued Memorandum Circular No. 33 (s. 1997) which provides that all government agencies and Government-Owned and/or-Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) shall provide, among others, a health program for their employees which includes free annual mental and medical-physical examinations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishment of the Annual Medical Check-up Program. An annual medical check-up for government of officials and employees is hereby authorized to be established starting this year, in the meantime that this benefit is not yet integrated under the National Health Insurance Program being administered by the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC).

SEC. 2. Coverage. The medical check-up program shall be granted to all permanent and temporary personnel of national government agencies who have been in the service for at least one year as of the effectivity of this Order. Excluded from the coverage, however, are officials and employees who are already recipients of a similar benefit or any supplementary medical allowance over and above the Medicare benefits.

GOCCs, which do not offer a free medical check-up or any supplementary medical allowance over and above the Medicare benefits shall also establish a similar program for their employees.

Local Government Units are also encouraged to establish a similar program for their personnel.

SEC. 3. Benefit Package. Initial benefits for employees who are below 40 years of age shall include the following: Physical examination, Chest X-ray, Complete Blood Count (CBC), Urinalysis and Stool Examination. Meanwhile, employees whose age is 40 years and above shall be entitled to the following: Physical examination, Chest X-ray, Complete Blood Count (CBC), Urinalysis, Stool Examination and ECG. Benefits may be increased upon the availability of funds.

SEC. 4. Funding. The National Government shall provide the funds to cover the cost of the medical check-up of officials and employees of national government agencies. Expenses for the medical check up of personnel in GOCCs, undertaken pursuant to this Order, shall be chargeable against the corporate funds of the respective GOCCs. Local Government Units, which may establish a similar medical program for their personnel, shall utilize local funds for the purpose.

Funds intended for the program shall be used only for the payment of the cost of the check-up actually rendered.

SEC. 5. Program Administration. This program shall be administered by the Department of Health (DOH). The DOH shall oversee the conduct of the medical check-up for all officials and employees of the national government agencies and administer the funds for the purpose.

SEC. 6. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The DOH, Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the PHIC shall jointly formulate and issue the implementing rules and regulations for this program.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause. All laws, orders, regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2 nd day of June, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.