MALACAÑANG MANILA

Administrative Order No. 288

CONSTITUTING THE SULU DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, it is government’s policy to ensure that the implementation of development programs and projects is undertaken in a coordinated and synchronized manner to provide maximum benefits to our people;

WHEREAS, the province of Sulu was beset by peace and order problems and other man-made disasters which hampered its growth and development; and

WHEREAS, there is need to implement a coordinated effort to accelerate the development of Sulu and improve the living conditions of its people.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION. 1. CONSTITUTION OF THE SULU DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . There is hereby constituted a Sulu Development Task Force for the integrated and synchronized implementation of special economic projects in the province of Sulu.

SEC. 2. COMPOSITION OF THE SULU DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Sulu Development Task Force shall be headed by a representative/officer from the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) to be designated by the Secretary of Public Works and Highways, or any individual designated/appointed by the President, with representatives/personnel from the following agencies as members to be designated by their respective Secretaries:

a. Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)

b. Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG);

c. Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR);

d. Department of Agriculture (DA);

e. Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR);

f. Department of Budget and Management (DBM);

g. Department of Energy (DOE);

h. Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS);

i. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI);

j. Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD);

k. Department of Health (DOH); and

l. Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC)

The Sulu Development Task Force may invite representatives from ARMM, local government units, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to act as consultants and/or advisers to the Task Force.

SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS OF THE SULU DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Sulu Development Task Force shall have the following functions:

a. Implement a multi-agency development program to promote the sustained economic and social development of the province of Sulu, in consultation with concerned local government units, national government agencies, non-organizations, and religious, political and civic groups;

b. In coordination with the Presidential Commission for Countryside Development, prepare the Terms of Reference for the development of the province of Sulu;

c. Adopt a process of maximum consultation with local government units, other national government agencies, non government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups in the preparation, updating, and implementation of economic and social development, programs and projects for the province of Sulu;

d. Cause, oversee, and facilitate the formulation and implementation of special economic and social development projects for the province of Sulu;

e. Formulate innovative schemes to provide opportunities for the private sector to pursue development projects within the province of Sulu;

f. Pool, manage, and coordinate government resources and immediately implement identified priority economic and social development programs and projects in Sulu;

g. Submit regular accomplishment reports to the President; and

h. Perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the President.

SEC. 4. SECRETARIAT/PROJECT MANAGEMENT GROUP . The Sulu Development Task Force shall have a Secretariat/Project Management Group composed of a representative/officer from the DPWH to be designated/appointed by the Secretary of Public Works and Highways, or any individual designated/appointed by the President (who will also act as Executive Director) and representatives/personnel from the member-agencies of the Task Force to be designated by their representative Secretaries. The Secretariat/Project Management Group shall have the following functions:

a. Manage and oversee the planning and implementation on the ground of development projects identified by the Sulu Development Task Force;

b. Liaise with various national government agencies, local government units, non government organization and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to ensure the timely and successful implementation of development projects identified by the Task Force;

c. Consolidate/integrate various Task Force projects and activities;

d. Provide over-all technical and secretariat support to the Task Force; and

e. Submit regular reports to the Task Force.

SEC. 5. PERSONNEL AND RESOURCES . The member agencies of the Sulu Development Task Force shall contribute equipment and personnel (on detail) to the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group. All member-agencies of the Task Force shall contribute funds for the operation of the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group.

SEC. 6. LINKAGING WITH MILITARY AND POLICE . The concerned military and police units in the areas covered by the Sulu Development Task Force shall provide assistance, as may be appropriate, to maintain peace and order in the area.

SEC. 7.REPEALING CLAUSE . All Administrative Orders, rules and regulations, and other similar issuances, or parts thereof which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. EFFECTIVITY . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September in the Year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.