MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 339

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES AND SPECIFICATIONS OF MOTOR VEHICLES FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS

WHEREAS, the acquisition of motor vehicles by the LGUs is necessary to enable local government personnel to more efficiently and effectively perform their assigned functions and responsibilities;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to prescribe certain guidelines and specifications to ensure that the motor vehicles which the LGUs have to purchase are appropriate to the intended uses and users;

WHEREAS, as in the case of national government agencies, the optimum use of resources in the purchase of motor vehicles will enhance the efforts of the LGUs to more expeditiously pursue their development objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. – Governors, City and Municipal Mayors and Punong Barangays are hereby authorized to purchase transport and heavy equipment for their respective provinces, cities, municipalities and barangays out of unencumbered local funds covered by an appropriations ordinance specifically authorizing/earmarking the appropriations for the purpose, subject to the following specifications:

a. Service Vehicles of Local Government Officials

1. For the Use of Provincial Governors and City Mayors – Any four-wheel vehicle with not less than four doors and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 2000 cc for gasoline or 2800 cc for diesel. Allowable options are car airconditioning, AM/FM stereo cassette/CD player and magwheels.

2. For the Use of Vice Governors, Municipal Mayors, City Vice Mayors and Municipal Vice Mayors – Any four-wheel vehicle with not less than four doors and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1500 cc for gasoline or 2200 cc for diesel. Allowable options are car airconditioning, AM/FM stereo cassette player and magwheels.

b. Service/Utility Vehicles

1. For General Urban Use – Any four-wheel utility type vehicle, high side pick-up with roof, with locally manufactured chassis and body, and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1800 cc for gasoline or 2500 cc for diesel. Allowable options are AM/FM cassette player and car airconditioning.

2. For Semi-Rugged Road Conditions in Rural Areas – Any four-wheel “assembled” vehicle with locally manufactured/fabricated owner-type jeep chassis and body fitted with reconditioned/surplus engine with a displacement not exceeding 1800 cc for gasoline or 2500 cc for diesel.

Any four-wheel “assembled” vehicle with a locally manufactured/fabricated passenger jeepney type chassis and body, fitted with reconditioned/surplus engine with a displacement not exceeding 2000 cc for gasoline or 3500 cc for diesel and a sitting capacity not exceeding twenty- one (21) persons including the driver.

3. For Remote Areas with Generally Rugged Road Condition and Mountainous Terrain – Any four-wheel pick-up type vehicle with imported chassis and body, and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 2200 cc for gasoline or 3000 cc for diesel. Allowable options are AM/FM stereo cassette player, car airconditioning, four-wheel drive and magwheels.

4. For Travel to Remote Areas Not Normally Accessible by Ordinary Transport Vehicles – Any two-wheel vehicle with a two or four-stroke cycle engine with a displacement not exceeding 125 cc. Allowable options are windscreen, saddlebag and sidecar.

c. For Transport of Sick and/or Injured Persons

1. Any four-wheel utility type vehicle with locally manufactured chassis and body and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1800 cc for gasoline or 2500 cc for diesel. Allowable options are rotating/flashing lights, siren, two-way radio, airconditioning and AM/FM stereo cassette player.

2. Any four-wheel van or wagon type vehicle with either imported or locally manufactured chassis and body and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 2000 cc for gasoline or 2700 cc for diesel. Allowable options are same as c.1 above.

The motor vehicles indicated in c.1 and c.2 may be converted into an ambulance fitted with necessary medical equipment and apparatus.

3. Original Ambulance – Specifications and special features vary according to manufacturers.

d. For Water Transport

1. A locally fabricated boat/banca with a wooden hull having a passenger carrying capacity not exceeding fifteen (15) persons, with RH and LH rigs, with or without roof and an inboard engine not exceeding thirty (30) horsepower.

e. For City and Municipal Patrol Operations

1. Patrol Car – Any four-wheel vehicle with not less than four doors and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1600 cc for gasoline or 2400 cc for diesel. Allowable options are rotating/flashing lights, siren, two-way radio and airconditioning.

2. Patrol Vehicle – Any four-wheel vehicle with locally manufactured/fabricated chassis and body and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1800 cc for gasoline or 2500 cc for diesel. Allowable options are same as e.1 above.

3. Patrol Motorcycle – Any two-wheel vehicle with a two or four-stroke cycle engine with a displacement not exceeding 125 cc. Allowable options are rotating/flashing lights, siren, windscreen, saddlebag, sidecar and two-way radio.

f. For Highway Patrol Operations

1. Patrol Car – Any four-wheel vehicle with not less than four doors and an engine with a displacement not exceeding 1800 cc for gasoline or 2600 cc for diesel. Allowable options are same as in e.1.

2. Patrol Motorcycle – Any two-wheel vehicle with a two or four-stroke cycle engine with a displacement not exceeding 450 cc. Allowable options are same as in e.3.

g. For Waste Management, Construction and Maintenance of Roads and Bridges – Dump trucks, graders, payloaders, road rollers, cement mixers and other related equipment. Specifications/features vary according to manufacturer, size, capacity, intended use etc.

SEC. 2.- The present inventory of motor vehicles shall at all times be taken into consideration in determining the need to acquire additional motor vehicles as well as the appropriateness of the number, type and specifications of the motor vehicles to the intended use/user.

SEC. 3. All purchases shall be subject to strict budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila this 6th day of June in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) LUIS C. LIWANAG II Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.