MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 224

AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 176, “CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE BOULEVARD 2000”

WHEREAS , Administrative Order No. 176 was issued on 14 January 1995 for the creation of Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000 to prepare, integrate and coordinate all development plans, programs and projects in the Boulevard Reclamation Area;

WHEREAS , the Boulevard 2000 Framework Plan prepared by the Task Force has been approved on 02 November 1995;

WHEREAS, the Task Force has been tasked to integrate in the Framework Plan for Boulevard 2000 projects that will be implemented outside the Boulevard 2000 area, affecting the development in said area and all other concerns which have yet to be specifically addressed by the Plan;

WHEREAS, there is need for closer consultation and coordination with concerned local government units in addressing the problem of relocating displaced families as a result of the implementation of development plans, programs, projects in the Boulevard 2000 area;

WHEREAS , the Philippines will be engaged in several milestone activities such as hosting of the 1996 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) and the Centennial Celebration of the Philippine Independence which are expected to attract foreign visitor;

WHEREAS, there is need to fastrack programs and projects in the area in time for milestone activities to ensure greater impact to foreign visitors;

WHEREAS, the Boulevard 2000 could influence the regional development of the National Capital Region through the introduction of a growth nucleus that will continuously stimulate the activities towards the attainment of a self-sufficient metropolitan community;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order;

Section 1. Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 176 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Section 2. Composition. The Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000 will be chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), co-chaired by the Secretary of the Department Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), with the General Manager of the Public Estates Authority (PEA) as Vice-chairman, and composed of the following as members:

National Economic Development Authority National Centennial Commission Department of Finance Department of Tourism Department of Interior and Local Government Department of Transportation and Communication Department of Trade and Industry Presidential Management Staff Flagship Programs and Projects Committee Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council Bases Conversion and Development Authority Philippine National Bank Government Service Insurance System Social Security System Cabinet Officer for Regional Development for the National Capital Region Cultural Center of the Philippines National Parks and Development Committee Philippine Gaming and Amusement Corporation Office of the Government Corporate Counsel Chairman, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority Governor of Cavite Mayors of Manila, Pasay City, Parañaque, Las Piñas and the municipalities of Bacoor, Kawit and Noveleta in Cavite Metropolitan Manila Waterworks and Sewerage System Five (5) Private Sector Representatives to be recommended by the Task Force Chairman and appointed by the President

Section 2. The life of the Presidential Task Force Boulevard 2000 shall be extended from 14 November 1995 to 14 January 1996.

Section 3. The Public Estates Authority will immediately implement plans, programs and projects in the Boulevard Reclamation Area, in accordance with the Boulevard 2000 Framework Plan;

Section 4. Further, the Public Estates Authority in coordination with the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority and Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council, will spearhead the implementation of Phase II on the Urban Renewal Program of said Framework Plan for areas adjacent to the Boulevard 2000 area.

Section 5. This Administrative Order will take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of November in the year of our Lord, Nineteen hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.