MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 350

DECLARING MAY 8, 1999 AS THE COMMISSION ON AUDIT (COA) CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY

WHEREAS, during the American regime as conditions in the Islands moved fast toward normalcy and essential services of government were installed, the President of the United States issued an Executive Order, dated May 8, 1899, creating the Office of the Auditor of the Philippine Islands (now Commission on Audit);

WHEREAS, to ensure the successful celebration of the 100th Founding Anniversary of the Commission on Audit and to heighten the awareness on the significance of the centennial, there is a need to supplement the efforts of the National Centennial Commission (NCC) by creating a committee which shall initiate plans and programs, coordinate with multisectoral components from business, education, culture and media, and oversee the successful implementation and completion of the COA Centennial Celebration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order as follows:

Section 1. The COA Centennial Anniversary and Celebration. The Centennial Anniversary of the Commission on Audit is hereby declared to be on May 8, 1999. As such, the COA is authorized to undertake programs and activities in preparation of the celebration of the COA Centennial Anniversary, in close coordination with the NCC and the National Historical Institute (NHI).

Section 2. Creation of Committee. The COA shall create a Committee to take charge of the preparations for the Centennial Celebration. This Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

1. Act as principal coordinator for all activities related to the Centennial Celebration;

2. Recommend to the Chairman of the COA all programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted for the purpose;

3. Constitute sub-committees and working groups which shall undertake the implementation of programs and projects;

4. Coordinate with the NCC and NHI and other concerned government agencies, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations and their subsidiaries to ensure well-coordinated, synchronized and successful implementation of the COA Centennial Anniversary plans, programs and activities; and

5. Prepare the fund requirements and source funds for the Centennial programs and activities, as necessary.

Sec. 3. Centennial Commemorative Items. Whenever appropriate, the COA is hereby allowed to coordinate with concerned agencies, such as the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Philippine Postal Corporation, Department of Transportation and Communication, among others, for the provision of commemorative notes, coins, stamps, centennial plates and the installation of historical markers.

Sec. 4. Monitoring of Centennial Anniversary Activities. The National Centennial Commission shall coordinate and monitor all Centennial Anniversary activities, plans and programs of the COA.

Sec. 5. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.