MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 342

CREATION OF A MALACAÑANG HISTORICAL COMMITTEE

WHEREAS , the Malacañang, which was acquired in 1825 by then Spanish Governor-General Juan Antonio Martinez to serve as summer residence of Spanish Governor Generals and since 1863, has become the official residence of the highest official of the land and the official venue for all state functions and events;

WHEREAS , the Malacañang, considered one of the most important historical treasures of the country, has also been the site of many socio-political landmark events in our history as a people;

WHEREAS , there is need to produce a comprehensive multi-media documentary on the rich historical heritage of Malacañang, showcasing significant events that transpired therein and featuring the people who occupied and visited it as well; and,

WHEREAS , the production of a documentary material on Malacañang requires collaborative efforts and close coordination among concerned agencies.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Malacañang Historical Committee . There is hereby created a Malacañang Historical Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) which shall be an ad-hoc body tasked to plan, conduct research and supervise the production of a multi-media (print, video and CD-ROM) historical documentary on the Malacañang Palace.

SEC. 2. Composition of the Committee . The Committee shall be composed of Secretary Alexander P. Aguirre, Head, Presidential Management Staff as Chairman, Press Secretary Hector R.R. Villanueva, as Co-Chairman, Appointments Secretary Apolinario L. Lozada, Jr. as Vice-Chairman, and the following as members:

a. Presidential Protocol Chief Marciano A. Paynor, Jr.; b. Presidential Assistant Lolita R. Haney, Internal House Affairs; c. Brig. General Jose M. Calimlim, Commanding General, Presidential Security Group; d. Executive Director Gloria P. Mara, Radio Television Malacañang; e. Director Teresita B. Paynor, Internal House Affairs – Palace; f. Director Adoracion M. Bolos, National Library; g. Director Ricardo L. Manapat, Records Management and Archives Office; h. OIC Director Emelita V. Almosara, National Historical Institute; i. Director Ma. Edna S. Gaffud, Malacañang Heritage Foundation; j. General Manager Ramy Diez, People’s Television Network; k. Director Alexander M. Arevalo, Office of the President; and, l. Director Cirio H. Santiago, Film Development Foundation of the Philippines.

The Committee shall also include two (2) representatives from the private sector to be determined by the Committee.

SEC. 3. Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Formulate a work program for the production of multi-media material (print, video and computer-based) on Malacañang Palace;

b. Conduct a comprehensive research on the significant events, milestones and people surrounding the history of Malacañang and gather/collate personal accounts/first-hand experiences of former and current Malacañang occupants, officials and staff to get insights and views of the Palace, its occupants and the events which took place in the area;

c. Negotiate and conclude contract relative to the project, including services of consultants, as necessary;

d. Call on any department, bureau or office of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, to render such assistance as it may need in the discharge of its functions;

e. Seek the assistance of, and coordinate with private entities, associations, foundations, cooperatives, and other non-government organizations, in mounting and meeting the requirements of the project;

f. Submit periodic reports to the President on the status of preparations of the said historical documentary; and,

g. Perform other functions/tasks as may be directed by the President.

SEC. 4. Secretariat . The Presidential Management Staff shall serve as the Secretariat to the Committee to service its technical and administrative requirements.

SEC. 5. Funding . The funding requirements for the project, including fund sources thereof, shall be determined by the Committee, in coordination with the Department of Budget and Management.

Section 6. Term of the Committee . The Committee shall cease to exist upon completion of the project.

Section 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 25th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.