MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 313

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE ELEVENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22–25, 1986 EDSA REVOLUTION

WHEREAS, our national spirit was forged by a ceaseless struggle for freedom of Filipinos who rose against colonial masters to become a nation of our own aspiration;

WHEREAS, the February 22–25 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions and ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country;

WHEREAS, the Filipinos astounded the world with feats of valor at EDSA, showing other captive people the way towards a democratic revolution of our time, thereby winning the respect and admiration of the world;

WHEREAS, the triumph of this revolution is rooted in the same spirit that brought our people to freedom a century ago;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of a National Committee. There is hereby constituted a National Committee for the commemoration of the 11th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution which shall be Chaired by Mr. Manolo Lopez, with Agrarian Reform Secretary Ernesto Garilao as Co-Chairman, and the following as members:

Representatives from the NGOs/Business Community:

1. Ms. Victoria Garchitorena 2. Mr. Jose Alejandro 3. Mr. Jose Concepcion, Jr. 4. Mr. Octavio Espiritu 5. Mr. Christopher Carreon 6. Ms. Denise Manosa 7. Mr. Jose Escaner 8. Mr. Lito Lorenzana 9. Monsignor Socrates Villegas 10. Mr. Vicente Jayme 11. Mr. Felipe Cruz, Jr. 12. Mr. David Consunji 13. Mr. Alberto Manlapid 14. Mr. Perfecto Quicho 15. Ms. Tina Monzon-Palma 16. Mr. Norberto Gonzales 17. Ms. Maria Montelibano 18. Ms. Patricia C. Sison

Representatives from the Government Sector:

19. Secretary Domingo Siazon, Department of Foreign Affairs 20. Secretary Gregorio Vigilar, Department of Public Works and Highways 21. Secretary Robert Barbers, Department of Interior and Local Government 22. Secretary Salvador Enriquez, Jr., Department of Budget and Management 23. Secretary Renato de Villa, Department of National Defense 24. Secretary Cesar Bautista, Department of Trade and Industry 25. Secretary Robert de Ocampo, Department of Finance 26. Secretary Ricardo Gloria, Department of Education, Culture and Sports 27. Secretary Leonardo Quisumbing, Department of Labor and Employment 28. Chairman Dionisio dela Serna, CORD-NCR 29. Chairman Angel Alcala, Commission on Higher Education 30. PA Amina Rasul-Bernardo, National Youth Council 31. Secretary Alexander Aguirre, Presidential Management Staff 32. Chairman Prospero Oreta, Metropolitan Manila Development Authority 33. Mayor Ismael Mathay, Jr. 34. Administrator Jose Rufino, Livelihood Corporation 35. Undersecretary Honesto Isleta, Philippine Information Agency 36. Chairman Alfredo Antonio, Development Bank of the Philippines 37. Chairman Victorino Basco, Bases Conversion Development Authority 38. Director Serafin Quiazon, National Historical Institute 39. Chairperson Imelda Nicolas, National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women 40. Director-General Jose Lacson, Technical Education and Skills Development Authority 41. Mayor Benjamin Abalos, Chairman, Metro Manila Peace and Order Council 42. Director-General Bren Guiao, KABISIG People’s Movement-National Operations Center

Mr. Jose Concepcion, former chairperson of the National Committee for the commemoration of the 10th Anniversary of the EDSA Revolution, shall serve as adviser to the Committee.

SEC. 2. Functions. The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate a comprehensive plan for the nationwide commemoration of the 11th Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution and coordinate with all sectors concerned in the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors, as may be necessary, to ensure the success of the celebration; and

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors who would like to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

SEC. 3. Staff Support. The KABISIG People’s Movement-National Operations Center (KPM-NOC) and the Department of Agrarian Reform shall provide the technical and secretariat support to the Committee. The Heads of departments, agencies, government owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are directed to give full support to the Committee and its various working Committees and to actively participate in the said celebrations.

SEC. 4. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5,000,000.00) to support this activity. Concerned agencies may allocate such amount as may be necessary to defray the expenditures that may be incurred from participation in the EDSA anniversary, subject to the usual accounting and auditing regulations.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.