MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 194

PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE SOCIAL REFORM AGENDA CONVERGENCE POLICY AND ITS OPERATIONALIZATION, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS , the Social Reform Agenda (SRA) intends to improve access to quality basic services; accelerate asset reform and sustainable development of productive resources; and allow greater access to economic opportunities; and strengthen institution-building and participation in governance of Basic Sectors in the 19 priority provinces and other priority geographic areas, as embodied in Memorandum Order No. 213 dated June 17, 1994;

WHEREAS , during the conduct of their respective Provincial Social Reform Summits, the 19 priority provinces accepted and committed their participation in adopting the SRA as an approach to their accelerated and comprehensive development and in providing resources funding for its accomplishment and implementation;

WHEREAS , the SRA has defined convergence as the focusing and synchronization of resources, services and interventions by SRA Flagship Programs and other agencies/entities on specific target families and communities, using the Minimum Basic Needs (MBN) Approach as the strategy for convergence, and providing for multi-level, multi-sectoral and inter-agency coordination and consultation, as embodied in Proclamation No. 548;

WHEREAS , there is a need to translate SRA objectives and policies into a single, unified action plan directing all Flagship Champions, other National Government Agencies, Local Government Units and other entities, primarily to operationalize the SRA Convergence Policy, but more importantly, to provide a common direction to the government bureaucracy, thus energizing it and making it more effective in its poverty alleviation efforts in the 19 priority provinces and other priority geographic areas;

WHEREAS , specific focal points within these 19 priority provinces and other priority geographic areas have been identified as Convergence Areas, taking into consideration the respective Sector’s demand for Basic Reform Commitments to address their specific needs;

WHEREAS , the successful and effective implementation of the SRA Convergence Policy will lead to a rapid and qualitative improvement in the levels of well-being of the disadvantaged sectors and communities in Convergence Areas, as well as enhance the overall national competitiveness of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the adoption of the ensuing provisions for the operationalization of the Social Reform Agenda Convergence Policy.

SECTION 1 . All National Government Agencies, including Government Owned and Controlled Corporations and Government Financial Institutions, and Local Government Units are hereby directed to take appropriate steps to implement the Social Reform Agenda (SRA) Convergence Policy, within the parameters of the Implementing Guidelines for the Operationalization of the SRA Convergence Policy (IGO-SRA) issued by the Social Reform Council.

SEC. 2 . To effect immediate implementation and ensure a baseline for the monitoring of progress of operationalization of the SRA Convergence Policy, Flagship Champions and Convergence Lead Agencies are hereby directed to coordinate and synchronize the preparation of socio-economic profiles for each of the identified specific Convergence Areas in partnership with other Government Agencies and Local Government Units.

a. The socio-economic profiles shall follow a format included in the IGO-SRA. Profiles, as much as possible must come from primary sources, and in case of their non-availability, may come from secondary sources. This will serve as baseline for measuring movements in the levels of well-being of sectors and communities in the Convergence Areas.

b. The baseline socio-economic profiles shall be submitted to the Social Reform Council (SRC) Secretariat not later than 30 June 1995, with refinements and updating likewise submitted periodically.

SEC. 3 . The Office of the Press Secretary through the Philippine Information Agency (PIA) is hereby directed to formulate a National Communication and Advocacy Program regarding the SRA Convergence Policy in coordination with the SRC Secretariat, the Foreign Information Council, other National Government Agencies, Government Owned and Controlled Corporations, Government Financial Institutions, Local Government Units and identified key private sector partners, with the view of harmonizing all communication and advocacy programs with a bearing on the Social Reform Agenda. Flagship Champions and Convergence Lead Agencies shall plan, implement and periodically review and refine, as necessary, their respective information programs in accordance with this National Communication and Advocacy Program.

SEC. 4 . National Government Agencies and Local Government Units are hereby directed to issue necessary operational directives or issuances supportive of the provisions of the SRA Convergence Policy as embodied in Proclamation No. 548 and the provisions of IGO-SRA, in close coordination with the SRC Secretariat to ensure consistency.

SEC. 5 . Convergence Lead Agencies and Local Government Units, in coordination with the SRC Secretariat, shall conduct periodic monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the SRA Convergence Policy. Periodic assessments shall be undertaken every six months, and provisions of the IGO-SRA may be refined as the need arises to better respond to changing conditions in Convergence Areas.

SEC. 6 . The funding for the programs, projects and activities to implement this Order shall come from: (a) the agencies of the Flagship Champions and the Convergence Lead Agencies; and (b) the President’s Contingent Fund and any other Fund as the President may authorize. This shall be in close coordination with the Department of Budget and Management and the SRC Secretariat, subject to availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations. The SRC Secretariat may prepare appropriate additional guidelines for this purpose.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed to this Order.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.