MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 202

FURTHER AMENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 123, DATED APRIL 4, 1989 AS AMENDED BY ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 125, DATED APRIL 21, 1989

WHEREAS, science and technology has a critical role in the attainment of our country’s industrialization goal and socio-economic development;

WHEREAS, the Science and Technology Master Plan (STMP) which was approved by the Science and Technology Coordinating Council (STCC) provided the strategies and directions for science and technology development and utilization;

WHEREAS, to pursue these strategies and directions, there is a need to enhance the representation of the government, private sector and academe in the STCC;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the amendments of Administrative Order No. 123 dated April 4, 1989 as amended by Administrative Order No. 125 dated April 21, 1989, entitled “Constituting the Science and Technology Coordinating Council,” as follows:

SECTION 1. Section 1 of Administrative Order No. 123 as amended by Administrative Order No. 125 is further amended to read as follows:

“Section 1. Composition . The Science and Technology Coordinating Council (STCC) shall be composed of the following:

The members of the Council may designate their duly authorized representatives. Such designated representatives shall have full powers to vote for and act for, and in behalf of their principals, in any action to be taken by the Council unless their designated provides otherwise.

Other heads of executive agencies, private organizations or individuals can be called upon by the Council to attend any Council Meeting and assist the Council to resolve issues and problems that concern their respective offices.”

SEC. 2. Section 2 of A.O. 123 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. Powers and Functions . The Council shall:

a. Act as a science and technology advisory body to the President;

b. Formulate science and technology policies and programs;

c. Coordinate the science and technology activities of departments, agencies, academe, business sector, non-government organization and people’s organization and oversee allocation of science and technology funds including research and development budget of government departments, agencies and state colleges and universities to accelerate science and technology development and utilization in accordance with the STMP and related plans;

d. Institute appropriate measures to update, revise and enhance the STMP and related plans;

e. Recommend to Congress legislation on science and technology; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the President.”

SEC. 3. Section 3 of A.O. 123 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. Technical Working Group and Secretariat . The Council shall be assisted by a technical working group composed of technical staff from each member organization/sector of the Council and a secretariat based in the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) headed by the Secretary of STCC designated by the Chairman of the Council.”

SEC. 4. Section 4 of A.O. 123 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. Meetings of the Council . The Council shall meet quarterly; provided, however, that the Chairman may convene the Council anytime whenever he deems it necessary.

A special meeting shall be convened every last quarter of the year to be presided by the President.”

SEC. 5. Section 5 of A.O. 123 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 5 . Funding . The activities and operational expenses of the Council shall be funded from the DOST budgetary appropriations.”

SEC. 6. Section 6 of A.O. 123 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 6. The Council shall submit an annual report to the President and Congress.”

SEC. 7. A new Section 7 is hereby incorporated to read as follows:

“Sec. 7. Mode of Selection of Private Sector Representatives . The President shall appoint the private sector representatives, who are not ex-officio members, upon nomination of the accredited organizations, ensuring balanced representation from Luzon, Visayas, Mindanao and various sectors such as the agri-business, manufacturing and services sector.

The private sector representatives of the Council shall serve for a period of three (3) years; provided, however , that when a vacancy arises due to the resignation, death or incapacity of a member, a replacement shall be appointed by the President who shall serve for the unexpired term of office.”

SEC. 8. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.