MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 328

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE FOR THE GERRY PEÑALOSA VERSUS LEE SEUNG KOO WORLD BOXING COUNCIL SUPERFLYWEIGHT TITLE FIGHT

WHEREAS , the Philippines has successfully played host to major world conferences and international sporting events;

WHEREAS , Gerry Peñalosa acquired his WBC Superflyweight title in Japan against Hiroshi Kawashima;

WHEREAS , as the reigning champion, it is only fitting that Gerry Peñalosa should stage his defense in his own country before his countrymen;

WHEREAS , the staging of this world championship directly supports the efforts of the tourism industry in projecting and promoting the Philippines as an ideal site for international and local sporting events;

WHEREAS , the holding of this event will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill and economic benefits to the country; and,

WHEREAS , the defense fight of Gerry Peñalosa will promote sport of boxing to worldclass standards in the country.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. A Philippine Management Committee (PMC), hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”, is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake all the necessary preparations for the staging of the next title defense of Gerry Peñalosa against Korean Lee Seung Koo in the City of Lapu-Lapu, scheduled on 14 June 1997.

The Committee shall be composed of the Chairman of the Games and Amusement Board (GAB) as Chairman with representatives from the Department of Tourism (DOT), Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO), Philippine and Gaming Corporation (PAGCOR), Lapu-Lapu City Local Government, Mactan Cebu International Airport Authority (MCIAA), 2nd Air Division, Mactan Air Base, Armed Forces of the Philippines, and two (2) private sector representatives to be determined by the Committee, one of whom shall be designated as Co-Chairman of the Committee.

Sec. 2. All concerned government departments, agencies and offices including government-owned and controlled corporations, whose assistance will be sought by the Committee, are directed to extend their support and resources to this world title fight.

Sec. 3. The Committee shall form a secretariat to be composed of representatives from the member agencies.

Sec. 4. The amount necessary for this event, including the operations of the Committee, its secretariat and working groups, shall come from sponsorships, donations, grants, contributions, proceeds from tournament related activities, or any form of assistance from any private or government entities.

Sec. 5. The Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA) is authorized to source funds from its Trust Liability Account (TLA) pursuant to Section 3 of Executive Order No. 46 (04 September 1986) to cover the hosting fee of $50,000 to be incurred by the Committee.

Sec. 6. The Committee shall be authorized to pay honoraria to those who will be involved with this event, subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Sec. 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18 th day of April, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.