MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 44

REVOKING LETTER OF INSTRUCTION NO. 189, SERIES OF 1974

WHEREAS, Letter of Instructions No. 189, issued May 23, 1974, directs the Department of Public Works and Highways and other infrastructure government agencies to purchase their asphalt requirements from the Petrophil Corporation and/or its subsidiaries;

WHEREAS, LOI No. 189 provides that “such government agencies and entities may purchase their requirements of asphalt from other companies and/or persons only to the extent of the quantity that Petrophil Corporation is unable to supply”;

WHEREAS, there exists private suppliers/manufacturers of asphalt which can provide the necessary asphalt requirements of the government at much lower prices than those sold by the Petrophil Corporation without compromising government specifications and standards;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby direct:

1. Letter of Instructions No. 189 issued May 23, 1974, is hereby revoked.

2. The Department of Public Works and Highways and all other concerned government agencies are hereby authorized to purchase their asphalt requirements from private suppliers/manufacturers through competitive public bidding with Petrophil as a Mandatory Bidder; Provided, That government specifications and standards therefor shall be fully complied with; and Provided further, That such purchases be in accordance with the guidelines prescribed under Executive Order Nos. 165, S. of 1987, 301, S. of 1987, 380, S. of 1989, E.O. 164, S. of 1987, and other subsequent rules and issuances.

Where PETROPHIL is a participant and the bidding process fails for any reason not attributable to PETROPHIL, the contract may then be awarded by the purchasing government entity to PETROPHIL.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of March in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.