MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 87

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON MANILA BAY REHABILITATION

WHEREAS, it is the concern of our society to have a properly developed, healthy and safe Manila Bay area;

WHEREAS, the rehabilitation of the Manila Bay involves the various agencies, institutions and instrumentalities and necessitates coordinated and sustained efforts; and

WHEREAS, there is a need for a body to oversee and coordinate the planning and rehabilitation efforts for the development of Manila Bay.

SECTION 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force on Manila Bay Rehabilitation . There is hereby created under the Office of the President, the Presidential Task Force on Manila Bay Rehabilitation.

SECTION 2. Duties and Responsibilities . The Task Force shall undertake, among others, the following duties and responsibilities:

a. Serve as forum for the deliberation and clarification of issues and concerns;

b. Review existing policies, programs, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations concerning Manila Bay;

c. Formulate a comprehensive and integrated Program for the rehabilitation and development of Manila Bay, and

d. Determine the need to create a permanent body to oversee the implementation of the above mentioned comprehensive and integrated program, and to coordinate and recommend to the President policies, strategies and measures for the development/improvement of the Bay.

SECTION 3. Composition . The Task Force shall be composed of heads of the following agencies or their duly designated representatives with the ranks of at least Undersecretary or Assistant General Manager, as the case may be:

SECTION 4. Technical and Administrative Support . The Department of Environment and Natural Resources – Environmental Management Bureau shall provide technical, administrative and secretariat support to the Task Force. Whenever it is deemed necessary, the Task Force, through the Chairman, may tap the assistance of other government agencies, private/civic organizations, for the furtherance of its mandate.

SECTION 5. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately. The Comprehensive Plan for the Rehabilitation and Development of the Manila Bay shall be submitted to the President three (3) months after the signing of this Administrative Order.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 8th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.