MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 107

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE EIGHTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FEBRUARY 22-25, 1986 EDSA REVOLUTION

WHEREAS, the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution restored democratic institutions, ushered in meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country and is acclaimed to be the crowning glory and legacy of the Filipino to the world;

WHEREAS, the triumph of this Revolution was anchored upon People Power, the spontaneous teamwork in seeking to transform Philippine society and chart a new course for the nation by linking arms and courageously asserting the democratic rights;

WHEREAS, to animate the potent lessons and relevance of this active but non-violent revolution, it is necessary to organize a committee that shall plan and coordinate a meaningful, nationwide, and multi-sector-participated celebration of the EDSA Revolution.

NOW, THEREFOR, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Committee for the Commemoration of the February 22-25, 1986 Revolution.

Section 1. Composition. The Committee shall be composed of Ms. Patricia Sison, Trustee of the Evelio V. Javier Foundation, Inc. and representing the private sector, as Chairman; Secretary Renato de Villa, representing the government sector as Co-Chairman; and the following as members:

Representative of the NGOs/Business Community

1. Ms. Victoria Garchitorena

2. Mr. Jose Concepcion, Jr.

3. Mr. Jose Alejandro

4. Ms. Mitch Valdez

5. Fr. Robert Reyes

6. Mr. Oscar Hilado

7. Mr. Octavio V. Espiritu

8. Mr. Eugenio Lopez

9. Mr. Christopher Carreon

10. Mr. Jose ‘Ping’ de Jesus

11. Ms. Denise Mendoza

12. Mr. Jose Escaner

13. Ms. Solita C. Monsod

14. Mr. Lito M. Lorenzana

Representatives of the Government Sector

14. Sec. Rafael M. Alunan III, Department of Interior and Local Government

15. Sec. Gregorio Vigilar, Department of Public Works and Highways

16. Sec. Salvador Enriquez, Department of Budget and Management

17. Mayor Ismael Mathay, Jr., Metro Manila Authority

18. Director-General Bren Z. Guiao, Kabisig People’s Movement

19. Administrator Renato Valencia, Social Security System

20. Presidential Assistant Benjamin De Leon, Office of the President

21. Administrator Jose Rufino, Livelihood Corporation

22. Usec. Honesto Isleta, Philippine Information Agency

Section 2. Function. The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. Formulate a comprehensive plans for the nationwide commemoration of the Eight Anniversary of the February 22-25, 1986 EDSA Revolution, and coordinate with all sectors concerned the implementation of the same, taking into consideration austerity measures and the spirit of volunteerism;

2. Create such working committees and designate the respective members thereof from both the private and government sectors as may be necessary to ensure the success of the celebration;

3. Invite or enjoin and mobilize all sectors who would like to participate in the celebration and call upon any government instrumentality to render the necessary assistance therefor.

Section 3. Staff Support. The Kabisig People’s Movement National Operations Center (KPMNOC) shall provide technical and secretariat support to the Committee. The heads of departments, agencies, government owned and controlled corporations and other government instrumentalities are enjoined to give full support to the Committee and its various working committees and to actively participate in said celebrations.

Section 4. Funding. The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000.00) necessary to support this activity. Concerned agencies may allocate such amount as incurred from participation, subject in the EDSA anniversary, to the usual accounting and auditing regulations.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31 st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.