MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 7

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON YOUTH AFFAIRS

WHEREAS, the Presidential Council for Youth Affairs (PCYA) was created by virtue of Executive Order No. 274, dated 25 July 1987 to serve as the direct link of the youth to government in policies and programs affecting the youth;

WHEREAS, Section 2 of Executive Order No. 274 provides that the Chairman and members of the Council shall serve at the pleasure of the President;

WHEREAS, there is a need to reconstitute the PCYA to ensure the youth’s more meaningful participation in nation building and to align the PCYA’s thrusts with the objectives of the present administration;

WHEREAS, the smooth transition of the functions and responsibilities of the Council requires the creation of an interim body such as a task force so as not to jeopardize the functions and activities of the PCYA.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of the Task Force on Youth Affairs . There is hereby created the Presidential Task Force on Youths Affairs herein referred to as the Task Force.

Sec. 2. Duties and Responsibilities . The Task Force shall undertake the following duties and responsibilities:

a. Assist the PCYA in the formulation of policies and programs necessary to involve the youth in more intensive and meaningful ways in community development and nation building;

b. Conduct a review of the PCYA’s performance, its on-going activities and plans, its structure and operations and to recommend appropriate changes to the President;

c. Provide guidance and direction in the screening and selection process for the new membership of the PCYA Council, including the proposed Chairman, for the President’s approval;

d. Ensure a smooth transition from the old to the new PCYA Council.

Sec. 3. Composition . The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

Sec. 4. On the PCYA . In the interim period that the new Council members have not yet been designated, the existing PCYA Council members shall continue to dispose of their functions and responsibilities. The PCYA shall extend all necessary assistance to the Task Force to enable it to attain the objectives of this Administrative Order.

Sec. 5. Tenure . The Task Force shall submit all recommendations to the President within thirty (30) days from the signing of this Administrative Order. The Task Force shall be deemed abolished upon the designation by the President of the new PCYA Council members.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1992). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.