MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 268

CONSTITUTING A PHILIPPINE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE FOR THE LUISITO ESPINOSA VERSUS CESAR SOTO WORLD BOXING COUNCIL (WBC) TITLE FIGHT

WHEREAS, the Philippines has successfully played host to major world conferences and international sporting events;

WHEREAS, Luisito Espinosa acquired his WBC Featherweight title in Japan and thereafter staged a defense thereof in Mexico;

WHEREAS, as now reigning champion, it is only fitting and decidedly advantageous that Luisito Espinosa should stage his second defense in his own country before his countrymen;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the contract covering the Japan title fight of Luisito Espinosa, the option to promote the coming mandatory defense of Luisito Espinosa against Cesar Soto was retained by the Mexican promoter;

WHEREAS, payment of the option money to the Mexican promoter will now set the stage for Luisito Espinosa’s mandatory defense against Cesar Soto here in the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the staging of this world championship directly supports the efforts of the tourism industry in projecting and promoting the Philippines as an ideal site for international and local sporting events;

WHEREAS, the holding of this event will bring international prestige, publicity, goodwill, and economic benefits to the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. A Philippine Management Committee (PMC) headed by the Chairman of the Games and Amusements Board, co-chaired by a representative from the private sector, with a representative each from the Land Bank of the Philippines, Philippine Tourism Authority (PTA) and the City of Manila, as members, is hereby constituted to oversee and undertake all the necessary preparations for the staging of the next title defense of Luisito Espinosa against Cesar Soto of Mexico here in the City of Manila, tentatively scheduled on 06 July 1996.

SEC. 2. All concerned government departments, agencies and offices including government-owned and controlled corporations, whose assistance will be sought by the PMC, are directed to extend their support and resources to this world title fight.

SEC. 3. The amount necessary for this event, including the operations of the PMC, its secretariat and working groups, shall come from sponsorships, donations, grants, contributions, proceeds from tournament related activities, or any form of assistance from any private or government entities.

SEC. 4. The PTA is authorized to source funds from its trust liability account, pursuant to Section 3 of Executive Order No. 46 (September 4, 1986) to cover the hosting fee to be incurred by the PMC and payment of the option to the Mexican promoter.

SEC. 5. The PMC is authorized to open an account with a government bank in which income/proceeds from Section 3 and 4 above shall be deposited and disbursed in accordance with its accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 6. The PMC shall be authorized to pay honoraria to those who will be involved with this event, subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SEC. 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.