MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 351

CREATION OF THE PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE ON TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENT AND MANAGEMENT (TRAFIMM)

WHEREAS, the traffic situation in the country, particularly in Metro Manila, has gravely and adversely affected the over-all mobility of people and goods and thus, resulting in decreased productivity, disruptions in the supply of goods and services and other traffic-related costs;

WHEREAS, traffic management and improvement involve various instrumentalities and agencies whose plans and programs need harmonization, and thus requires the establishment of a single traffic authority that will cut-across various departments and traffic-related bodies and instrumentalities to integrate and coordinate traffic implementation and mobilization of resources to address the traffic situation;

WHEREAS, the Department of Transportation and Communications is mandated, pursuant to Executive Order No. 125-A to establish and administer comprehensive and integrated programs, and prescribe rules and regulations for land transportation;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Creation of the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Improvement and Management. There is hereby created the Presidential Task Force on Traffic Improvement and Management (TRAFIMM), hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, that shall serve as the integrating, coordinating, and directing authority on traffic management nationwide.

Section 2. Composition. The Task Force shall be composed of the following:

The Chairman is hereby vested with full executive authority within the law to rationalize and facilitate the effective and efficient movement and management of people and goods along highways nationwide, particularly in Metro Manila and other urban centers.

Section 3. Support from Other Agencies. All agencies are hereby directed to provide full support to the Task Force in the implementation of its mandate and responsibilities.

Section 4. Funding. The amount of Five Million Pesos from OP-DBM Savings/Reserves is hereby approved for release for the initial funding necessary for the operations of the Task Force; additional funding requirements may be requested by the Chairman of the Task Force from the Office of the President.

Section 5. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 31st day of August in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.