MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 81

GIVING MORE IMPETUS TO THE GOVERNMENT EFFORT TO DISBAND PRIVATE ARMED GROUPS

WHEREAS, there are government officials and abusive personalities who utilize numerous AFP, PNP or civilian bodyguards, as security personnel to the consternation of the general public;

WHEREAS, the resurgence of private armed groups is counter productive and will endanger the realization of our vision of “Philippines 2000”;

WHEREAS, there is a clamor for the continued operations against the private armed groups even beyond the deadline set forth on September 9, 1993; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to involve and integrate all the efforts of law abiding citizens and concerned sectors of the government in the campaign to disband private armed groups.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The DND-AFP and DILG-PNP shall jointly evaluate and assess the tactical necessity of all community defense forces (e.g. CAFGUs, CVOs, etc.) organized according to law and immediately deactivate those which are no longer needed for counter-insurgency (COIN) operations.

Section 2. The provision of security detail to government offices, officials, or any private entity or person pursuant to EO No. 41, s. 1966, as amended by EO 371 dated September 28, 1989 or RA No. 6975 (Section 35<b><3>) shall be assessed to determine whether public interest is served thereby. All excess security personnel shall be recalled.

Section 3. Only regular AFP and PNP personnel may be assigned as security and only with the express approval of the concerned Department Secretary.

Section 4. No detailed security personnel shall conduct military or law enforcement operations independent of their mother unit except in the case of citizens arrest pursuant to Rule 113 of the Rules of Court.

Section 5. The existing reward system shall be updated to provide rewards to citizens furnishing information in the campaign against private armed groups.

Section 6. The Secretaries of the Interior and Local Government and National Defense shall issue guidelines to implement this Order.

Section 7. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.