MALACAÑANG MANILA

Administrative Order No. 287

RECONSTITUTING THE BASILAN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE AS THE BASILAN DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, it is government’s policy to ensure that the implementation of development programs and projects is undertaken in a coordinated and synchronized manner to provide maximum benefits to our people;

WHEREAS, the province of Basilan was beset by peace and order problems and other man-made disasters which hampered its growth and development;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 139, dated 19 July 1994, created the Basilan Inter-Agency Task Force for the integrated conduct of development and security/law enforcement operations to clear Basilan of lawless elements and facilitate and socio-economic development of the province; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to sustain the developmental work being undertaken by the Basilan Inter-Agency Task Force in order to accelerate improvements in the living conditions of the people of Basilan.

NOW, THEREFORE, I FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. CONSTITUTION OF THE BASILAN DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Basilan Inter-Agency Task Force (created through Administrative Order No. 139 dated 19 July 1994) is hereby reconstituted into the Basilan Development Task Force for the integrated and synchronized implementation of special economic and social development projects in the province of Basilan.

SEC. 2. COMPOSITION OF THE BASILAN DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Basilan Development Task Force shall be headed by a representative/officer from the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) to be designated by the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, with representatives/personnel from the following agencies as members, to be designated by their respective Secretaries:

a. Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)

b. Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR

c. Department of Agriculture (DA)

d. Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR);

e. Department of Budget and Management (DBM);

f. Department of Energy (DOE)

g. Department of Education, Culture, and Sports (DECS)

h. Department of Trade and Industry (DTI)

i. Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD

j. Department of Health (DOH); and

k. Department of Transportation and Communications DOTC)

The Basilan Development Task Force may invite representative from the Regional Development Council IX, local government units, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to acts as consultants and/or advisers to the Task Force.

SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS OF THE BASILAN DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE . The Basilan Development Task Force shall have the following functions:

a. Pursue the implementation of economic and social development programs and projects undertaken by the Basilan Inter-Agency Task Force created under Administrative Order No. 139 (date 19 July 1994).

b. Implement a multi-agency development programs to promote the sustained economic and social development of the province of Basilan, in consultation with concerned local government units, national government agencies, non-government organizations and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups;

c. In coordination with the Presidential Commission for Countryside Development, pursue and update (as appropriate) the Terms of Reference for the economic and social development of the province of Basilan prepared by the Basilan Inter-Agency Task Force created under Administrative Order No. 139 (date 19 July 1994).

d. Adopt a process of maximum consultation with local government units, other national government agencies, non-government organizations and people organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups in the preparation, updating, and implementation of economic and social development programs and projects for the province of Basilan;

e. Cause, oversee, and facilitate the formulation and implementation of special economic and social development programs and projects for the province of Basilan;

f. Formulate innovative schemes to provide opportunities for the private sector to pursue development projects within the province of Basilan;

g. Pool, manage, and coordinate government resources and immediately implement identified priority economic and social development programs and projects in Basilan;

h. Submit regular accomplishment reports to the President and

i. Perform such other tasks as may be assigned by the President.

SEC. 4. SECRETARIAT/PROJECT MANAGEMENT GROUP . The Basilan Development Task Force shall have a Secretariat/Project Management Group composed of a representative/officer from the DILG (who will also act as Executive Director) to be designated by the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, and representatives/personnel from the member-agencies of the Task Force to be designated by their respective Secretaries. The Secretariat/Project Management Group shall have the following functions:

a. Manage and oversee the planning and implementation on the ground of development projects identified by the Task Force;

b. Liaise with various national government, agencies, local government units, non-government organizations, and peoples organizations, and religious, political, and civic groups to ensure the timely and successful implementation of development projects identified by the Task Force;

c. Consolidate/integrate various Task Force projects and activities;

d. Provide over-all technical and secretariat support to the Task Force; and

e. Submit regular reports to the Task Force

SEC. 5. PERSONNEL AND RESOURCES . The member agencies of the Basilan Development Task Force shall contribute equipment and personnel (on detail) to the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group. All member-agencies of the Basilan Development Task Force shall contribute funds for the operation of the Task Force and the Secretariat/Project Management Group.

SEC. 6. LINKAGING WITH MILITARY AND POLICE UNITS . The concerned military and police units in the areas covered by the Basilan Development Task Force shall provide assistance, as may be appropriate, to maintain peace and order in the area.

SEC. 7. REPEALING CLAUSE . All Administrative Orders, rules and regulations, and other similar issuances, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. EFFECTIVITY This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of September, in the Year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.