MALACAÑANG Manila

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 108

CONSTITUTING  A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE LEYTE GULF LANDINGS ON 20 OCTOBER 1994

WHEREAS, October 20, 1994 marks the 50th Anniversary of the Leyte Gulf Landings which signalled the beginning of the liberation of the Philippines from the Japanese Occupation during World War II;

WHEREAS, this event should be appropriately observed to promote, preserve and memorialize the principles, ideals and deeds of Filipino military veterans as a means of enhancing patriotism and love of country, especially among the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, the commemoration of this event should be focused on the values of freedom and lasting peace for which Filipino war veterans fought valiantly, many of whom paid the ultimate sacrifice;

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate all activities that are envisioned to foster nationalism among Filipinos, particularly with that of the National Centennial Commission, which was created pursuant to E.O. 128, dated 04 October 1993, to act as the principal coordinator for all activities related to the Centennial celebrations of the Philippine Independence;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. — Creation of a National Executive Committee. There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee on the Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Leyte Gulf Landings, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

(a) The Executive Secretary;

(b) The Secretary of National Defense;

(c) The Secretary of Tourism;

(d) The Secretary of Foreign Affairs;

(e) The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports;

(f) The Secretary of the Interior and Local Government;

(g) Secretary of Transportation and Communications;

(h) The Secretary of Public Works and Highways;

(i) The Secretary of Budget and Management;

(j) The Press Secretary;

(k) Presidential Assistant for Visayas;

(l) The Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines;

(m) Administrator, Philippine Veterans Affairs Office;

(n) Chairman, National Historical Institute;

(o) Governor, Province of Leyte;

(p) Mayor, Tacloban City;

(q) Mayor, Cebu City;

(r) President, Veterans Federation of the Philippines;

(s) National President, Boy Scouts of the Philippines;

(t) National President, Girl Scouts of the Philippines; and

(u) Chief, Military Shrines Service.

The Chairman of the Committee shall be the Executive Secretary and the Vice Chairman shall be the Secretary of National Defense.

SECTION 2. — Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall take charge of the nationwide preparations for 50th Anniversary of the Leyte Gulf Landings on 20 October 1994. For this purpose, it shall have the following functions:

(a) Formulate all the programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted in observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Leyte Gulf Landings;

(b) Prepare the implementing guidelines for all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(c) Orchestrate and coordinate the implementation of all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(d) Source funds and prepare the budget which shall be required by the Committee in the discharge of its functions; and,

(e) Perform other tasks as may be given by the President.

SECTION 3. — Operational Relationships. In the conduct of all programs, projects and activities in the observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Leyte Gulf Landings, the Committee shall coordinate with the National Centennial Commission which is the body tasked to oversee the nationwide celebrations for the Centennial of the Philippine Independence.

The Committee is also authorize to call upon the assistance of any department, bureau, agency, office and other instrumentality of the Government, as well as invite any non-governmental organization as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

SECTION 4. — Creation of Subcommittees . The Committee may form sub-committees as it may deem necessary to effectively carry out its duties and responsibilities.

SECTION 5. — Technical and Secretariat Support . The Department of National Defense shall provide technical, secretariat and administrative support to the Committee.

SECTION 6. — Funding . Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order shall be taken from the respective appropriations of the concerned agencies.

SECTION 7. — Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21 st day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.