MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 311

CREATING A NATIONAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE FOR THE WORLD INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ORGANIZATION’S (WIPO) WORLD SYMPOSIUM ON BROADCASTING, NEW COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY

WHEREAS, largely through the efforts of the current leadership of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas (National Association of Broadcasters of the Philippines), in coordination with the Permanent Mission of the Philippines to the United Nations in Geneva, Switzerland, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) decided to organize a “World Symposium on Broadcasting, New Communication Technologies and Intellectual Property” (hereinafter referred to as “WIPO World Symposium on Broadcasting”) in Manila, Philippines from 28 to 30 April 1997;

WHEREAS, the protection of the rights of broadcasters and owners of new communication technologies and intellectual property has increasingly gained universal importance because of the dominant role technology plays in influencing international economics and trade;

WHEREAS, the recognition and adequate protection of the rights of broadcasters, inventors, authors and intellectual property owners would enhance the economic environment needed to spur sustained economic growth and attract foreign investments;

WHEREAS, as a member-country of WIPO, the Philippines is privileged to have been designated as host of the forthcoming WIPO World Symposium on Broadcasting and welcomes this opportunity to reaffirm to the world its policy to protect the rights of broadcasters and owners of new communication technologies and intellectual property against infringement, piracy and counterfeiting;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. National Organizing Committee . – A National Organizing Committee for the “WIPO World Symposium on Broadcasting, New Communication Technologies and Intellectual Property” is hereby created, which is tasked to coordinate the overall implementation of activities related to the WIPO World Symposium.

SEC. 2. Composition. – The Committee shall be co-chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and the present President of the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas, with the Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry as Vice-Chairman and the representatives of the following as members:

Office of the Press Secretary Philippine Information Agency Presidential Management Staff Department of National Defense Department of Transportation and Communications Department of Education, Culture and Sports Department of Tourism Department of Interior and Local Government Department of Budget and Management National Economic Development Authority Philippine National Police Presidential Inter-Agency Committee on Intellectual Property Rights Institute of International Legal Studies (UP) A representative from the Council to Combat Counterfeiting and Piracy of Patents, Copyright and Trademarks (COMPACT) and the Intellectual Property Association of the Philippines (IPAP)

SECT. 3. Functions of the Committee. – The Committee shall create a Secretariat and such sub-committees as it may deem necessary to implement its mandate and formulate mechanisms that will ensure the success of the WIPO World Symposium on Broadcasting. Secretariat support shall be provided by the Kapisanan ng mga Brodkaster ng Pilipinas. In the execution of its tasks, the Committee shall have the authority to call upon the assistance of any department, agency or instrumentality of the Government.

SEC. 4. Funding. – The amount of two million pesos (P2,000,000) required for the symposium shall be sourced partly from the International Commitments Fund. The funding balance shall be charged against the respective savings/revenues of the participating agencies, the sharing of which shall be identified by the Committee.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. – This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Seven.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1997). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.