MALACAÑANG

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 240

AUTHORIZING THE LOCAL EXECUTIVES OF THE NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION TO ORGANIZE, SUPPORT AND FINANCE LOCAL POLICE AUXILIARY UNITS

WHEREAS , there has been a resurgence of crime, especially in the National Capital Region, which undermines whatever economic gains have been achieved by this administration;

WHEREAS , the fight against crime and the maintenance of peace and order are not the sole responsibilities and duty of the national government but more so of local governments where these crimes are committed;

WHEREAS , there is a need to authorize local executives, especially in the National Capital Region where most of the reported heinous crimes are committed, for them to organize, support and finance local police auxiliary units in order to make them more effective in dealing with criminality and maintain peace and order in their respective localities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Authority of Local Executives of the National Capital Region to Organize, Support and Finance Local Police Auxiliary Units. – City and Municipal Mayors in the National Capital Region, particularly in the Cities of Manila, Quezon, Pasay, Kalookan, Mandaluyong, Pasig, Makati and Muntinlupa, and the Municipalities of Malabon, Navotas, Valenzuela, San Juan, Marikina, Taguig, Pateros, Parañaque and Las Piñas, as deputized representatives of the National Police Commission, are hereby authorize to organize, support and finance local police auxiliary units in order to assist the existing police forces assigned in their respective localities. Provided, however, that the members of those auxiliary units shall not be issued nor allowed to carry firearms, nor be detailed or assigned as personal security of local officials.

SEC. 2. Over-all Supervision Over the Police Auxiliary Units by the Director General of the Philippine National Police. – The members of the local police auxiliary force shall be under the over-all supervision of the Director General of the Philippine National Police and under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police of the city or municipality.

SEC. 3. Recruitment and Recommendation of Appointment Local Police Auxiliary Personnel. – The City/Municipality Mayors concerned shall recruit and appoint the members of the local police auxiliary units. Those recruited shall be recommended for appointment from a list of eligibles previously screened by the peace and order council of their city/municipality. If eligibles are not sufficient, those to be recruited shall be appointed on a probational basis, provided that they shall undergo and pass the requisite examinations devised by the Chief, Philippine National Police.

SEC. 4. Crash Training Program for New Recruits at the PNP Training Center. – Before being appointed, the new members of the local police auxiliary units shall undergo a training program to be conducted by the PNP.

SEC. 5. Augmentation of the Regular PNP Elements by the Auxiliary Units. – After their basic training, the members of the auxiliary units shall assist the existing regular PNP elements in traffic management and control, in the performance of administrative duties and such other duties and functions which are non-life threatening, as may be assigned by the Mayor or the Chief of Police of the municipality or city.

SEC. 6. Development and Establishment of an Integrated Area/Community Public Safety Plan for Implementation by the Local PNP Station. – The City/Municipal mayor concerned shall, in coordination with the local peace and order council of which he is the chairman pursuant to Executive Order No. 309, as amended, develop and establish an integrated area/community public safety plan embracing priorities of action and program thrust for implementation by the local PNP station.

It shall, likewise, be the duty of the city or municipal mayor to sponsor periodic seminars for members of the PNP and the auxiliary units in his city or municipality in order to update them regarding local ordinances and legislation.

SEC. 7. Disciplinary Authority of the City/Municipal Mayor. – The city and municipal mayors concerned shall have the power to impose, after due notice and summary hearings, disciplinary penalties for minor offenses committed by members of the police auxiliary units assigned to their respective jurisdictions.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1996). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.