MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 79

CONSTITUTING A MULTISECTORAL CONSULTATIVE TASK FORCE

WHEREAS, Section 23, Article II of the Constitution provides that “The State shall encourage non-governmental, Community based, or sectoral organizations that promote the welfare of the nation”;

WHEREAS, Section 16, Article XIII of the Constitution provides that “The State shall respect the role of independent people’s organizations to enable the people to pursue and protect, within the democratic framework, their legitimate and collective interests and aspirations through peaceful and lawful means”;

WHEREAS, Section 17, Article XIII of the Constitution provides that “The right of the people and their organizations to effective and reasonable participation at all levels of social, political, and economic decision-making shall not be abridged. The State shall, by law, facilitate the establishment of adequate consultation mechanisms”;

WHEREAS, it was agreed during the Legislative-Executive Economic Summit at the Manila Hotel held on 20 August 1993, and the Pre-Summit at Malacañang held last 2 September 1993 that consultative mechanism between government and the basic sector be institutionalized;

WHEREAS, government recognizes the right of the basic sectors to be consulted and to participate in decision-making on matters concerning and affecting their sectors;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. Composition. — There is hereby constituted a Multisectoral Consultative Task Force, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, hereinafter referred to as the Task Force, to oversee the conduct of a consultative forum on matters discussed and agreed upon during the People’s Economic Summit. The Task Force shall be composed of the Executive Secretary as Chairman and the following members:

Secretary of Trade and Industry Secretary of Labor and Employment Secretary of Finance Secretary of Agriculture Secretary of Agrarian Reform Secretary of Justice Secretary of Budget and Management Director-General, National Economic Development Authority Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process One (1) representative from the Business Sector One (1) representative from the Labor Sector One (1) representative each from the following basic sectors:

a. Youth and Students; b. Farmers and Fisherfolks; c. Women; d. Elderly and Veterans; e. Urban Poor; f. Indigenous Cultural Communities; g. Disabled; and h. Other sectors as may later be determined by the Task Force.

The representatives from the basic, business and labor sectors shall be selected in accordance with rules and regulations to be promulgated by the concerned departments/agencies that have supervision over them.

Section 2. Functions. — The Task Force shall have the following functions:

a. To monitor and review the agreements arrived at during the People’s Economic Summit and other consultations;

b. To ensure implementation of agreements arrived at during the People’s Economic Summit;

c. To provide a mechanism for regular consultation in the formulation of government policies and programs at different levels;

d. To ensure compliance with presidential directives for all departments/agencies to conduct regular consultations with their respective constituents;

e. To coordinate with the respective Committees in the Senate and the House of Representatives on matters taken up during the People’s Economic Summit; and

f. To perform such other function as may be assigned by the President.

Section 3. Meetings. — The Task Force shall meet at least once every two months or as often as it may deem necessary to review and assess the implementation of the agreements arrived at during the Economic Summit.

Section 4. Secretariat. — The Presidential Management Staff shall provide secretariat staff support to the Task Force.

Section 5. Implementing Rules. — The Task Force shall formulate its own rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order.

Section 6. Effectivity. — This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila this 8th day of September in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.