MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 386

CONSTITUTING A TRANSITION COMMITTEE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, it is the declared policy of the government to ensure a peaceful, orderly and smooth transfer of powers to the next duly elected President;

WHEREAS, the duly-elected President and his incoming Cabinet members should be given full support and cooperation by the outgoing Cabinet to allow for their smooth assumption into office; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to constitute a Transition Committee in the Office of the President to ensure a proper and orderly transition of government into the next Administration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, by the powers vested in me by Law and the Constitution do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Constitution of the Transition Committee in the Office of the President (OP). A Transition Committee in the Office of the President is hereby constituted with the Executive Secretary as Chairman and Head, Presidential Management Staff as Vice-Chairman. The Committee shall have the following members:

a. Chief, Presidential Protocol Office b. Director, OP Finance c. Director, OP Personnel d. PA for Palace Internal Household Affairs Office; and e. Director, Malacanang Records Office

The OP Transition Committee may organize working groups as may be deemed necessary. Appropriate funding for transition activities shall be supported by the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 2. Functions. The OP Transition Committee shall have the following functions:

a. Oversee the preparation and implementation of the transition plan and the necessary transition reports.

b. Serve as official representatives of the Office of the President to meetings which may be called by the Transition Team of the President-elect.

c. Facilitate and coordinate resolution of issues that may arise in the preparation of required documents and other activities related to the transition.

SEC. 3. Secretariat. Secretariat support to the Committee shall be provided jointly by the Office of the Executive Secretary and the Presidential Management Staff.

SEC. 4. Assistance from OP Units. All organizational units in the Office of the President are directed to extend all the necessary support and assistance to the OP Transition Committee in undertaking the various transition activities.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 17th of March, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1998). [Administrative Order Nos. : 301 – 407]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.