MALACAÑANG MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF  HE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 226

CREATING A PRESIDENTIAL TASK FORCE FOR AN INTEGRATED REHABILITATION AND RESTORATION PROGRAM IN SOUTHERN LUZON AND CENTRAL PHILIPPINES (SOLCENTAF)

WHEREAS , typhoon “Rosing” and three other destructive typhoons have affected Southern Luzon and other parts of the country, resulting in the great loss of lives and injuries, the displacement of thousands of families, and extensive damages to properties, crops and infrastructure in these areas;

WHEREAS , the affected provinces and cities have already been declared as calamity areas;

WHEREAS , there is a need to coordinate the rehabilitation and restoration efforts among the concerned local government units and national agencies; and

WHEREAS , the creation of a special body would facilitate the coordination and implementation of plans, programs and projects for area-wide rehabilitation and restoration;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a Presidential Rehabilitation Task Force . There is hereby created a Presidential Task Force which is designated as the Southern Luzon – Central Philippines Rehabilitation Task Force (hereafter referred to as SOLCENTAF) to undertake integrated rehabilitation efforts and restoration activities in the typhoon-damaged provinces and cities.

SEC. 2. Composition . The SOLCENTAF shall be chaired by the Secretary of Agrarian Reform and shall be composed of:

a. Chairmen of the Regional Development Councils and CORDs of Regions IV, V, VI and VII;

b. Governors and City Mayors of affected areas to include the Visayas;

c. Chairman of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council;

d. Department of Agriculture;

e. Department of Social Welfare and Development;

f. Department of Public Works and Highways;

g. Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

h. Department of Budget and Management;

i. Department of Transportation and Communications;

j. Department of Energy;

k. Department of Education, Culture and Sports;

l. Department of Trade and Industry;

m. Department of Labor and Employment;

n. Department of National Defense; and

o. Department of the Interior and the Local Government.

p. Private Sector representatives designated by the Chairman.

The above line departments shall be represented by no less than an Assistant Secretary.

Concerned agencies organizations, as may be determined by the Chairman of SOLCENTAF, may be designated as Ex-Officio members.

SEC. 3. Powers and Functions . The Task Force shall the following powers and functions:

a. Develop area-wide rehabilitation and restoration programs and projects;

b. Undertake broad-based consultations with concerned agencies and People’s Organizations (POs)/NGOs to insure that their needs, concerns and ideas are considered in the formation of rehabilitation and restoration programs and the corresponding projects to be undertake;

c. Established priorities based on the identified programs and projects;

d. Access funds, services and other resources from existing government programs and projects, where feasible;

e. Allocate resources and coordinate fund release and other resources based on Task Force identified priorities;

f. Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the projects;

g. Evaluate the effectiveness of the implementation projects;

h. Submit progress and other necessary reports to the President, copy furnished the Executive Secretary and the NDCC Chairman;

i. Call on any government agency or instrumentality for any support requirement; and

Perform such other functions and responsibilities as the President may direct.

SEC. 4. Executive Director . The Task Force Executive Director shall be designated by the SOLCENTAF Chairman. He shall concurrently head the Secretariat which shall provide the administrative technical and special staff support to the Task Force. he shall have the following additional task/functions:

a. Manage the planning, coordination and implementation of Task Force operations;

b. Supervise the day-to-day implementation of Task Force plans, programs and projects; and,

c. Prepare progress reports to the President, through the Task Force Chairman.

The Task Force Executive Director shall be assisted by the Chairmen of the Regional Disaster Coordinating Councils of Regions IV, V, VI and VII who shall acts as Assistant Executive Directors.

SEC. 5. Staff Support . The Department of Agrarian Reform shall provide the administrative, technical and special staff support to the Task Force. Additional personnel may be detailed from other agencies/offices. Full-time personnel to include appropriate consultants may be hired/contracted as needed by the Task Force.

SEC. 6. Rehabilitation Task Groups . There shall be five (5) Rehabilitation Task Groups, namely: Agriculture Task Group, Infrastructure Task Group, Housing Task Group, School Building Task Group and livelihood Task Group which will implement the rehabilitation and restoration projects of their respective areas of concern. They shall have as members, representatives of concerned departments/agencies of the national and local governments, as indicated in the Task Force organization chart attached hereto. The Head of each Task Group shall designated by the Chairman of the Task Force.

SEC. 7. Role of Municipal Mayors . The Municipal Mayors shall act as advisers to their respective Governors and render assistance to the Rehabilitation Task Groups concerned in the implementation of Task Force projects in their respective cities/municipalities. They shall also monitor and submit independent reports and recommendations direct to the Heads of Task Groups concerned on Task Force programs and projects in their respective cities/municipalities.

SEC. 8. Implementation of Task Force Projects . Projects under the Task Force shall be implemented by concerned national agencies and/or local government units depending upon the nature, size and location of the project. As a matter of policy, the participation of local government units and other organizations, such as the Parents-Teachers associations, local school boards and cooperatives, shall be tapped to assist or participate in the implementation of Task Force projects where such participation is feasible.

SEC. 9. Relationship with the Office of the President and the National Disaster Coordinating Council . The Task Force shall operate directly under the Office of the President. The National Disaster Coordinating Council shall assist and support the Task Force in the accomplishment of its mission.

SEC. 10. Funding . The administration and operation of the Task Force shall initially be funded from the Office of the President and other available sources, including from the departments and corporate agencies, in the amount of THREE HUNDRED FIFTY MILLION PESOS. The amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS from these funds is hereby authorized for initial administrative and operational expenses of the Task Force.

SEC. 11. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 20 Th day of November in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

BY THE PRESIDENT: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Reference: Presidential Rehabilitation Task Force for Southern Luzon and Central Philippines (SOLCENTAF) Organization Chart

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1995). [Administrative Order Nos. : 201 – 300]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.