MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 168

CONSTITUTING A NATIONAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE FOR THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE LANDING IN NASUGBU, BATANGAS, ON 31 JANUARY 1995 AND LIBERATION OF TAGAYTAY, CAVITE, ON 2 FEBRUARY 1995

WHEREAS, January 31, 1995, marks the 50th Anniversary of the Landing in Nasugbu, Batangas, and February 2, 1995 Liberation of Tagaytay, Cavite, which were part of the effort to liberate the Philippines from the Japanese occupation during the World War II;

WHEREAS, this event should be appropriately observed to promote, preserve and memorialize the principles, ideals and deeds of Filipino military veterans as a means of enhancing patriotism and love of country, especially among the youth of the land;

WHEREAS, the commemoration of this event should be focused on the values of freedom and lasting peace for which Filipino war veterans fought valiantly, many of whom paid the ultimate sacrifice;

WHEREAS, there is a need to coordinate all activities that are envisioned to foster nationalism among Filipinos, particularly with that of the National Centennial Commission, which was created pursuant to E.O. 128, dated October 4, 1993, to act as the principal coordinator for all activities related to the Centennial Celebrations of the Philippine Independence.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of a National Executive Committee . There is hereby constituted a National Executive Committee on the Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Landing in Nasugbu, Batangas, and the Liberation of Tagaytay, Cavite, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, to be composed of the following:

(1) The Secretary of National Defense, as Chairman;

(2) The Secretary of Tourism, as Vice-Chairman;

(3) The Secretary of Foreign Affairs;

(4) The Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports;

(5) The Secretary of Interior and Local Government;

(6) The Secretary of Transportation and Communications;

(7) The Secretary of Public Works and Highways;

(8) The Secretary of Budget and Management;

(9) The Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources;

(10) The Secretary of Finance;

(11) Press Secretary;

(12) Chief of Staff, Armed Forces of the Philippines;

(13) Chief, Philippine National Police;

(14) Administrator, Philippine Veterans Affairs Office

(15) Chairman, National Historical Institute;

(16) Governor, Province of Batangas;

(17) Governor, Province of Cavite;

(18) Mayor of Nasugbu, Batangas;

(19) Mayor of Tagaytay City;

(20) President, Veterans Federation of the Philippines;

(21) National President, Boy Scouts of the Philippines;

(22) National President, Girl Scouts of the Philippines;

(23) Chief, Military Shrines Service;

(24) President, Sons and Daughters of Veterans, Inc.;

(25) Representatives of Non-Governmental Organizations.

SECTION 2. Functions of the Committee . The Committee shall take charge of the preparations for the 50th Anniversary of the Landing in Nasugbu, Batangas, and Liberation of Tagaytay, Cavite, on January 31, 1995, and February 2, 1995, respectively. For this purpose, it shall have the following functions:

(a) Formulate all the programs, projects and activities that shall be conducted in observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Landing in Nasugbu, Batangas, and Liberation of Tagaytay, Cavite;

(b) Prepare the implementing guidelines for all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(c) Orchestrate and coordinate the implementation of all the programs, projects and activities that shall be undertaken for the commemoration;

(d) Source funds and prepare the budget which shall be required by the Committee in the discharge of its functions; and

(e) Perform other tasks as may be given by the President.

SECTION 3. Operational Relationships . In the conduct of all programs, projects and activities in the observance of the 50th Anniversary of the Landing in Nasugbu, Batangas, and Liberation of Tagaytay, Cavite, the Committee shall coordinate with the National Centennial Commission.

The Committee is also authorized to call upon the assistance of any department, bureau, agency, office and other instrumentality of the Government, as well as invite non-governmental organizations as it may deem necessary in the performance of its functions.

SECTION 4. Creation of Sub-Committees . The Committee may form sub-committees as it may deem necessary to effectively carry out its duties and responsibilities.

SECTION 5. Technical and Secretariat Support . The Department of National Defense shall provide technical secretariat and administrative support to the Committee.

SECTION 6. Funding . Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Administrative Order shall be taken from the respective appropriations of the concerned agencies.

SECTION 7. Effectivity . This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1994). [Administrative Order Nos. : 101 – 200]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.