MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 35

DELINEATING THE FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS OF THE PROFESSIONAL REGULATION COMMISSION AS A COLLEGIAL BODY AND THOSE OF THE COMMISSION CHAIRMAN/COMMISSIONER AS HEAD OF OFFICE

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 223, dated June 22, 1973, created the Professional Regulation Commission composed of a full-time Commissioner, who shall act as Chairman, and two (2) full-time Associate Commissioners as members, and which as a body shall exercise general administrative, executive and policy-making functions;

WHEREAS, administrative supervision over the Professional Regulation Commission rests with the office of the President as an attached agency thereof;

WHEREAS, the President, pursuant to Section 31, Chapter 10, Book III of Executive Order No. 292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987, is vested with continuing authority to reorganize his Office which include the Office of the President Proper and the agencies under its administrative control and/or supervision;

WHEREAS, there is a need to delineate and clarify the functions and responsibilities of the Commission as a collegial body, and those of the Commission Chairman as Head of Office, to enhance its administrative efficiency and to more effectively and expeditiously attain the Commission’s goals and objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I,  FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Functions and Responsibilities of the Commission as a Collegial Body. — The Commission shall as a body:

1. Promulgate policies with respect to the regulations and licensing of the various professions and occupations under its jurisdictions;

2. Fix the date and venue of the various licensure examinations;

3. Review and act on administrative cases decided by the various regulatory boards, which are appealed to the Commission;

4. Deliberate on the appointments, promotions and imposition of administrative disciplinary action on personnel of the Commission, whenever such act could affect their rank and/or employment status;

5. Approve purchase orders, job orders and contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment, and non-infrastructure repair works; and for security/janitorial services either through bidding or negotiation, in accordance with existing laws; and

6. Do or perform all acts necessary to effectively carry out its powers, duties and functions provided for under Section 5, P.D. No. 223, and the various provisions of professional regulatory laws, decrees and orders.

SECTION 2. Functions and Responsibilities of the Commission Chairman as Head of Office. — The Commission Chairman as Head of Office shall have all the powers of the Chief Executive of the Office under Section 29, Chapter 6, Book IV, of the Administrative Code of 1987. He shall:

1. Exercise supervision and control over all personnel of the Commission, including their assignment/reassignment, as well as the hiring of other personnel from government offices or private sector to assist or to supervise in the conduct of licensure examinations;

2. Direct and supervise the preparation of the budget for the Commission, and to sign or approve financial reports;

3. Approve vouchers and sign checks for all expenses and disbursements, and delegate the same power to the Executive Director for expenses and disbursements not to exceed P50,000.00;

4. Issue and/or approve travel orders, itineraries of travel, and claims for travel expenses of all Commission personnel, including the Chairman and Members of the Regulatory Boards;

5. Sign all office documents, letters and communications for the Commission; and

6. Act on all other matters relating to the implementation and execution of policies promulgated by the Commission.

SECTION 3. Effectivity. — This Administrative Order shall take effect upon its approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 9th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1993). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 100 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.