PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 25

REQUIRING ALL PERSONS, NATURAL OR JURIDICAL, OWNING OR ADMINISTERING REAL PROPERTY, INCLUDING THE IMPROVEMENTS THEREON, TO FILE SWORN STATEMENT OF THE TRUE VALUE OF SUCH PROPERTY.

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and in accordance with Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, and knowing

THAT, values of real property and improvements therein are usually under declared obviously for the purpose of evading payment of higher and correct taxes due the government:

THAT, although real property and the improvements therein are undervalued for purpose of taxation, these real property are sold to the government when needed for public purposes, such as the construction of roads and other infrastructure, at their market value which are usually ten (10) to twenty (20) times more than the value declared by the owners for purposes of taxation; and in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structure of the country, which is the main objective of the New Society; I hereby decree and order that:

1. All persons owning or administering real property, including the improvements therein, shall file with the respective Provincial or City Assessors not later than January 31, 1973, a Sworn Statement declaring the true value of their property.

This Sworn Statement when approved by the Provincial or City Assessor concerned, shall be the basis not only for the payment of real property tax beginning with the year 1973 but also of the just compensation to be paid to owners or administrators of land and other real property expropriated or appropriated by the government for public purpose or purposes.

2. From the decisions of Provincial or City Boards of Tax Appeals, an appeal may be taken by the owner or by the Provincial or City Assessor to a Central Board of Tax Appeals, composed of the Secretary of Finance, as chairman, and the Secretary of Justice, and the Secretary of Local Governments and Community Development, as members, whose decision shall be final. Said Central Board of Tax Appeals shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the procedure in such appeals.

3. The true value of the land and the improvements therein shall be the value for taxation plus the market value divided by two.

4. Any one who shall knowingly make a false declaration concerning any property or who shall fail to make statement as required in section one of this Decree, shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than one hundred nor more than ten thousand pesos. If the offense is committed by a corporation, the manager or person in charge of the management of the business of the corporation shall be responsible therefor.

5. The Secretary of Finance is hereby ordered to cause the preparation of the necessary forms, in sufficient number, needed for this purpose and to formulate the implementing details to be followed by all Provincial and City Assessors for the immediate and successful implementation of this Decree.

This Decree shall form part of the laws of the land and shall take effect immediately after its publication.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office