MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1562

ESTABLISHING THE INFRASTRUCTURE COMPUTER CENTER IN THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS, TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS

WHEREAS, the effective management of the infrastructure program depends on an integrated and systematic diagnosis of data and information for planning and decision-making at all levels;

WHEREAS, the National Computer Center (NCC) has identified the infrastructure community of the government as an important hub in the national computerization development program; and

WHEREAS, the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications and the various agencies attached to it have initiated integration of their computerization efforts so as to achieve economies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree;

Section 1. There is hereby created the Infrastructure Computer Center hereinafter referred to as the Center, in the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications and under the administrative supervision and control of the Secretary thereof, which shall:

a. Provide computing services and operate electronic data processing facilities, and auxiliary equipment to support infrastructure planning, design, resource allocation, implementation and administration of the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, including its bureaus attached or affiliated agencies;

b. Extend advice, assistance and support regarding computer requirements, at the request of the primary agencies and government instrumentalities attached to or under the administrative supervision of the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, and other entities directly or indirectly involved in infrastructure operations;

c. Supervise, monitor and review the operations of computer installations in the infrastructure program community in accordance with NCC policies; and

d. Develop and foster computer use and applications in the fields of civil engineering, transportation, communications, water resources, and allied disciplines.

Section 2. The Center shall be headed by a Director and assisted by an Assistant Director, both of whom shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines.

Section 3. The Center may enter into contracts with other parties for the provision of computer time and related services, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Public Works, Transportation and Communications.

Section 4. The Center shall have such officers, assistants and employees as may be necessary for its proper functioning, and such other personnel as may be assigned or detailed from other affiliated government agencies. All regular positions in the Center are hereby declared sensitive and scientific in nature. It shall set up special selection technique to insure the establishment and maintenance of a merit system in the Center which conforms with general practices in the Electronic Data Processing (EDP) industry.

Section 5. There shall be a Management Advisory Committee to the Center consisting of not more than nine (9) members designated by the heads of participating agencies which computer requirements are served by the Center, the Committee shall give advise the Center on matters of priorities, applications and other policies.

Section 6. The appropriations for the Center shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

The Center is authorized to use funds generated from such sources as encoding and computer services, contributions from government agencies, and sale of computer time to cover such items of its expenditures as supplies, equipment, allowances for its personnel and contractual services, subject to the approval of the Budget Commission and existing rules and regulations.

Section 7. This Decree takes effect immediately, but shall be subject to the reorganization and rationalization program of the national government on the use of computers.

Done in the City of Manila, 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1562 June 11, 1978