PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 125

AMENDING CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 2234, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE CITY CHARTER OF LEGAZPI, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, Article I, Section 2 of Republic Act No. 2234, otherwise known as the City Charter of Legazpi, provides that “The City of Legazpi, which is hereby created, shall comprise the present territorial jurisdiction of the Municipality of Legazpi, Province of Albay”;

WHEREAS, the steady growth and continuing urbanization of the City of Legazpi on account of its strategic importance and location as the hub of commerce, industry, transportation and communications and as the regional center of government offices in the Bicol Region, urgently necessitate a wider area or territory for its expansion;

WHEREAS, such present and future need for the expansion and consequent modernization of the City of Legazpi can be adequately met by including and making part of its territory the contiguous and/or adjacent Municipality of Daraga, Province of Albay;

WHEREAS, under Republic Act 306, which created the City of Legazpi for the first time in June 18, 1948, the present Municipality of Daraga was in fact part and parcel of the City of Legazpi as provided for in Article I, Section 2 thereof, but which through the undesirable practice of gerrymandering possible under the old society, was separated therefrom for political expediency; and

WHEREAS, in the referendum conducted by and among the citizens assemblies in the City of Legazpi and in the Municipality of Daraga with a total of 43,303 persons attending, 40,694 voted for the annexation of the Municipality of Daraga to the City of Legazpi, while only 2,373 voted against the proposal;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby amend Republic Act No. 2234, particularly Article I, Section 2 thereof to read as follows: “Territory of the City of Legazpi. The City of Legazpi which is hereby created, shall comprise the present territorial jurisdiction of the City of Legazpi and the Municipality of Daraga in the Province of Albay.”

For this purpose, the funds and obligations and property of all kinds of the Municipality of Daraga shall be transferred to and assumed by the City of Legazpi.

The City of Legazpi as now constituted under this Decree shall be divided into three districts, namely, Daraga, Old Albay and Legazpi Port, each of which shall be entitled to four (4) councilors to be elected in the manner provided for under Republic Act No. 2234 by the qualified voters in their respective districts: Provided, however, That the first four (4) councilors of the district of Daraga shall be appointed by the President and together with the incumbent councilors shall continue to hold office until their successors shall have been duly elected and have qualified unless sooner removed.

Any provision of existing laws, and rules and regulations in conflict with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Decree is hereby made part of the law of the land and shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FLORES BAYOT Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office