PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1243

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BUMBARAN IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

WHEREAS, it is the desired aim of the State to provide every possible opportunity to hasten the pace of progress throughout the land with emphasis not only in areas where economic development is behind, but likewise in places where for political reasons, among other, constitute a stumbling block towards the early realization of the ideals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, the municipality of WAO in the province of Lanao del Sur is comprised of so vast a territory that the present strength of the local Integrated National Police Force is far from adequate to patrol outlying communities for the maintenance of peace and order;

WHEREAS, a division of said municipality into two municipalities would enhance progress and development of the areas involved, since projects for development would be subjected to closer attention and supervision by local officials;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to create the municipality of Bumbaran out of the existing municipality of WAO so as to maximize the enforcement of law and order thereat and to expediate optimum development thereof, considering that the territorial area of the proposed new Municipality of Bumbaran is vast agricultural lands capable of producing variable crops which would sufficient food and income to its population;

WHEREAS, the creation of the municipality of Bumbaran will benefit economically, socially and politically the residents of the area or areas affected;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Barangays Sumiorang, Ilama, Mansilano, Lico, Ranao-Baning, Aparport, Punud, Lambanogan, Frankfort, Borantacan, Sumogot, Pagalamatan, Sigua-an, Salam, Piagma, Comara, Natangcopan, Bandara-Ingud, Miorod, Pagonayan, Bagombayan, all in the municipality of WAO, Lanao del Sur, are hereby segregated therefrom and shall constitute a separate and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Bumbaran, in the province of Lanao del Sur, and same shall be bounded as follows: On the East by the mother of Municipality of WAO only separated by a straight line 13.65 km. drawn Northward from Point-1 to Point-2 on the bank of the Maladugao Boundary line as Point-3; thence by straight line following the Lumbabayabao-Wao boundary line Southward to the intersection of the Lanao-Cotabato Boundary as Point-4; thence finally 1.72 Eastward following the Lanao-Cotabato Boundary Line to Point of beginning.

Section 2. The seat of government of the Municipality of Bumbaran shall be Barangay Aparport.

Section 3. The present elective officials of the Municipality of WAO shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality until the officials of the latter shall have been duly appointed by the President and shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree, and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Other officials and employees necessary in the organization and operation of the municipal government shall be appointed in the manner provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the corresponding share of the Municipality of Bumbaran in the obligations, funds, deposits and property of the original municipality of WAO, shall be transferred by the President to the new Municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. Title to all the property, powers, rights and obligations, or portions thereof formerly belonging to the original municipality of WAO, shall be vested either in the new municipality of Bumbaran or the mother of municipality, depending upon the particular territorial jurisdiction in which they are situated.

Section 6. All laws, decrees, executive orders, ordinances, rules and regulation, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office