EXTENDING THE TERM OF OFFICE OF THE PRESENT KABATAANG BARANGAY OFFICERS

WHEREAS, the Filipino youth have assumed a unique and distinguished seat in the affairs of government by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 684 creating the Kabataang Barangay throughout the country;

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 684 provides that the said organization shall be composed of all residents within a particular barangay who are less than 18 years of age;

WHEREAS, the aforecited provision compels a sizeable number of the country’s youth to relinguish their positions and/or membership in the organization upon exceeding the maximum age limit of 18 years;

WHEREAS, all executive officers of the Kabataang Barangay throughout the land have undergone a nationwide training program to orient them into the lofty spirit of national service and commitment;

WHEREAS, the same participants of the said training program need to be granted sufficient and ample opportunity to put into practice the knowledge and skills acquired therein;

WHEREAS, the same participants have proven themselves competent to impart the skills and knowledge to a wider number of barangay youth members;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree as part of the law of the land the following:

Section 1. The pertinent provisions of Presidential Decree No. 684 limiting the membership of the youth organizations to barangay residents below 18 years of age are hereby suspended to allow the Kabataang Barangay officers to continue in office.

Section 2. The Secretary of Local Government and Community Development shall promulgate such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary to effectively implement the provisions of this Decree.

Section 3. All provisions of laws, orders and decrees as well as rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby modified accordingly.

Section 4. This decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office