PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1134

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAGUING IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR.

WHEREAS, it is the desired aim of the State to provide every possible opportunity and facility to hasten the pace of progress throughout the land with emphasis not only on areas where economic development is behind but likewise in places where political reasons, among others, constitute a stumbling block toward the early realization of the ideals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, themunicipalityofLumba-Bayabaoin the province of Lanao del Sur is comprised of so vast a territory (100 square kilometers) and densely populated that the present officials thereof are unable to efficiently discharge the functions of government;

WHEREAS, a division of said municipality into two municipalities would not only enhance the progress and development of the areas involved, for in this regard, projects for development would be subjected to closer attention and supervision of local officials, but would also insure peace and order within their respective localities;

WHEREAS, the necessity is imperative to create, by division, the municipality of Maguing out of the existing municipality of Lumba-Bayabao so as to maximize the efficacy of law and order thereat and to expedite optimum development thereof, particularly considering that the proposed municipality is the rice production center of the Basak area; and

WHEREAS, the creation of the municipality of Maguing will benefit economically, socially and politically the residents of the area or areas affected.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order and make as part of the laws of the land:

Section 1. Lumba-Bayabao in the province of Lanao del Sur shall remain a municipality, exercising powers and discharging functions over the areas specified in the law of its creation, except the barrios of Borua, Alog, Pindolonan, Butod, Dimaro, Lumbac, Balagunun, Dimagalin, Bulao, Borokot, Dasaon, Romapunot, Dilausan, Madaya, Madanding, Malungun, Mimbasa, Pinduolonan, Linindingan, Buadiangcay, Pagalongan, Pilimoknan, Maguing-proper Batobato, Bualan, Tandiongkairan, Rinabor, Minipagalanga, Balintao, Bubong, Dilinbayan, Panayangan, Macadiar, Iclo, Elian, Kianodan, Runggayan, Ilalag, Camalag, Kilala, Cambong, Balawag, Minaring, Dalidigan, Bosicong, Pantao, and Agagan, all of the aforesaid municipality, which are hereby segregated therefrom to constitute a separate and independent municipality to be known as the municipality of Maguing, both in the province of Lanao del Sur.

Section 2. The seat of government of themunicipality ofMaguing shall be barrio Dilausan.

Section 3. The present elective officials of the municipality of Lumba-Bayabao shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality until the officials of the latter shall have been duly appointed by the President and shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected, in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree, and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Other officials and employees necessary in the organization and operation of the municipal government shall be appointed in the manner provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. The formal organization, however, of the newly created municipality of Maguing shall depend upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Lumba-Bayabao, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maguing, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for essential municipal services.

Section 5. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the corresponding share of the municipality of Maguing in the obligations, funds, deposits and property of the original municipality of Lumba-Bayabao shall be transferred by the President to said new municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 6. Title to all the property, powers, rights and obligations, or portions thereof formerly belonging to the original municipality of Lumba-Bayabao, shall be vested either in the municipality of Lumba-Bayabao or the newly created municipality of Maguing depending upon the particular territorial jurisdiction in which they are situated.

Section 7. All laws, decrees, executive orders, ordinances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 8. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office