PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1241

FURTHER AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1187 ENTITLED “PROVIDING FOR A GENERAL REGISTRATION OF ALL QUALIFIED VOTERS THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES”

WHEREAS, Presidential Decree No. 1187, as amended, provided for a general registration of all qualified voters throughout the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to further amend certain provisions of said Decree so as to insure a more effective and orderly registration of voters in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the further amendment of Presidential Decree No. 1187, as follows:

Section 1. Maximum numbers of the registered voters for every voting Center. A new section to be known as Section 11 shall be inserted after Section 10 of Presidential Decree No. 1187 which shall read as follows:

“Sec. 11. Maximum number of registered voters for every voting center. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding section, the number of registered voters in every voting center shall not exceed three hundred unless otherwise authorized by the Commission on Elections in special cases.”

Section 2. Repealing Sections 12 and 20. Sections 12 and 20 of the same Presidential Decree are hereby repealed.

Section 3. Use of the book of voters for the election. Section 19 of the same Decree is hereby repealed and substituted with the following:

“Sec. 19. Use of the book of voters for the election. Whenever an election is called, it shall be the duty of the Citizens Election Committee to obtain from the election registrar concerned before the start of voting on election day the book of voters containing the approved applications for registration of voters pertaining to the center where they are assigned together with the other forms and paraphernalia needed for the election: Provided, however, That the Commission on Elections may, for special reasons authorize the delivery of the book of voters, election forms and other paraphernalia at an early date to the election committee concerned. Only those voters whose applications are included in the book of voters shall be allowed to vote except as may be ordered by competent court.

“The book of voters shall be returned to the Election Registrar by the Citizens Election Committee on the day following the election, duly arranged in the same manner that it was received.”

Section 4. Section 18 of the same Decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 18. Preparation of list if voters. On the last meeting day for the registration of voters, the Citizens Registration Committee shall before adjourning prepare and certify an alphabetical list of voters in triplicate based on all applications for registration approved by it pursuant to this Decree including those approved by the Election Registrar in accordance with Presidential Decree No. 1099.

“The Election Registrar shall deliver on the last day of registration before the Citizens Registration Committee to the proper registration committee all the approved applications under his custody pertaining to the voting center for inclusion in the list of voters.

“On the day following, one copy shall be delivered to the Election Registrar, and another copy to the Barangay Captain. The third copy of the list shall be retained by the Chairman of the Committee. All copies shall be made available for inspection by the public during reasonable hours.

“Not later than seven days before the day of the election, the Election Registrar shall prepare and certify for each voting center a supplemental list of voters containing the names, in alphabetical order, and addresses of voters registered by him after the last day of registration in voting centers. Copies of the list shall each be delivered to the Chairman of the Registration Committee and to the Barangay Captain concerned.”

Section 5. Repealing Clause. Section 29 of the same Decree is hereby amended by adding a second paragraph thereto, so that said section shall read as follows;

“Sec. 29. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, rules and regulations thereof inconsistent with the provision of this decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

“As a consequence of the insertion of a new section known as section 11 and the deletion of Sections 12 and 20, Sections 11, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 32 shall be renumbered respectively as Sections 12, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31.”

Section 6. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President  of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office