MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1328

CREATING BARANGAY MARCELO GREEN IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF PARAÑAQUE, METRO MANILA

WHEREAS, the basic objectives of government is to accelerate the pace of socio-economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the government has engaged in intensified development projects geared towards the upliftment of the socio-economic well-being of our people.

WHEREAS, in the execution of the said governmental projects, close supervision by local officials is a necessity so as to at least approximate a certain degree of achievement which will contribute to a large extent towards the political, social and economic upliftment of the residents of the localities involved;

WHEREAS, it has been the steady desire of the inhabitants of the area affected to create the proposed barangay so as to effectively attain the goals of the New Society throughout the land;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the law of the land, the following:

SECTION 1. The following subdivisions known as Severina Diamond, United Parañaque Phase 4, Supervill, Irenville Subdivision, Irenville and Marcelo Green Village in Barangay La Huerta in the Municipality of Parañaque, Metro Manila, is hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent barangay which created to be known as Barangay Marcelo Green without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother barangay La Huerta.

SEC. 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays, shall be applicable to barangay Marcelo Green.

SEC. 3. The present elective barangay officials of Barangay La Huerta shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Barangay Marcelo Green until the barangay officials of said barangay shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for barangay officials following the issuance of this Decree shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the barangay Marcelo Green shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

SEC. 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Barangay Marcelo Green in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangay La Huerta shall be transferred by the President to the newly created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

SEC. 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Presidential Museum and Library