PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 337

GRANTING LONGEVITY PAY TO CIVILIAN INVESTIGATION AGENTS OF THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION SERVICE, PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY, AND TO CIVILIAN INTELLIGENCE AGENTS OF THE INTELLIGENCE SERVICE/UNITS OF THE ARMED FORCESOF THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, martial law has been declared under Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and is now in force and effect:

WHEREAS, the Armed Forces of the Philippines more than any agency of the government, has been charged to carry a greater share of the burden of suppressing all forms of lawlessness, violence and subversion as well as any act of insurrection or rebellion, to pave the way for the institution of much-needed reforms in our society;

WHEREAS, the civilian investigation agents of the Criminal Investigation Service, Philippine Constabulary and the civilian intelligence agents of the Intelligence Service/Units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, have participated and played an important role in the suppression of criminality and other forms of lawlessness, and in the detention, identification and arrest of leaders of communist organizations/movements, lawless armed groups and crime syndicates;

WHEREAS, the civilian investigation agents of the Criminal Investigation Service, Philippine Constabulary, and the civilian intelligence agents of the Intelligence Service Units of the Armed Force of the Philippines are exposed to the same danger as their military counterparts in the performance of hazardous missions;

WHEREAS, it is imperative to raise the efficiency and morale of the civilian investigation agents of the Philippine Constabulary and the civilian intelligence agents of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in consonance with the policy of the government to inculcate professionalism in the service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby order and decree that henceforth:

1. Civilian investigation agents of the Criminal Investigation Service, Philippine Constabulary, whose powers and duties are defined under Republic Act Numbered five thousand seven hundred fifty, and civilian intelligence agents of the Intelligence Service/Units, Armed Forces of the Philippines shall receive, in addition to their basic monthly salary, longevity pay equivalent to ten per centum of their latest monthly salary for every five years of continuous service with the Criminal Investigation Service and the Intelligence Service/Units, as the case may be: Provided, That in the determination of their length of service for purposes of this Decree, only uninterrupted and continuous service with the Criminal Investigation Service or Intelligence Service/Units, as military or civilian intelligence agents shall be considered: Provided, further, That the longevity pay of the civilian investigation agents and the civilian intelligence agents shall not exceed fifty per centum of their basic salary.

2. Such sums as may be necessary to implement this Decree is hereby appropriated out of the savings of the Department of National Defense. Thereafter, the sum necessary for the purpose shall be included in the General Appropriations Act.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Source: Malacañang Records Office