PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1188

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BARIRA IN THE PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO

WHEREAS, prominent leaders and residents of the territory affected been consistently clamoring and petitioning for the creation of the proposed municipality with the favorable recommendation of the provincial and municipal authorities concerned;

WHEREAS, the proposed municipality with its estimated annual income and development potentials is viable and the creation thereof will, therefore, accelerate its economic development and the restoration of peace and order therein which are the prime concerns of the state and the New Society; and

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will not adversely affect the status and financial stability of its mother municipality;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree and make as part of the laws and the land the following:

Section 1. Barangays Barira, Nabalawag, (Western Part), Tugaig, (Western part), Liong, Lipawan, Bualan, Gadung, Lipa, Marang, and Ruminimbang, together with the sitios of Midpacor, Palangka, Minabay, Inipantao, Kendis, Kalimbato, Karosayan, Nituan, Panggao, Sumsed, Cawa, Bangkala, Kaigan, Talaid, Basak, Racoray, Pedtad, Bukalan, Balut, Rumayas, Pindulunan, Sabpi, Tataya, Pimbago, Tanulang, Pianubkan, Manuang, Lamin, Kawingis, Palao, Sumiorang, Kagawaran, Tantao, Interior Kalilangan, Bundol, Nagubaran, Madaya, Calagan, Diromoyod, Kadingilan, Gumatong, Ator, Mate, Tantangan and Ludasan, all in the municipality of Buldon, Province of Maguindanao, are hereby detached therefrom and crated into a distinct and separate municipality to be known as the Municipality of Barira with the seat of government in sitio Pedtad of Barangay Lipawan.

Section 2. The Municipality of Barira shall have the following boundaries; Beginning at the point at the peak (Highest point) of Mt. Boroanga along the Maguindanao-Lanao del Sur boundary, following an imaginary straight line to the South down to the center of the Banganan Falls; thence, from the center of the said Banganan Falls, following an imaginary downstream line at the center of Banganan River down at the point in the South where the said Banganan River meets or joins Ambal River, thence following an imaginary downstream line at the center of the said Ambal River down to the point where said Ambal River meets or joins Simuay River, thence following the boundary of the municipalities of Buldon and Parang as defined in Republic Act No. 3419 up to the Maguindanao-Lanao del Sur Boundary, to the point of beginning.” (As defined in Resolution, No. 25, s-1975 of the Municipal Council of Buldon).

Section 3. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of laws, now of hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the newmunicipality ofBarira.

Section 4. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Buldon shall continue to perform their duties and such officials in the newly created Municipality of Barira until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to enable the government of the Municipality of Barira to operate its organization shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 29th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1188, August 29, 1977