PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 896

FURTHER AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4136, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE LAND TRANSPORTATION AND TRAFFIC CODE.

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Section 8, paragraph (d) of Republic Act No. 4136 as amended by Presidential Decree No. 843 is hereby amended to read as follows:

(d) Private motor tricycles for three wheels the sum of P30.00 and private motorcycles, scooters and bicycles with motor attachments, of two wheels, the sum of P50.00.

Section 2. Section 8, paragraph (i) of the same Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

(1) Motor vehicles not intended to be operated or used upon any public highway, or which are operated on highways not constructed or maintained by the government, or are intended not to be used or operated at all, shall be exempt from payment of the registration fees provided in this Act, but shall each pay an annual recording and service fee of fifteen pesos: Provided however, That no refund, credit for, or reimbursement of registration fees or part thereof shall be made to any owner on account of the discountinuance of the use or operation of a motor vehicle subsequent to the payment of such registration fees: Provided, however, That in the event motor vehicles exempted under this section shall be found operated on any public highway, the regular registration fees and surcharges shall be collected in addition to whatever penalties may be imposed for violation of this Act. The Commissioner of Land Transportation shall provide distinctive number plates for vehicles exempted from payment of regular registration fees, and the owner of the vehicles concerned shall pay a plate fee as prescribed by the Land Transportation Commission.

Section 3. Section 8, paragraph (k) of the same Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

(k) The registration fees provided in this Act for trucks may be payable in two equal installments, the first to be paid on or before the last working day of March whether for hire or private; and the second to be paid on or before the last working day of August; Provided, That the fifty per cent penalty shall apply only to the unpaid balance of the remaining period of delinquency.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 896 February 26, 1976