PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 18

ESTABLISHING THE METROPOLITAN MANILA FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE COUNCIL

WHEREAS, there were pending before Congress prior to the promulgation of Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, priority measures duly certified by the President as urgent for the solution of pressing problems of the country;

WHEREAS, one of these measures is the “Act to Undertake an Integrated Flood Control and Drainage Program for the Greater Manila Area and Public Works Projects in other Cities and Municipalities and to Provide Sources of Funds Therefor;”

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, in accordance with the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree that the Metropolitan Manila Flood Control and Drainage Council be established with the following as members: (1) the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, Chairman, (2) the fourteen member-mayors of the Metropolitan Mayors Coordinating Council as members, and; (3) such other members that the President may designate.

The Council shall have the tasks of formulating and implementing an Integrated Flood Control and Drainage Program for the Metropolitan Manila Area.

In order to provide for the proper financing of the project, there is hereby created a Greater Manila Metropolitan Area and Drainage Fund Account to be deposited in the National Treasury which shall be constituted from the following sources:

(a) Proceeds from a special metropolitan flood tax of twenty-five (P0.25) centavos levied on all admission tickets of movie houses in Greater Manila for a period of fifteen (15) years;

(b) Fund releases from appropriation of various Public Works Acts for the Project;

(c) Proceeds from additional real estate taxes (not exceeding one-eighth (1/8) of 1% of the assessed value of real estate located within Metropolitan Manila), other taxes or sources which may be imposed if and when the funds generated by the special metropolitan flood tax on theater admission is not sufficient to complete and maintain the flood control and drainings project.

All agencies and offices of the Government are enjoined to extend full cooperation and assistance to the Metropolitan Manila Flood Control and Drainage Council herein established to insure the successful prosecution of the essential project.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office