PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 689

REVISING THE STAFFING PATTERN OF THE BUREAU OF CUSTOMS AND INCREASING THE SALARIES OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES

WHEREAS, the reforms instituted in the Bureau of Customs since the declaration of Martial Law have revolutionized and infused a new concept of efficient and effective Customs service which resulted in the unprecedented collection of Customs revenue from P3.19 billion in Calendar Year, 1973, to P6.45 billion in Calendar Year, 1974, an increase in real terms of P3.26 billion, or a growth rate of more than 102%;

WHEREAS, the Bureau of Custom’s role as a revenue-collecting agency of the government is of paramount importance in achieving and maintaining an accelerating rate of economic development and social progress of the country; and

WHEREAS, in pursuance of the Government’s policy of expending the international as well as domestic trade of the country there is a need to revitalize the personnel structure of the Bureau of Customs by changing some features of its Integrated Reorganization Plan and by upgrading the salary ranges to make them more realistic and commensurate with the duties and functions appertaining to the positions.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. The proposed staffing pattern of the Bureau of Customs with the corresponding salary rates attached to the positions is hereby approved.

Section 2. Any Customs officer or employee legally appointed to any of the positions enumerated in the Revised Staffing Pattern shall be immediately entitled to the salary provided for said position, and the position as stated in the approved appointment shall be the basis for identifying the individual position in the Bureau of Customs. Such officer or employee shall perform the functions of the position to which he is legally appointed.

Section 3. So much amount as may be needed to implement the provisions of this Decree is hereby deemed appropriated.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 689 April 22, 1975