PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 522

PRESCRIBING SANITATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE OPERATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES FOR THE PROTECTION AND CONVENIENCE OF THE TRAVELLING PUBLIC.

WHEREAS, public and private sectors have continously contributed time, efforts and funds in the promotion of tourism, sanitation and in beautification campaigns throughout the land;

WHEREAS, results of surveys and observations along national highways and roads leading to tourist resorts have indicated an increase in private establishment and enterprises catering to local and foreign tourist;

WHEREAS, the influx of tourists has spawned problems as a result of insanitary conditions of physical facilities and lack of public utilities in tourist resorts, bus stops and terminals and service stations along national highways, including airports and seaports;

WHEREAS, there is need of providing for an adequate number of rest areas for passengers of public and private conveyances playing the highways to cater to the comfort and personal conveniences and needs of travellers; and

WHEREAS, it is the responsibility of Government to regulate necessary the basic facilities for the health and convenience of tourist and travellers in order to project a favorable image of our comfort and its people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree and make as part of the law of the land following:

Section 1. The Department of Health, thru the Regional Sanitation Committee, is hereby empowered to inspect investigate and issue or revoke permits to operate rest areas service stations, eating establishments and such other facilities or amenities intended for the physical convenience of the travelling public.

Section 2. There are hereby created Regional Sanitation Committees in each Health Region under the Department of Health which will control, supervise and regulate the sanitation requirements in public eating places, lounges, motels, hotels, seaports, airports, and other similar establishments serving the travelling public throughout the country composed of the following:

Director, Regional Office Chairman

Supervising Sanitary Engineer Vice-Chairman

Provincial Health Officers Members

City Health Officers Members

Section 3. The Regional Sanitation Committees, in consultation with Provincial and City Health Officers, are hereby vested with, but not limited to, the following powers and functions:

a) Require all business establishments catering to the travelling public to have the necessary sanitary permits to operate;

b) Require employees of such establishments to possess health certificates issued by the local health officials;

c) Require all public transportation companies including hotels or tourist and travel agencies, with units playing the highways, to provide their own rest areas as strategic places along the National Highway to adequately accommodate the conveniences and personal necessities of their passenger by the Department of Health;

d) Prohibit public and private conveyances to make stops at points on the highways other than at the regular designated rest areas for the purpose of satisfying the demand for personal necessities of passengers;

e) Require all eating and recreational establishments, rest areas, service stations, picnic grounds, airports, seaports and other similar business establishments catering to the travelling public to have adequate comfort rooms in conformity with the sanitary standards promulgated by the Department of Health;

f) Construct rest areas with sanitary facilities and maintain their operations in conformity with accepted health standards, under maintenance of the Health Department or the Department of Public Highways;

g) Make a classification of rating system for establishments catering to the travelling public for tourists’ guidance, and to require the permanent or temporary closure of any establishment not meeting the specifications of the Department of Health;

h) Perform such other duties as may be necessary to promote the convenience or comfort of the travelling public.

Section 4. The Department of Health is hereby authorized to enlist the support of the Philippine Constabulary or any government office for the enforcement or implementation of this Decree.

Section 5. All establishments catering to the travelling public are hereby given (90) days from the promulgation of this decree within which to comply with the provisions thereof.

Section 6. Violations of this decree, as well as of the rules and regulations issued by the Secretary of Health pursuant to the preceding Section, shall be punished by a fine of not less than P2,000 nor more than P5,000 or imprisonment of not less than 2 years nor more than 5 years, or both, at the discretion of the Court, for the first offense; for subsequent offenses, by both fine or imprisonment and cancellation of the license or permit of the establishment. If the offender is a corporate entity, the officers, manager or directors shall be primarily liable. If the offender is an alien, he shall be adopted immediately without further investigation.

Section 7. All laws, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 8. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office