PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 227

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 210, SO AS TO VALIDATE FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE REGISTRATION OF MEMBERS OF BARANGAYS, (CITIZENS ASSEMBLIES) THE PERMANENT LIST OF VOTERS PREPARED UNDER REPUBLIC ACT 6388

Section 1. Section 14 of Presidential Decree No. 210 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 14. Transitory Provision. Without prejudice to the registration of person not included, any list prepared and used in the referendum of January 1973 in accordance with Presidential Decree Nos. 86, 86-A, 86-B duly certified as such by the Secretary of the Department of Local Government and Community Development or his duly designated representative, shall be adopted for purposes of this decree after the said list shall have been posted in at least three conspicuous place, in the Barrio, Barangay or District, or in case the list is of such thickness or volume that it is impractical to post it, deposited in the office of schools where it shall be open for public scrutiny, for a period of five days. In case there are complaints against the inclusion of persons not qualified to be registered, the question shall be determined by the registrar of the City, Municipality or Municipal District, but the entire list shall not be affected.

“The permanent list of voters in the custody of the election registrar of the city, municipality or municipal district prepared in accordance with Republic Act Numbered Sixty-three hundred and eighty-eight shall likewise be adopted for purposes of this decree. The election registrar concerned shall furnish a list of voters to the Barrio Captain or Barangay Head who shall have the names in said list copied in Barangay Form No. 2 (Barangay List). The election registrar is authorized to deputize as many public school teachers as may be needed to help him copy the list of voters, and upon request of the Barrio Captain or Barangay Head, or shall designate as many public school teachers of the barrio or district as may be needed to help in the transfer of names from the list furnished by the election registrar to the barangay list.

“After the reglamentary period of publication prescribed in the [preceding] first paragraph, the list shall then be authenticated in the same manner as provided in Section 10.”

Section 2. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office