MALACAÑANG PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1549

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LIMASAWA IN THE PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE.

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a must if intensified governmental developmental projects geared toward the economic and political progress of the nation are to be achieved;

WHEREAS, the realization of said development projects depends primarily on the administration efficiency of each and every local government unity;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the island of Limasawa, municipality of Padre Burgos, in the province of Southern Leyte, to create the proposed municipality so as to stimulate its faster development not only as a community but as a local government unit; and

WHEREAS, all indications show that the proposed municipality will become a self-reliant community once created and intensified government projects are implement to enhance its development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS. President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

SECTION 1. All barangays and sitios in the island of Limasawa in the Municipality of Padre Burgos, Province of Southern Leyte, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Limasawa the seat of government of which shall be in Barangay Triana: Provided, That this Decree shall not affect the legal existence of the Municipality of Padre Burgos as such.

SEC. 2. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Padre Burgos shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the new Municipality of Limasawa until the officials of the latter municipality shall have been appointed by the President of the Philippines and shall have qualified: Provided, That the officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in a regular election and duly qualified, unless sooner removed by the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 3. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize and complete the government of the Municipality of Limasawa shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

SEC. 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree the proportionate share of the Municipality of Limasawa in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Padre Burgos duly appertaining to the former shall be transferred to and be borne by the Municipality of Limasawa, as determined by the Commission on Audit and approve by the President of the Philippines.

SEC. 5. All laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

SEC. 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia