MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1545

CREATING BARANGAY GENERAL AGUINALDO, IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF RAMON, PROVINCE OF ISABELA.

WHEREAS, the basic objective of the state is to accelerate the pace of the progress throughout the country especially in areas where economic development is behind;

WHEREAS, the creation of local government units, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of our people;

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed barangay had been the clamor of the residents therein to insure the upliftment of their socio-economic well-being;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Sitio Villa Cortez of Barangay Ambatoli, in the Municipality of Ramon, Province of Isabela, is hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent barangay which is created to be known as Barangay General Aguinaldo without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother barangay of Ambatoli.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays, shall be applicable to the new barangay of General Aguinaldo.

Section 3. The present elective barangay officials of Barangay Ambatoli shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created barangay of General Aguinaldo until the officials of said barangay shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of Barangay General Aguinaldo shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Barangay of General Aguinaldo in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangay Ambatoli shall be transferred by the President to the newly created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1545 June 11, 1978