PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1047

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TAGAPUL-AN IN THE PROVINCE OF WESTERN SAMAR

WHEREAS, the primary objective of the government is to hasten up the pace of economic development of the entire country;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed municipality with the conformity of the elective officials of the locality, to create a new municipality out of existing Municipality of Almagro, Province of Western Samar, so as to achieve a closer supervision of the execution of the developmental programs of the locality, simultaneously insuring peace and order therein;

WHEREAS, the new municipality will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are instituted in line with declared policy of the government to promote the socio-economic well being of the residents therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Sugod, Langbaybay, Baguin, Mataloto, Guimbarocan, Polangabto, Pantalan, Balocawe, Nipa, Luna and San Vicente, all comprising the whole island of Tagapul-an and forming part of Municipality of Almagro, Province of Western Samar, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a district and independent municipality which is created to be known as the Municipality of Tagapul-an, without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother municipality of Almagro. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Sugod.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or thereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the municipality of Tagapul-an.

Section 3. The present elective officials of the Municipality of Almagro shall perform their duties as such in the newly created municipality until the officials of the latter shall have been duly appointed by the President and they shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the election for provincial and municipal officials following the issuance of this decree, and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Other officials and employees necessary in the organization and operation of the municipal government shall be appointed in the manner provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new municipality of Tagapul-an in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Almagro shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1047 November 15, 1976