PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 877

ORGANIZING THE KATIPUNAN NG MGA SANGGUNIAN

WHEREAS, to provide for a more authentic grassroot participation of the citizenry in the affairs of the government, the Sangguniang Bayan has been organized in the municipal, city and provincial levels throughout the country pursuant to Presidential Decree Nos. 824 and 826;

WHEREAS, there is a need for the members of the said Sangguniang Bayan to perceive and identify problems not only on a local but, more importantly, on a national perspective and to provide the proper solutions thereof;

WHEREAS, the said function can be exercised and performed only through the collective deliberations and decisions of the Sangguniang Bayan membership convening in conference;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Composition and Membership. There shall be an organization of all the Sangguniang Bayan in the provinces and cities including Metro Manila which shall hereinafter be known as the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian.

The Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian shall be composed of the following:

(a) All the members of the Sangguniang Bayan in the provinces and cities, who have been elected by the Association of Barangay Captains as well those elected by their respective sectoral groups (capitalist, professional, industrial labor and agricultural sector) pursuant to Presidential Decree Nos. 824 and 826, provided that in both cases, they have been duly appointed by the President as of December 31, 1975; and

(b) Former members of provincial boards and city and municipal councils or boards, whose membership in the Sangguniang Bayan has been extended until March 31, 1976;

Section 2. Annual Conference. The Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian shall meet in conference at least once a year on a date set by its executive committee, or at the call of the President.

Section 3. Officers of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian. The Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian shall elect a temporary chairman and such other officers as may be necessary at the start of the conference, whose terms of office shall extend only for the duration of such conference. The Chairman shall be an ex-officio member of the executive committee, and shall be the presiding officer of the meetings of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian for the duration of its conference.

Section 4. Executive Committee. There shall be an executive committee to be elected by and among its members, which committee shall be authorized to act for and in behalf of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian when not in session.

Section 5. Secretariat. The Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian shall have a permanent secretariat, the staff support of which shall be provided by the Department of Local Government and Community Development.

Section 6. Powers of the Sangguniang Bayan in the Provinces, Cities and Municipalities. The Sangguniang Bayan in the provinces, cities and municipalities shall retain their legislative powers subject only to laws and presidential decrees, except those situated in Metro Manila as provided for in Section 9 of Presidential Decree No. 824.

Section 7. Term of Office of the Members of the Sangguniang Bayan in the Provinces, Cities and Municipalities. The term of office of the present members of the Sangguniang Bayan in the provinces, cities and municipalities shall be interim in character and temporary in duration. They shall hold office until the President, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Local Government and Community Development, should rescind their appointment or annul their election because of the grounds provided for such rescission or annulment or at the request of the Katipunan ng mga Sanggunian, or shall call an election to be supervised by the Commission on Elections, upon which election the terms of office of those elected shall be specified by presidential decree.

Section 8. Repealing clause. All laws or parts of laws, as well as all executive orders or regulations, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity. This decree shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Signed in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office