PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 876

CREATING THE POSITION OF UNDERSECRETARY OF NATIONAL DEFENSE FOR CIVILIAN RELATIONS

WHEREAS, the primacy of civilian authority over the military is one of the basic policies of the New Society;

WHEREAS, in line with this policy, the Armed Forces of the Philippines is committed to a significant role in the development efforts of the government;

WHEREAS, there is a need for effective coordination of the programs and activities of the military and civilian agencies especially in matters affecting local projects and developments;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. There is hereby created an additional position of Undersecretary for Civilian Relations in the Department of National Defense.

Section 2. The Undersecretary of National Defense for Civilian Relations shall have the following functions:

(a) Establish and maintain effective liaison between the Department of National Defense and the Department of Local Government and Community Development and local governments, for the purpose of coordinating local development efforts;

(b) Promote coordination and cooperation between units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and the Integrated National Police (INP) in the field on one hand and local executives and authorities on the other;

(c) Develop programs and formulate policies and guidelines for the supervision and operation of the Office of the Civil Relations (OCR).

(d) Formulate and oversee the implementation of troop information programs designed to instill in the soldier the conviction and determination to uphold and advance the ideals of the New Society;

(e) Formulate and oversee the implementation of public information programs that will enhance the prestige of the armed services and thereby inspire the confidence of the people in the organization;

(f) Monitor the activities of military units/personnel assigned to civilian agencies of the government;

(g) Oversee the activities of veterans organizations; and

(h) Such other functions as the Secretary of National Defense may assign to him from time to time.

Section 3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office