PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 830

GIVING FLEXIBLE AND CONTINUING AUTHORITY TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES TO RESTRUCTURE THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

WHEREAS, the organizational structure of the Office of the President, including the Executive Office, should continuously be attuned and responsive to the current needs and requirements of the President in his capacity as chief executive of the national government;

WHEREAS, there is need to periodically review the organizational structure of the Office of the President, including the Executive Office, in order that needed changes can be expeditiously effected that would better orient its functions towards providing strong staff support to the President; and

WHEREAS, the transition towards the parliamentary form of government will necessitate flexibility in the organization of the Office of the President in order to allow needed adjustments to be effected.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the following:

1. The President of the Philippines shall have the continuing authority to reorganize the administrative structure of the Office of the President, including the private offices, Executive Office, and such other agencies and units in the Office.

2. For this purpose, the President may, at his discretion, take the following actions:

(a) Effect the transfer of agencies under the Office of the President to other appropriate departments or agencies, as well as the transfer of agencies to the Office of the President from other departments or agencies, the provisions of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding;

(b) Effect the transfer of functions from the Office of the President, including the private offices, Executive Office, and other internal units to other appropriate departments or agencies, as well as the transfer of functions to the Office of the President from other departments and agencies; and

(c) Effect the restructuring of the internal organization of the Office of the President, including the private offices, Executive Office, and other internal units in the Office, by abolishing, consolidating and merging units thereof and/or transferring functions from one unit to another.

3. Presidential actions taken pursuant to this Decree shall be effected through Letters of Implementation as he may issue from time to time.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office