PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 191

ABOLISHING THE MASS MEDIA COUNCIL CREATED UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 36, AND CREATING IN ITS STEAD THE MEDIA ADVISORY COUNCIL, PRESCRIBING RULES AND REGULATIONS TO ENABLE THE NEW BODY TO DISCHARGE ITS FUNCTIONS EFFECTIVELY

WHEREAS, it is the objective of Government to help in the sound development of the mass media to the end that they would become an effective instrument in the attainment of social change;

WHEREAS, the various sectors of mass media have shown full appreciation of the fact their failure to institute self-regulatory measures that would regulate corruption and abuse in the media resulted, as it could only result, in Government having to intervene in order to ensure that private rights and public welfare are safeguard;

WHEREAS, the same sectors of mass media, fully aware and cognizant of the reasons for the measures that have been instituted since September, 1972, concerning the operation of mass media, have shown willingness to institute a system of self- regulation and internal discipline within their ranks to the end that no part of media may ever again consciously or unconsciously, engage or take part in any conspiracy against the Government, or any of its duly constituted authorities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree the amendment of Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 36, as follows:

“3. The creation of a Media Advisory Council, headed by the President of the National Press Club as chairman, with a recognized civic leader to be appointed by the President as co-chairman, and one representative each from the Manila Overseas Press Club, print, radio and television and such others as President of the Philippines may designated as members.

“The Media Advisory Council shall have the duty of passing upon applications of mass media for permission to operate, so that no newspapers, magazine, periodical, or publications of any kind, radio, television and telecommunications facility, station or network may so operate without first obtaining a Certificate of Authority to Operate from the Media Advisory Council; Provided, however, That said Certificate of Authority shall not become valid and effective until approved by the President of the Philippines. Such Certificate of Authority shall be in force for six (6) months, renewable after six (6) months thereafter, unless otherwise terminated earlier.

“Any publication existing at the time of this Decree with a Certificate of Authority to operate duly signed by the President or approved by the Mass Media Council shall continue without obtaining a new Certificate until the expiration of the existing permit.

“The Media Advisory Council shall constitute itself immediately upon the promulgation of this Decree and shall within 15 days of its organization, promulgate rules and regulations and such other guidelines as it may deem necessary for the operation of mass media. Such rules and regulations and guidelines shall provide sanctions for their infraction, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines. For this purpose the Media Advisory Council shall also assume the functions and prerogatives of the defunct Philippine Press Council, and the Press Consultative Panel which was constituted by the Secretary of Public Information and representatives of the mass media on October 4, 1972, insofar as these relate to and conform with the requirements of this Decree.

“For the full and proper implementation of this Decree, the Media Advisory Council is hereby authorized to set up a secretariat which shall perform such functions and duties as may be entrusted to it by that Council. The Media Advisory Council shall submit to the President of thePhilippinesa monthly report on the actions taken and recommendations proposed on matters affecting the operation of mass media.

This Decree is hereby made part of the law of the land and shall take effect immediately and remain in force unless otherwise ordered by me, or by my duly authorized representative.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office