PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 875

AMOUNTS TO FINANCE THE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF A COMMISSARY AND PX SYSTEM FOR THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICED PERSONNELS

WHEREAS, among the beneficiaries of the commissary and the post exchange (PX) privileges granted pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 83 dated December 20, 1972 and Letter of Instruction No. 31 dated October 23, 1972, both as amended, are members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines considering that they are now carrying the greater part of the burden of suppressing the activities of groups or individuals actively engaged in a criminal conspiracy to seize political and state powers in the country and of eradicating widespread lawlessness, anarchy, disorder and wanton destruction of lives and property;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 765 dated August 8, 1965, the City and municipal police forces, fire departments and jails became components of the Integrated National Police, with the Philippine Constabulary as nucleus with the latter remaining as a Major Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, by virtue of the establishment of the Integrated National Police under the Department of National defense, the aforesaid city and municipal police forces, fire departments and jails have become vital partners of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the discharge of the above-mentioned responsibilities;

WHEREAS, to further insure realization of the objectives of the police integration, the sum of Five Million (P5,000,000.00) Pesos is needed to finance the operation and maintenance of a commissary and PX system for the personnel of the Integrated National Police including their dependents;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land that a commissary and PX system is hereby established for the Integrated National Police and all purchase thru such system from local sources, manufacturers, suppliers and producers of commodities shall be free of all taxes, duties, and other charges prescribed for similar commodities under existing revenue, other laws, ordinances and regulations. For this purpose FIVE MILLION (P5,000,000.00) PESOS of the retained earnings of the Veterans Claims Settlement Fund which is held in trust by the Philippine Veterans Bank is set aside to finance the organization, operation and maintenance of said commissary and PX system for the benefit of said personnel and their dependents.

The Chief of Constabulary/Director General, Integrated National Police, with the approval of the Secretary of National defense is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this Decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office