PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 628

ESTABLISHING ZONIFICATION AREAS FOR TOBACCO GROWING IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, the different tobacco varieties are grown in practically all areas in the Philippines without regard to the soil, climate, topography and other agricultural conditions obtaining in this area;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the type or variety of tobacco to be grown shall be suited to the area in order to produce high-yield and good quality tobacco for export and for domestic sale or consumption;

WHEREAS, in order to stabilize and maintain the prices of tobacco at reasonable level for the benefit of the planters, exporters and cigar and cigarette manufacturers, the production of tobacco should be consistent with the demand for domestic sale or consumption and for export;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Zonification. Philippine tobacco shall be grown only in the following provinces:

1. Virginia Tobacco

a) Ilocos Norte

b) Ilocos Sur (except Cabugao Valley for wrapper)

c) Abra (except in the municipality of Pilar)

d) La Union (except Tubao Valley for wrapper)

2. Cigar Tobacco

a) Isabela

b) Cagayan

c) Quirino

d) Nueva Ecija

e) Nueva Vizcaya

f) Zamboanga del Sur

g) Misamis Oriental

h) Leyte

3. Burley Tobacco

a) Occidental Mindoro

b) Eastern and Central Pangasinan

4. Turkish Tobacco

a) Western Pangasinan

b) Western Tarlac

c) Zambales

d) Cebu

The above zonification may be modified by the Philippine Tobacco Board whenever it may deem necessary and warranted for the good of the tobacco industry.

Section 2. Rules and Regulations. The Bureau of Plant Industry, upon approval by the Philippine Tobacco Board, shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations implementing this Decree.

Section 3. Penal Clause. Tobacco produced outside of the above zonification areas shall not be entitled to the floor price fixed by the Philippine Tobacco Board, and to the agricultural extension service on production, supervision and credit assistance by other agencies concerned.

Section 4. Endorsement. The Philippine Virginia Tobacco Administration, Philippine Tobacco Administration, Bureau of Plant Industry, Bureau of Internal Revenue, and other agencies concerned shall see to it that the provisions of this Decree are properly and effectively implemented.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect next planting season.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office