PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 639

RECOGNIZING THE ASIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT, INC., AS AN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION OF INTERNATIONAL CHARACTER, GRANTING CERTAIN PREROGATIVES CONDUCIVE TO ITS GROWTH AS SUCH, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the Philippines is committed to a future which is closely tied with the future of Asia, especially the ASEAN countries, whose economic development as a region is of great interest and concern to this country;

WHEREAS, the “Asian Institute of Management, Inc.”, also known as the AIM, has been established and is operating as a non-stock, non-profit educational institution under existing laws of the Philippines, for the purpose of offering high quality management education on the graduate level uniquely designed to meet the needs and opportunities of Asia;

WHEREAS, AIM, since its corporation in 1968, has served, with excellence, the management development needs not only of the Philippines but other countries, particularly those of Asia, and is, thereby, in fact an educational institution of international character and dimension;

WHEREAS, AIM, wishes to share this developed academic resources with the other countries ofAsia, especially those of the ASEAN countries, in the fullest way possible;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. The Asian Institute of Management as a graduate educational institution of international character shall be classified and treated by the Department of Education and Culture as a foreign school of special character, with an international student body, faculty, management composition and control, funding support, programs, curricular offerings, calendar, fee structure, and academic standards.

Section 2. Scholars, trainees, participants, students, fellows or professors who come to the Philippines under the auspices of the AIM shall be allowed entry as special non-immigrants under Section 47 (a) of the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940, as amended, free from the payment of visa and immigration fees; provided, however, that such persons are holders of valid passports, are otherwise admissible, and there is no derogatory information against them.

Section 3. The Secretary of Education and Culture, in coordination with the other Government agencies concerned, shall issue the necessary implementing rules to carry into effect the purpose of this Decree.

Section 4. All laws, decrees, orders, rules, or regulations, or part thereof, inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 21st day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office