PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1232

RECOGNIZING THE BARANGAY COMMUNITY BRIGADES IN METROPOLITAN MANILA AND GRANTING THEM CERTAIN PRIVILEGES

WHEREAS, the Governor of Metropolitan Manila has organized the Barangay Community Brigade which have proven to be effective auxiliary groups for beautification, health, sanitation, peace and order, rescue and relief operations, traffic management, and other civic development programs which require barangay participation with the end in view of maintaining continued and effective partnership and rapport between government and people;

WHEREAS, towards this end, it is imperative to mobilize the massive productive manpower resources at the local level for national progress;

WHEREAS, the Barangay Community Brigades have been conceived as the means for tapping the potential manpower of the country and involving them in Barangay affairs; and

WHEREAS, in recognition of the active participation, fruitful contribution and constructive role played by the Barangay Community Brigades, it is deemed necessary to raise their legal status and vest them with additional privileges as added incentives to the faithful performance and discharge of their functions and duties;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The Barangay Community Brigades consisting of the Barangay Volunteer Brigade, Barangay Ladies Auxiliary Brigade, Barangay Disaster Brigade, Barangay Traffic Auxiliary Brigade, Barangay Tanod Brigade such other Brigades as may be organized by the Governor of Metropolitan Manila are hereby extended official recognition as such.

“Art. 152. Person in Authority and Agents of persons in Authority Who shall be deemed as such. In applying the provisions of the preceding and other articles of this Code, any person directly vested with jurisdiction whether as an individual or as a member of some court of government-owned or controlled corporation, board, or commission, shall be deemed as person in authority.

“Any person who, by direct provision of law or by election or by appointment by competent authority, is charged with the maintenance of public order and the protection and security of life and property, such as a barangay councilman, barangay policeman, barangay leader, officers and members of the Barangay Community Brigades, and any person who comes to the aid of person in authority. A barangay captain and/or barangay chairman shall also be deemed a person in authority.

“In applying the provisions of Articles 148 and 151 of this Code, teachers, professors, and person charged with the supervision of public or duly recognized private schools, colleges and universities, shall be deemed persons in authority.”

Section 3. The Officers and members of the Barangay Community Brigades referred to in section 1 thereof shall be extended insurance coverage in the form and extent to be determined jointly by the Secretary of Local Government and Community development, Secretary of National Defense, Secretary of Finance, Governor of the Metropolitan Manila and the General Manager of the Government Service and Insurance System who shall promulgate rules and regulations on the matter.

Section 4. All laws, decree, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended of modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office