PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1037

AUTHORIZING THE USE OF REMARK SHEETS IN THE OCTOBER 1976 REFERENDUM-PLEBISCITE, FURTHER AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 991, AS AMENDED BY PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1031.

WHEREAS, in the event the barangay voters in the referendum-plebiscite of October 16, 1976 approve the creation of the interim Batasang Pambansa, certain aspects of implementation have to be clarified such as (1) the possible date of the election of the members thereof; (2) the system of election to be adopted, whether direct or indirect;

WHEREAS, during the referendum-plebiscite there may be other issues relative to martial law and local or national problems which the voters may wish to bring to attention of the government; and

WHEREAS, the Remark Sheets (Comelec Form No. 3-A) is an effective vehicle through which the barangay voters may express their views on the subjects mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, and on the basis of which a national consensus, or lack of it, may be ascertained:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Presidential Decree No. 991, as amended, is hereby further amended by inserting therein a new section to be designated as Sec. 6-A which shall read as follows:

“Sec. 6-A. Remarks Sheets. Remark sheets (Comelec Form No. 3-A) are hereby authorized to be used in connection with the October 1976 national referendum-plebiscite for the purpose of determining the existence of a national consensus on other issues such as:

(a) the possible date of the election of the members of the interim Batasang Pambansa in case the proposed amendments are ratified;

(b) the system of election to be adopted, whether direct or indirect;

(c) the thinking of the voters on their issues relative to martial law; and

(d) other matters of national or local concern which the voters may wish to bring to the attention of the Government.”

Section 2. Section 11 of the same Decree, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 11. Appropriation. To carry out the provisions of this decree and other pertinent decrees, the sum of Seven Million Four Hundred Thousand Pesos (P7,400,000) is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated.”

Section 3. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1037 October 05, 1976