PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 975

CREATING THE OFFICE OF ISLAMIC AFFAIRS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, under the Constitution of the Philippines, it is declared policy of the State “to adhere to the policy of peace, equality, justice, freedom, cooperation, and amity with all nations”; “to preserve Filipino culture for the development of national identity”, and, “that customs, traditions, beliefs, and interests of national cultural communities shall be considered in the formulation and implementation of State policies”;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of these policies, the Philippine Government has established diplomatic relations and maintains close ties of friendship and cooperation with member-states of the Islamic Conference and other nations in the world;

WHEREAS, there still is a need to strengthen further political, economic, cultural, social and technical cooperation with Islamic States only bilaterally but on a broader multilateral scale;

WHEREAS, there is a need to undertake a unified and sustained Government action to minimize cooperation with Islamic States through an Office in the Department of Foreign Affairs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

Section 1. Office of Islamic Affairs. There shall be created an Office of Islamic Affairs in the Department of Foreign Affairs to be headed by an Assistant Secretary.

Section 2. Functions. The Office of Islamic Affairs shall have the following functions:

1. To assist the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in the formulation of policies governing Philippine relations with Islamic States;

2. To assist the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in recommending measures relevant to the conduct of Philippine relations with Islamic states, designed to uplift the political, economic, social and cultural well-being of Muslim communities in the Philippines, particularly in relation to the implementation of national policies the autonomous commission in Regions IX and XII;

3. To assist the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in cultural projects with Islamic states designed to preserve the Islamic cultural heritage of the Philippines;

4. To assist the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in the monitoring and in the coordination of the projects and the utilization of funds of the Relief and Welfare Agency and of such other agencies that may be created for the same purpose;

5. To assist the Secretary of Foreign Affairs in negotiations with Islamic states for obtaining scholarships, fellowships, grants and other forms of educational and financial assistance;

6. To recommend to the Secretary of Foreign Affairs the sending of missions to Islamic countries for the promotion of goodwill and to strengthen political, economic, technical and scientific, cultural and social cooperation, in regional or multilateral forums and conferences.

Section 3. Personnel. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs shall appoint the personnel necessary to ensure the efficient and effective operations of the Office of Islamic Affairs taking into consideration the highly specialized and technical expertise required by the nature, functions, duties and operations appertaining thereto.

Section 4. Appropriation. Funds for the necessary expenses for the initial operations of the Office of Islamic Affairs are hereby appropriated from the General Fund. Subsequent appropriations shall be provided in the budget of the Department of Foreign Affairs.

Section 5. Repealing Clause. The provisions of laws, decrees, executive orders, administrative orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are either amended or modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately. Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office