MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1734

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF LUGUS IN THE PROVINCE OF SULU.

WHEREAS, to hasten the pace of socio-economic development of the country, especially in Muslim Mindanao area, is a basic objective of the State;

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can be best achieved by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of the residents of the proposed municipality;

WHEREAS, the creation of the municipality of Lugusin Sulu province will greatly redound to the benefits of the inhabitants therein and greatly contribute to the pacification drive of the government towards normalization in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree, as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Bas-Lugus, Witwit, Bas Numuk, Larap, Mantam, Lugasan, Gapas, Pa-et, Alu Duyung, Laha, Alu, Kawayan, Bas Mangkallay, Kayawan Subah, and Tingkangan, all in the Municipality of Tapul, Province of Sulu, are hereby detached and separated from said Municipality and constituted and created into a separate, distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Lugas, Province of Sulu, without effecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother Municipality of Tapul. The seat of the government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Alu, and that of the Municipality of Tapul shall be in Barangay Kalang.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality ofLugus.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Tapul shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Lugus until the municipal officials of the latter municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed, at pleasure, by the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Lugus shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Lugus in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Tapul shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 23rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office