MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1592

AUTHORIZING THE CREATION OF THE POSITION OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT IN EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS.

WHEREAS, the growth of the economy and the necessary expansion of government operations call for the effective and efficient management utilization of available resources to meet targeted goals;

WHEREAS, there is a need to upgrade the standards and practices in the management of government finances and to emphasize the critical role of the finance and management functions in the implementation of government programs and projects;

WHEREAS, to achieve this, the department head must be assisted by a ranking official capable of designing and implementing financial and work plans that will achieve departmental and national development objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. There shall be created in each Executed Department whose annual budget exceeds P200 million, the position of Assistant Secretary for Finance and Management which shall provide the Secretary Advice and Assistance on financial, budgetary, accounting, and management matters pertaining to the Department and the bureaus and agencies under it; shall supervise the coordinated preparation and implementation of annual and long-term financial and work plans and budget estimates of these offices; shall conduct periodic department-wide performance financial review; shall design and implement, subject to approval and in coordination with other offices concerned, improvements in financial management systems, procedures and practices and shall coordinate with the Budget Commission, Department of Finance, Commission on Audit and other agencies in ensuring the government resources are effectively and efficiently used.

Section 2. In each Executive Department whose annual budget exceeds P200 million and where there are two or more Undersecretaries, the Secretary may assign these financial management duties to one of the Undersecretaries or in his discretion appoint an Assistant Secretary of Finance and Management as provided in this Decree. In case where the incumbent of the position Chief, Financial and Management Service is appointed Assistant Secretary for Finance and Management, the Position Chief, Financial and Management Service shall be abolished automatically.

Section 3. Except for those which are attached or otherwise administered or supervised by a department, government-owned or controlled corporations may create a position similar in function and rank to the Assistant Secretary for Finance and Management, if such is considered necessary by them.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office