MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1410

CREATING THE POPULATION/FAMILY PLANNING OFFICE IN THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR

WHEREAS, the government has undertaken a national program on population and family planning involving both public and private sector for the purpose of furthering national development;

WHEREAS, the Department of Labor has engaged in a Population/Family Planning Program basically concerned in improving the quality of life of the Filipino workers and their families, pursuant to Article 134 of Presidential Decree 422 known as the Labor Code of the Philippines as amended;

WHEREAS, the Population/Family Planning Project in the Department of Labor has been initiated with financial assistance from UNFPA in March 1975 to implement the family planning provision of the Labor Code;

WHEREAS, there is no specific office or bureau in the Department of Labor which shall continue to implement the family planning program and maintain what has been achieved upon termination of the Project on December 31, 1977;

WHEREAS, the Department of Labor is committed to absord the project staff and to assume operational costs consonant with the provisions of the Project Sub- Agreement entered into between the Department of Labor, Commission on Population and the National Economic Development Authority, representing the Philippine Government, and the UNFPA;

WHEREAS, it is essential to establish an office designed specifically for such purpose;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines do hereby decree;

Section 1. There is hereby created in the Department of Labor a Population/Family Planning Office, hereinafter referred to as the “Office” which shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Secretary of Labor, and shall be headed by an Executive Director assisted by a Deputy Executive Director.

Section 2. The Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director shall be appointed by the President of the Republic of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Labor, and shall receive an annual salary of P26,000 and P24,000 respectively.

Section 3. The Office shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) To provide plans and programs that will make positive contribution to national development through the institutionalization of family planning and welfare services in all establishments covered by the Labor Code.

(b) To harness the efforts of all agro-industrial groups in the furtherance of the national population program by integrating family planning and welfare in the health, education, manpower development and welfare programs undertaken by labor and management.

(c) To supervise, coordinate and monitor the implementation of the family planning and welfare program in covered establishments.

(d) To develop policies and guidelines for program implementation in covered establishments.

(e) To undertake studies and field inquiries pertinent to the population/family planning and welfare program of the Department of Labor.

(f) To provide for the information, education and communication (IEC) needs of covered establishments in relation to the family planning and welfare program by formulating IEC strategies and developing or producing IEC materials among others.

(g) To develop and prescribe incentive schemes to facilitate family planning acceptance in covered establishments.

(h) To coordinate with other organizations or agencies involved in the family planning and welfare program.

(i) To assist bureaus, offices and attached agencies of the Department of Labor in integrating family planning and welfare in their training and staff development programs.

(j) To exercise other functions as may be assigned by the Secretary of Labor.

Section 4. The Secretary of Labor shall establish offices in the regions and such other extension offices as may be deemed appropriate.

Section 5. The technical staff and other personnel of the Office shall be appointed by the Secretary of Labor upon recommendation of the Executive Director.

Section 6. The Secretary of Labor shall issue orders and regulations to implement the provisions of this Decree.

Section 7. All laws, decrees, general orders or letters of instructions of any provisions thereof contrary or inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified.

Section 8. The Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1410 June 09, 1978