PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 973

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 855 PRESCRIBING THE STANDARD RANKS AND SALARY RATES FOR MEMBERS OF THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE.

WHEREAS, the standard salary rates prescribed by Presidential Decree No. 855 dated December 22, 1975 for members of the Integrated National Police have been affected substantially by the new minimum wage provided for all workers under Presidential Decree No. 928 dated May 1, 1976; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the manner of readjusting the aforesaid salary rates in relation to the new minimum wage.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as part of the laws of the land, the following:

Section 1. Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 855 dated December 22, 1975 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. Authorized Salary Rates. The salary structure for police and fire service personnel of the Integrated National Police shall consist of the salary in pesos per month which shall be graduated in six scales or steps within a salary range for each rank, as hereunder indicated:

Section 2. Implementation. Implementation of the salary rates under this Decree shall be as may be determined by the President, subject to availability of funds.

Section 3. Readjustment of Salary. The salary of a member of the Integrated National Police as adjusted pursuant to Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 855 shall be readjusted to conform with the preceding Section 1 hereof, subject to the following guidelines:

(a) In case the salary of any member of the Integrated National Police is equal to or within the first and second salary step as provided in Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 855, such salary shall be raised to the rate corresponding to the first salary step provided for herein.

(b) In case the salary of a member of the Integrated National Police is above the second salary step provided for in Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 855, the member concerned shall continue to receive such salary under the corresponding authorized rank and salary step in accordance with Section 1 hereof.

(c) When the salary of a member of the Integrated National Police prior to the effectivity of Presidential Decree No. 765 on August 8, 1975 has not been adjusted pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 855, such salary shall be readjusted in conformity with the guidelines prescribed in Subsection 3a and 3b above.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office