PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1240

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF JOSEFINA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

WHEREAS, the fundamental aim of the government is to provide every possible opportunity and facility to accelerate the pace of progress throughout the country not only in the areas where economic development lagged out but likewise in places where political reasons, among others, constitute a stumbling block toward the realization of the ideals of the New Society;

WHEREAS, the necessity is felt, in order to maximize the efficacy of law and order and to expedite optimum development in the proposed municipality as same would enhance the progress and development of the localities involved for, in this regard, government projects would be subjected to closer attention of local officials;

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will redound and contribute greatly to the maintenance of the peace and order and to the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area; and

WHEREAS, the proposed municipality will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are made in line with the declared policy of the government to uplift the socio-economic well-being of the residents therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by the virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Bogo Calabat, Sebucang, Nopolan, Lower Bag-ong Tudela, Leonardo, Gumahan, Mansanas, Nemenio, Moradje, Dawa, Tagaytay Hill, Litapan and Ebarle, all in the Municipality of Tambulig, Province of Zamboanga Del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is hereby created to be known as the Municipality of Josefina without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother Municipality of Tambulig. The new municipality shall be specifically bounded as follows:

“Beginning at a point marked “1” the existing barrio hall of Bogo Calabat, thence due south, 2,100 meters to point “2”, thence due west, 3,000 meters to point “3”, thence due north 19,200 meters to point “4”; (the intersection of Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur Provincial Boundary) thence due east following the common boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte to a distance of 5,200 meters until it intersects the provincial boundary of Misamis Occidental and Zamboanga del Sur to point “5”; thence due south following the common provincial boundary of Misamis Occidental and Zamboanga del Sur to a distance of 17,200 meters to point “6”; thence due west 1,250 meters to point “7”; thence due south 1,300 meters to point “8”; thence due west 1,000 meters to point “9”; (identical to point 2) thence due north 2,100 meters to point “1” the point of beginning.”

The seat of the government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Gumahan.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Josefina.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Tambulig shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of Josefina until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Josefina shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of Josefina in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Tambulig shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive order or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 11th day of November, in the year of Our Lord Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office