MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1497

ESTABLISHING A STATE UNIVERSITY IN THE PROVINCE OF PANGASINAN TO BE KNOWN AS THE PANGASINAN STATE UNIVERSITY BY TRANSFERRING ALL COLLEGE LEVEL COURSES OF THE STATE-SUPPORTED INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING THEREAT INTO SAID INSTITUTION/UNIVERSITY, PROVIDING A CHARTER FOR THIS PURPOSE, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THERETO

WHEREAS, the Constitution of the Philippines directs the State to establish and maintain a complete, adequate, and integrated system of education relevant to the goals of national development and further prescribes that all educational institutions shall aim to develop scientific, technological, and vocational efficiency;

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 6-A also known as the Educational Decree of 1972 promulgated on September 20, 1972, it has been declared a policy of the government to re-orient the educational system toward accelerated national economic growth and meaningful social development;

WHEREAS, to maximize the effective utilization of limited resources, it is necessary to integrate and convert the state-funded institutions of higher learning located in the province of Pangasinan into one institution of learning in order to establish an effective and efficient state university that will serve as an instrument towards the rapid development of the natural and manpower resources of Region I, particularly of the Province of Pangasinan;

WHEREAS, the establishment of a state university in the Province of Pangasinan will provide better service in professional and technical training in the arts, sciences, humanities, and technology and in the conduct of scientific research and technological studies;

WHEREAS, the establishment of a state university in the Province of Pangasinan through the integration of all existing college level courses of the state supported institution of higher learning in the said province, and such other units as may be opened in other parts of the province will assure and ensure the continuous improvement of the quality of instruction in the professions and the operation of a more coordinated tertiary education system therein.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. There is established one state university in theProvince ofPangasinan to be known as thePangasinanStateUniversity, hereinafter referred to as the University, with each main campus and administrative site to be developed and/or located at a site to be determined by an Ad Hoc committee designated to initially implement this Decree.

The present Central Luzon Teachers College located in Bayambang Pangasinan and all the college level courses of the Eastern Pangasinan Agricultural College in Sta. Maria, Pangasinan College of fisheries in Binmaley, Pangasinan School of Arts and Trades in Lingayen, Asingan School of Arts and Trades in Asingan, Speaker E. Perez National Agricultural School in San Carlos City, the Western Pangasinan State College of Agriculture and other similar state-supported institutions of higher learning in the province are hereby transferred to the University; Provided, however, that such institutions and such others as shall be established or integrated pursuant to this Decree may be maintained and operated as units or branches of the University upon approval by the Board of Regents.

Section 2. The University shall provide advanced instruction in the arts, agricultural and natural sciences as well as in technological and professional fields.

Section 3. The governing board of the University shall be the Board of Regents to be composed of the following;

* Minister of Education and Culture, Chairman

* President of the University, Vice-Chairman

* Representative of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), Member

* Two (2) prominent citizens who have distinguished themselves in the professions or fields of specialization, one representing the alumni association, the other chosen from prominent citizens in the province, to be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Ministry of Education and Culture, Members.

* The first group of appointive regents or trustees shall serve for two (2) years and four (4) years, respectively. Thereafter, the appointees shall hold office for a term of four (4) years. In case of permanent vacancy, the appointee shall hold office for the unexpired term only.

* In the absence of Minister of Education and Culture, the Minister shall authorize a representative, preferably the Deputy Minister concerned and at the least a director, to sit in the meetings of the Board: Provided, however, that during these meetings the President shall preside as Vice Chairman of the Board.

Section 4. A quorum of the Board of Regents shall consist of a majority of all the members holding office at the time of the meeting; Provided, however, that among those present are the Minister of Education and Culture, who is the Chairman of the Board, or the President, who acts as presiding officer in the former’s absence. All processes against the university or college shall be served on the President of the university or his duly authorized representative.

Section 5. The members of the Board of Regents shall receive compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred either in attendance of meetings of the Board or of other official business authorized by the Board.

Section 6. The Board of Regents shall have the general powers of administration as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1437 and exercised all the powers of a corporation as provided in Section Thirteen of Act Numbered Fourteen Hundred Fifty-nine as amended otherwise known as the Corporation Law.

Section 7. No student shall be denied admission to the University be reason of sex, nationality, religion, or political belief.

Section 8. The head of the University shall be known as the President of the University. He shall be appointed for a term of six (6) years by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the Minister of Education and Culture after consultation with the members of the Board.

The powers and duties of the president of the University in addition to those specifically provided for in this Decree, shall be those usually pertaining to the office of the president of a university.

Section 9. There shall be an Administrative Council consisting of the President of the University as Chairman, and the Vice-Presidents deans, directors and other officials of equal rank as Members, whose duty shall be able to implement policies governing the administration, management, and development planning of the university, subject to the approval of the Board of Regents.

Section 10. There shall be an Academic Council of the University with the President of the University as Chairman and all the faculty of the University as members. The body of instructors, assistant professors, associate professors, and professors shall constitute the faculty of the University.

The Academic Council shall have the power to prescribe the curricula and rules of discipline of the University subject to the approval of the Board of Regents. It shall fix the requirements of admission to the college or unit as well as for graduation and the conferring of degrees, subject to review of the Board of Regents. The Council shall likewise have the power to recommend students or others to be recipients of degrees. Through the President of the University or his duly authorized representative, the Council shall have disciplinary power over the students of the colleges or units of the University within the limits prescribed by the rules of discipline as approved by the Board of Regents.

Section 11. Members of the faculty of the University shall be except from any civil service examination or regulate as a requisite to appointment. No religious test shall be applied nor shall religious opinion or affiliation be a matter of inquiry in the appointment of faculty members of the University: provided, that no member of the faculty shall teach for or against any particular church or religious sect.

Section 12. The Treasurer of the Philippines shall be ex-officio treasurer of the University. All accounts and expenses thereof shall be audited by the Commission on Audit or its duly authorized representative.

Section 13. Except such resources as may be applicable to the secondary education program, all college personnel, assets, records, and appropriations of the Central Luzon Teachers College, the Eastern Pangasinan Agricultural College, Pangasinan College of Fisheries, Pangasinan School of Arts and Trades, Asingan School of Arts and Trades, Speaker E. Perez National Agricultural School and such other state-supported institutions of higher learning in the Province of Pangasinan as may be covered by this Decree are hereby transferred to the University.

Section 14. Heads of bureaus and offices of the national government and provincial or city governments in Region I are hereby authorized to loan or transfer, upon request of the President of the University, such apparatuses, equipments and supplies as may be needed by the University and to detail employees for duty therein when in the judgment of the head of the bureau or office, such employees can be spared without serious detriment to the public service. Employees to detailed shall perform such duty as required under such detail and the time so employed shall be counted as part of their regular official service.

Section 15. The Minister of Education and Culture is hereby directed to take such steps as are necessary for the immediate implementation of this Decree. For this purpose, he is hereby authorized to create a technical committee to advice the Board of Regents of the University toward the proper establishment, development, or expansion of the program of the University.

Section 16. On or before the fifteenth day of the second month after the opening of regular classes each year, the Board of Regents shall file with the Office of the President of the Philippines through the Minister of Education and Culture, a detailed report setting forth the progress, conditions and needs of the University.

Section 17. In addition to the present appropriation of the institutions of higher learning integrated in this Decree, the sum of ONE MILLION PESOS (P100,000,000.00) is hereby appropriated out of the fund of the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated to carry out the purposes of this Decree. Thereafter, funds needed for the maintenance and continued operation of the University shall be included in the Annual Appropriation Act.

Section 18. Republic Act No. 5705, and such other laws, acts, decrees, or executive orders contrary to or inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

Section 19. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Seventy-Eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office