PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 212

AMENDING PARAGRAPH ONE OF SECTION 1659 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE, AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, in the event of a vacancy in the Office of, or in the absence of, the Solicitor General, Section 1659 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended, now provides for a First Assistant Solicitor General to temporarily perform the functions of the office and in the event of the absence of the First Assistant Solicitor General, the Acting Solicitor General is designated from among nine (9) Assistant Solicitors General on the sole basis of seniority;

WHEREAS, for the superior handling of litigation for the State, for the efficient administration of the functions of the Office and in the greater interest of the public service, it is necessary that discretion and more flexibility should be exercised in the choice of a substitute for such a sensitive and important government position;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby decree, order and make as part of the law of the land the following amendment to the first paragraph of Section 1659 of the Revised Administrative Code, as amended:

“Sec. 1659. Chief Officials of the Office of the Solicitor General. The Office of the Solicitor General shall have one chief to be known as the Solicitor General whose salary shall be the same as that of a Justice of the Court of Appeals. He shall be assisted by Ten (10) Assistant Solicitors General who shall have the same salary as that of a Judge of the Court of First Instance. When the Solicitor General is unable to perform his duties or in case of vacancy in the Office, one of the ten (10) Assistant Solicitors General designated by the Department Head shall temporarily perform the functions of said Office. . . . .”

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office