MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1548

CREATING MUNICIPALITY OF TAGOLOAN IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a must in line with the intensified governmental development projects geared towards the hastening up of the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the effective implementation of the declared programs of the government on development hinges primarily on the administrative efficiency of each and every local government unit;

WHEREAS, it has been the persistent clamor of the resident of the proposed municipality with the conformity of all the local officials of the locality, to create the proposed municipality, so as to achieve a closer supervision of the execution of the developmental programs of the area; and

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will not only contribute greatly to the maintenance of the peace and order but will also enhance the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Barangays Kianibong, Kingan, Malinao, Mimbagulang, Purung, Inodaran, Cadayonan, Sarimbar, Indolang, Tagoloan, Kolambogan, Sigayan, Kibanog, Malingen, Man-ay, Mipait, Imaon, San Olipio, Marawi, Mago-Ingud, Dagonalan, Banguian, Bayog, Buntong, Ragundang, Pikutan, Patpat, Kamadahan, Bantalan, Molobolo, Quiapo, Logisan, Gayakay, Bansayan, Kitaon, Maganding, Kalilangan, Lantud and Basigan, all in the Municipality of Kapai, Province of Lanao del Sur, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is hereby created to be known as the Municipality of Tagoloan without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother Municipality of Kapai. The seat of government of the newly-created municipality shall be in Barangay Tagoloan.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular Municipalities shall be applicable to the new Municipality of Tagoloan.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Kapai shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created Municipality of Tagoloan until the municipal officials of said Municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular of this Decree and shall have qualified, unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Tagoloan shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Municipality of Tagoloan in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Kapai shall be transferred by the President to the newly-created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws, executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1548 June 11, 1978