PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 722

AMENDING THE JUDICIARY ACT BY INCLUDING NEWLY CREATED PROVINCES IN THE SIXTEENTH JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF THE COURTS OF FIRST INSTANCE, COMMISSIONING JUDGES THEREFOR AND FIXING THEIR PERMANENT STATIONS.

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 302, dated September 27, 1973, the province of Tawi-Tawi was created out of certain municipalities which were removed from the territorial jurisdiction of the province of Sulu;

WHEREAS, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 341, dated November 22, 1973, the province of Cotabato was divided into three provinces known as North Cotabato, Maguindanao and Sultan Kudarat;

WHEREAS, all the existing three branches of the Court of First Instance of the undivided province of Sulu are permanently stationed in the Municipality of Jolo, and none in any of the municipalities comprising the new province of Tawi-Tawi; and of the existing four organized branches of the Courts of First Instance of the undivided province of Cotabato and Cotabato City, three branches are permanently stationed in Cotabato City and one in the Municipality of Pagalungan, now within the territory of the new province of Maguindanao; so that, there is no branch of the Court of First Instance in any municipality of the new provinces of North Cotabato and Sultan Kudarat;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that, in each of the aforesaid newly created provinces without a Court of First Instance, the same court be established therein for the effective administration of justice which is essential to the political, social and economic stability of the province.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the amendment of Republic Act No. 296, as amended, otherwise known as the Judiciary Act of 1948, as follows:

Section 1. The last paragraph of Section 49 of Republic Act No. 296, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 49. Judicial Districts. Judicial districts of Court of First Instance in the Philippines are constituted as follows:

“The Sixteenth Judicial District of the Provinces of Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental and Davao del Norte, the City of Davao, the Provinces of South Cotabato, North Cotabato, Maguindanao, Sultan Kudarat and the Cities of Cotabato and General Santos, the Province of Occidental Misamis, the City of Ozamis and Tangub, the Province of Zamboanga del Sur, the Cities of Zamboanga and Pagadian, the Province of Basilan and the City of Basilan, the Province of Sulu and the Province of Tawi-Tawi.”

Section 2. The last paragraph of Section 50 of the same Act, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 50. Judges of the First Instance of Judicial Districts.

“Thirty-six judges shall be commissioned for the Sixteenth Judicial District. Twelve judges shall preside over the Courts of First Instance of the Provinces of Davao Oriental and Davao del Norte, and Davao City, to be known as judges of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth branches thereof; six judges shall preside over the Courts of First Instance of North Cotabato, Maguindanao and Cotabato City and Sultan Kudarat, to be known as judges of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth branches thereof; two judges shall preside over the Courts of First Instance of South Cotabato and the City of General Santos and the Municipality of Koronadal, to be known as judges of the first and second branches thereof; three judges shall preside over the Courts of First Instance of Occidental Misamis and the Cities of Ozamis and Tangub, to be known as judges of the first, second and third branches thereof; four judges shall preside over the Courts of First Instance of Zamboanga del Norte and the Cities of Dapitan and Dipolog, to be known as judges of the first, second, third and fourth branches thereof; three judges shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Zamboanga City; one judge shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Basilan and Basilan City; two judges shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Sulu to be known as judges of the first and second branches thereof; and one judge shall preside over the Court of First Instance of Tawi-Tawi.”

Section 3. The last paragraph of Section 52 of the same Act, as amended by Section 1 of Presidential Decree No. 204, dated June 5, 1973, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“For the Sixteenth Judicial District, four judges (Branches I, II, III and VI) shall be stationed in the City of Davao; two judges (Branches IV and X) in the Municipality of Mati, Province of Davao Oriental; two judges (Branches V and VII) in the Municipality of Digos, Province of Davao del Sur; two judges (Branches VIII and IX) in the Municipality of Tagum, Province of Davao del Norte; one judge (Branch XI) in the Municipality of Nabunturan, same province; one judge (Branch XII) in the Municipality of Baganda, province of Davao Oriental; two judges (Branches I and II) shall be stationed in Cotabato City; one judge (Branch VI) in the Municipality of Maganoy, Province of Maguindanao; two judges (Branches III and V) in the Municipality of Kidapawan, Province of North Cotabato; one judge (Branch IV) in the Municipality of Isulan, Province of Sultan Kudarat; one judge (Branch I) shall be stationed in the city of General Santos; one judge (Branch II) in the Municipality of Koronadal, Province of South Cotabato; two judges (Branches I and III) shall be stationed in the City of Oroquieta; one judge (Branch II) in the City of Ozamis; three judges (Branches I, II and III) in the City of Dipolog; one judge (Branch IV) in the Municipality of Sindangan, Province of Zamboanga del Norte; three judges in the City of Pagadian; two judges (Branch I and II) in the City of Zamboanga; one judge in the City of Basilan; two judges (Branches I and II) in the Municipality of Jolo, Province of Sulu; and one judge (Branch III) in the Municipality of Bongao, Province of Tawi-Tawi.”

Section 4. All provisions of existing laws, orders, rules and regulations, contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office