MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1527

GRANTING PERSONNEL OF THE INTEGRATED NATIONAL POLICE HAZARDOUS DUTY PAY DURING CERTAIN CONDITIONS

WHEREAS, members of the civil service and the Armed Forces of the Philippines serving in certain areas in our country are entitled to hazardous duty pay, combat pay, and other incentive allowances in performing duties that are fraught with risks, hazards and imminent danger to their lives;

WHEREAS, members of the Integrated National Police in the same areas or duty assignments are similarly exposed to the same, if not greater, risks, hazards and danger in the performance of their duties;

WHEREAS, since integration of the police force on 1 January 1976, some 95 policemen and firemen have already died in the performance of hazardous duties to include combat encounters with insurgents, terrorists and criminals, and fire suppression operations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby decree the following as part of the law of the land:

Section 1. Hazardous Duty. Personnel of the Integrated National Police may be entitled to hazardous duty pay when engaged in the following hazardous duties:

(a) Combat operations in critical and embattled areas of the country against insurgents, rebels and/or terrorists;

(b) Crime prevention or suppression operations against armed criminals;

(c) Firefighting operations which require the rescue of persons that are trapped inside burning buildings or structures; and

(d) Exposure to radiation hazards and to danger in connection with the disarming/disposal of bombs, mines, grenades and other lethal or explosive devices and chemicals.

Section 2. Hazardous Duty Pay. Subject to the availability of funds, personnel of the Integrated National Police performing hazardous duties as enumerated in the preceding section shall be entitled to receive hazardous duty pay of a maximum of ONE HUNDRED TWENTY PESOS (P120.00) per month: Provided, that payment of hazardous duty pay shall be made only upon presentation of ample proof that the claimant had experienced or been exposed to hazardous duties at least once during the month.

Section 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The Director General of the Integrated National Police shall promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this decree subject to the approval of the Minister of National Defense.

Section 4. Funding Source. The Director General of the Integrated National Police is authorized to use savings in appropriations for personal services to fund the hazardous duty pay authorized by this Decree. The amount the conditions for the approval of hazardous duty pay shall be adjusted from time to time so as to be within the limit of funds available from this source.

Section 5. Recession Clause. Any provision of law, rules and regulations inconsistent with the foregoing is hereby modified accordingly.

Section 6. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect upon approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office