PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 60

ABOLISHING THE CUSTODY AND DISPOSAL ADMINISTRATION UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.

WHEREAS, under Presidential Decree No. 1 dated September 24, 1972, the Integrated Reorganization Plan was adopted and made part of the law of the land;

WHEREAS, the fifth paragraph of said Presidential Decree No. 1 provides that changes and modifications in the Integrated Reorganization Plan shall be made from time to time, as necessity requires, to be correspondingly announced by me or by my duly authorized representative;

WHEREAS, the Custody and Disposal Administration is one of the offices retained in the Department of Finance subject to the provisions of paragraph 4, Article 1, Chapter 1, Part I of the Integrated Reorganization Plan;

WHEREAS, the cited provisions of the Integrated Reorganization Plan state that, un less otherwise provided in the said Plan or in the executive directives creating them, existing agencies created by executive directives shall continue to exist for one year after the approval of the said Plan unless sooner terminated or extend by the President;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, in order to effect the desired changes in the Executive Department as necessity requires, do hereby order and decree the abolition of the Custody and Disposal Administration under the Department of Finance.

The pertinent functions of the herein abolished office are correspondingly transferred to the Bureau of Customs together with its applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as the Secretary of Finance may deem necessary.

The Secretary of Finance is hereby directed to implement this Decree within thirty days after the date of promulgation with the assistance of the Budget Commission, the Civil Service Commission, and the Presidential Commission on Reorganization.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 60, November 20, 1972