PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 331

REQUIRING THAT ALL PUBLIC FORESTS BE DEVELOPED, MANAGED, AND UTILIZED ON A SUSTAINED YIELD BASIS WITH THE BENEFIT OF TECHNICAL FORESTRY KNOW-HOW OF REGISTERED FORESTERS

WHEREAS, the Philippine forests are the patrimony of the Filipino people and as such they have to be developed, managed, and utilized in such a manner as to insure their perpetuity in productive condition for the benefit of all Filipinos, living or yet to be born;

WHEREAS, the grandeur and productivity of our Philippine mountains, our vital watersheds, once verdant with forests and abundant with game and wildlife, have been despoiled and diminished by disregard of sound forestry principles and practices;

WHEREAS, there is now an urgent need to develop, manage and utilize the Philippine forests scientifically by the application of sound technical forestry knowledge;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 6239 has professionalized the practice of forestry so as to provide the needed expertise in safeguarding public interest in the development, management, and utilization of Philippine forests;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of thePhilippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. All holders of timber licenses, leases and/or permits are hereby required to employ and/or engage the services of registered foresters in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated for the purpose;

Section 2. All holders of long-term license or lease agreements shall establish and maintain their own forestry department for the purposes envisioned in this Decree and these offices shall be under registered foresters.

These offices shall collaborate with the Government through its forestry development officials the preparation and implementation of forest management plans, the supervision of selective logging programs and such other silvicultural systems as may be prescribed by the Bureau of Forest Development and shall be responsible for the implementation of these forestry policies as enumerated in Section 2 of Republic Act No. 6239;

Section 3. All documents on technical forestry matters prepared and submitted by a registered forester shall bear his signature and seal;

Section 4. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources shall promulgate rules and regulation for the effective implementation of this Decree upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau of Forest Development and the Chairman of the Foresters Board of the Professional Regulations Commission.

Section 5. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Decree and the rules and regulations as may be promulgated hereafter shall be sufficient cause for the immediate cancellation of the license, lease, or permit, confiscation of bond, and permanent disqualification from acquiring another similar license, lease or permit;

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office