PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 339

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF PRESIDENT QUIRINO, MARIANO MARCOS AND ESPERANZA IN THE PROVINCE OF SULTAN KUDARAT

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby order anddecree:

Section 1. The barrios of Bagumbayan, Bannawag, Bayawa, Estrella, Kalanawe I, Kalanawe II, Katiko, Malingon, Mangelen, Mangilala, Pidtubo, Sambolawan, Sinaculay, Suben, Tinangan, Tual, Towato, in the Municipality of Buluan, Province of Maguindanao, are hereby separated from said municipality, and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of President Quirino, in the province of Sultan Kudarat. The seat of government of the new municipality shall be in the present site of the barrio of Sambulawan.

Section 2. The barrios of Caridad, Didtaras, Gansing, Kabukalan, Kapingkong, Katitisan, Lagao, Lilit, Madanding, Maligaya, Mamali, Matiompong, Midtapok, New Cebu, Pidtiguian, Pinguiaman, Pimbalayan, Poblacion, Ponol, Sadsalan, Senaban, Sigayan, Tinomiguez, Torre, Tambak, Tumiao, Udtong and Palumbi in the Municipality of Sultan sa Barongis, Province of Maguindanao, are hereby separated from said municipality, and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Mariano Marcos, in the province of Sultan Kudarat. The seat of government in the new municipality shall be in the present site of the barrio of Poblacion.

Section 3. The barrios of Ala, Banaba, Daladap, Ducay, Esperanza, Guimalia, Ilian, Kamasi, Kangkong, Kauran, Kayakaya, Maranding, Mao, Margues, Matagobong, New Panay, Numo, Pamadtingan, Sugasa, Salabaca, Saniag, Sugadol, Talisawa, Tomicor, Tubak, Tukanalogong and Villamor, in the Municipality of Ampatuan, Province of Maguindanao, are hereby separated from said municipality, and constituted into a distinct and independent municipality to be known as the Municipality of Esperanza, in the province of Sultan Kudarat. The seat of government of the new municipality shall be in the present site of the barrio of Esperanza.

Section 4. The President shall appoint the respective mayors, vice-mayors and councilors of the aforementioned municipalities who shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the next general elections for local officials and shall have qualified.

Section 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office