MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1551

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF PANTAR IN THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE.

WHEREAS, in the execution of governmental projects, close supervision by local officials is a necessity so as to at least approximate a certain decree of achievement which will contribute to a large extent toward the political, social and economical upliftment of the residents;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed municipality with the conformity of the elective officials of the locality to create a new municipality out of the existing Municipality of Baloi, province of Lanao del Norte, to accelerate the development of the area, and

WHEREAS, the creation of the proposed municipality will redound and contribute greatly to the achievement of the developmental goals of the New Society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree and make as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Pantar Poblacion, Pantaon, Talontona, West Pantar, Pindoloan, Pantar East, Campong, Bobong, Raya, Kalanganan East, Kalanganan Lower, Tambo, Cadayonan, Tawaan, Domakias, Pitubo, Bobong-Madaya, Cabasaran, Bangcal, Pantao-Marug, Punod, Bowi, Poona-Punod, Pantao-Ranao, Sundiga-Punud, Bogowan-Ingud, Cawi-Ompara, River Side, Kalilangan and Dibarosan, all in the Municipality of Baloi, Province of Lanao del Norte, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is created to be known as the Municipality of Pantar without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother municipality of Baloi. The seat of government of the newly-created municipality shall be in Barangay Pantar Poblacion.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities, shall be applicable to the Municipality of Pantar.

Section 3. The present elected municipal officials of the Municipality of Baloi shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly-created Municipality of Pantar until the respective municipal officials of said new municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize and complete the government personnel of the Municipality of Pantar shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the corresponding share of the new Municipality of Pantar in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Baloi shall be transferred by the President to the newly-created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1551 June 11, 1978