MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1542

PROVIDING FOR THE REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF DENTAL PROSTHETIC LABORATORIES

WHEREAS, dental prosthetic laboratories are essential components of the practice of dentistry in mechanical construction of dental prosthetic to artificially replace one or more teeth and/or associate structures;

WHEREAS, there are many dental prosthetic laboratories which are operating without the supervision of a licensed dentist and without proper license and permit;

WHEREAS, the danger to public health posed by these laboratories is similar in effect to public health resulting from human activity if not properly regulated; and

WHEREAS, in line with the constitutional mandate, the Department of Health is the government agency charged with the protection and preservation of the health of the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the State to regulate and provide for the registration licensing of dental prosthetic laboratories.

Section 2. Expansion of Division of Standards, Bureau of Dental Health Services. For the purpose of regulating, registering and licensing dental prosthetic laboratories, the Division of Standards, Bureau of Dental Health Services, Department of Health, shall be expanded and position shall be made for appropriate and necessary positions therein as may be determined by the Secretary of Health.

Section 3. Powers and Functions. The Division of Standards, Bureau of Dental Health Services shall have, in addition, the following powers and functions:

(1) Formulate rules and regulations and standard requirements to regulate and control the establishment and operations of dental prosthetic laboratories duly approved by the Secretary of Health with the aim of protecting the health of the public;

(2) Require the registration and licensure of the existing dental prosthetic laboratories within six (6) months from the effectivity of this Decree;

(3) Undertake the supervision and inspection of the dental prosthetic laboratories for compliance with rules and regulations and standard requirements issued under this Decree;

(4) Collect, analyze and disseminate information regarding the conduct of these dental laboratories; and

(5) Maintain a registry of licensed dental prosthetic laboratories and laboratory technicians.

Section 4. Definitions. For the purpose hereof, the terms herein below shall be understood to mean as follows:

(1) Prosthetic The replacement of an absent part of the human body by an artificial part.

(2) Dental Prosthesis An artificial replacement of one or more teeth and/or associated structures which can either be removable or fixed.

(3) Dental Prosthetic Laboratory Technician A person who performs any type of dental prosthetic procedures upon the prescription and supervision of a duly licensed dentist not requiring the presence of the patient.

(4) Dental Prosthetic Laboratory Any person or part of a dental clinic or establishment engaged in the construction of dental prosthesis.

Section 5. Relations with other Entities. The Division of Standards, Bureau of Dental Health Services shall, in the furtherance of its functions and duties, cooperate with the government and private dental schools for the training of dental laboratory technicians, and other government entities as well as international organizations involved in activities related to dental prosthetic laboratories.

Section 6. Penal Provision. Any person who violates any provision of this Decree or the rules and regulations implementing this Decree shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than one month and not more than one year or by a fine of not less than TWO HUNDRED PESOS or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.

Section 7. Funds and Resources. The sum of one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) is hereby authorized to be appropriated, in order to support the activities authorized in this Decree.

Section 8. Repealing Clause. Any provision of laws, decrees, orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, modified or amended accordingly.

Section 9. Effectivity Clause. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1542 June 11, 1978