MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1706

PROVIDING FOR COMPULSORY NATIONAL SERVICE FOR FILIPINO CITIZENS AND AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF COMMONWEALTH ACT NUMBER ONE, AS AMENDED, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS “THE NATIONAL DEFENSE ACT” FOR THE PURPOSE

WHEREAS, Section 2, Article II of the Constitution provides that: “The defense of the state is a prime duty of the government and the people, and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be required by law to render personal military or civil service”;

WHEREAS, Section 1, Article V of the same Constitution provides, among others, among others, that it is the duty of the citizen to contribute to his country’s development and welfare and to cooperate with the duly constituted authorities in the attainment and preservation of a just and orderly society;

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act Number One, as amended, makes it obligatory for all citizens to render military service;

WHEREAS, to serve the urgent needs of a developing country such as the Philippines, at present and in the foreseeable future, it is equally vital to enhance respect for the law and lawfully constituted authorities and provide for, promote and develop civic consciousness and participation as it is to insure national defense preparedness;

WHEREAS, the citizens of our country, particularly its youth, as the most valuable resource of our nation, need to be motivated, trained, developed, organized, mobilized and utilized in regard to their responsibilities as citizens particularly their commitment to civic welfare, their respect for the law and lawfully constituted authorities and the fulfillment of their military or civil obligations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree that:

Section 1. This Decree shall be known as “The National Service Law.”

Section 2. National service shall be obligatory for all citizens of the Philippines. As used in this decree, “National service” shall consist of three main programs namely: civic welfare service, law enforcement service; and military service.

Section 3. Each citizen shall render national service in any of the three main programs stated in Section 2 of this decree or a combination thereof: Provided, That such service shall be credited in his favor for the purpose of fulfilling educational requirements established by law.

Section 4. The terms “military service” and “military training” referred to in Commonwealth Act Number One, as amended, shall mean “national service” and “training for national service”, respectively, as herein defined.

Section 5. The Minister of National Defense, in coordination with the Ministers of Human Settlements, Education and Culture, and Local Government and Community Development, shall issue rules and regulations to implement this Decree, subject to the approval of the President.

Section 6. All provisions of Commonwealth Act Number One, as amended, laws, orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree takes effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1706 August 08, 1980