MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1843

REORGANIZING THE LUPONG TAGAPAGPAGANAP NG POOK

WHEREAS, in the interest of economy, efficiency and effectivity in the delivery of services to the public, in general, and for the purpose of achieving uniformity in economic, cultural and social development policies and programs in Regions IX and XII, it is imperative that the existing Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook in these two regions be merged into a single Executive Council;

WHEREAS, it is the wish of the residents of Regions IX and XII, expressed through resolutions of the Sangguniang Pampook of the two regions that the two existing Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook be merged into a single Executive Council for a more effective governance of the areas of autonomy;

WHEREAS, Section 14 of Presidential Decree No. 1618 dated 25 July 1979 provides for a Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook for the areas of autonomy;

WHEREAS, in a joint communiqué issued by His Excellency, the President of the Philippines, and His Majesty, King Khalid Bin Abdul Aziz, on March 24, 1982 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, the President of the Philippines confirmed that steps will be taken to merge the two Executive Councils in Regions IX and XII into one Executive Council in implementation of the Tripoli Agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. There shall be a Lupong Tagapagpaganap that shall serve as the executive unit for Regions IX and XII. It shall be composed of the members as provided for in Section 14 of Presidential Decree No. 1618 and shall be vested with the same powers and responsibilities as defined in the said Decree and other pertinent laws, executive orders, letters of instructions, and implementing orders and regulations.

SEC. 2. The two existing Lupong Tagapagpaganap ng Pook are hereby abolished upon the expiration of the terms of office of their present members on 7 May 1982. All records, equipment, buildings, facilities and properties of the Councils reorganized under this Decree shall be transferred to the Lupong Tagapagpaganap created herein.

SEC. 3. The merging of the two Executive Councils into one Lupong Tagapagpaganap or Executive Council for Regions IX and XII shall be submitted to the people of said regions in a plebiscite to be supervised by the Commission on Elections on May 17, 1982, to coincide with the barangay elections.

SEC. 4. The merged Executive Council shall hold its sessions in Zamboanga City.

SEC. 5. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia