MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1783

CREATING THE MARCOS GOLF FOUNDATION OF THE PHILIPPINES, DEFINING ITS OBJECTIVES, POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, it is the declared objectives of the Government to pursue and implement the programs of total sports development;

WHEREAS, golf is an international sport wherein Filipinos may be able to compete credibly without regard to height and build; and

WHEREAS, to facilitate the development of golf, there is a necessity of creating a foundation to take care of the improvement of golf in the Philippines.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree;

SECTION 1. Name and Location . — There is hereby created a body corporate to be known as the Marcos Golf Foundation of the Philippines, hereinafter referred to as the Foundation, with its main executive offices in Metro Manila.

SEC. 2. Purposes and Objectives . — In general, the Foundation, a non-municipal public corporation, shall render maximum assistance primarily to all golf enthusiast in the Philippines in the attainment of the define tasks and objectives of the Foundation as follows:

(a) to promote golf in the country as a basis of developing sports program;

(b) to provide equipment for the promotion of golf;

(c) to construct, maintain and operate golf courses and facilities;

(d) to purchase suitable land for development of golf clubs and facilities;

(e) to import golf equipment free from the payment of taxes and customs duties;

(f) to standardize conduct of playing golf and oversee all golf associations and golf clubs;

(g) to make the necessary standard rules in playing golf within the context of the ancient rules of golf;

(h) to raise funds through fees, donations, contributions and other lawful means;

(i) to provide incentives for the development of golf;

(j) to conduct local and international competitions for the promotion of golf; and

(k) to perform such other functions as may be necessary for the accomplishment of its objectives.

In pursuance of the foregoing purposes and objectives, the Foundation may call on any of the government ministries, offices, or agencies, for assistance and support.

SEC. 3. Governing Body . — The Foundation shall have a Board of Trustees composed of a Chairman and four (4) other members who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Board may appoint an Executive Officer.

SEC. 4. Functions . — The Board shall have the following powers and functions:

(a) to adopt a constitution and by-laws for its internal organization;

(b) to affiliate with international or regional golf associations;

(c) to purchase, sell, lease or otherwise incumber properties of the Foundation, both real and personal, for the accomplishment of its objectives;

(d) to conduct local, inter-region or international competitions which may be deemed necessary for the promotion of golf;

(e) to discipline erring members for misconduct and willful violations of the rules, regulations and policies of the Foundation;

(f) to appoint representatives among the members of the association to represent the country in any foreign competitions;

(g) to render an annual report to the President of the Philippines regarding its finances and activities; and

(h) to perform such other acts as may be necessary for the proper implementation of the objectives of the Foundation.

SEC. 5. Membership . — The Foundation shall have professional as well as amateur golf players as members which shall be classified in accordance with the ability of the individual member. The Foundation shall be the umbrella of all golf associations in the Philippines. Any individual or golf association in the Philippines may apply for membership therein.

SEC. 6. Admission . — Application for membership, either individually or by association, shall be made in a proper form provided for by the Foundation and shall be accompanied by such information as it may require. Individuals as well as associations, shall be required to pay either monthly or yearly dues as the Foundation may determine.

SEC. 7. Duties and Obligations of the Members . — The acceptance of membership of any person or association shall bind such person or association to uphold the constitution and by-laws and such other rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Foundation. Such member shall abide by all decisions of the Board of Trustees within its jurisdiction.

SEC. 8. Disciplinary Action . — Any member who will willfully and continuously fail to comply with its obligations to the Foundation may be suspended or expelled by a vote of three (3) members of the Board of Trustees: Provided , that such member shall be given due notice of the charge or charges preferred against him and shall be given the opportunity to be heard.

Any member may likewise be expelled from the association on the grounds of dishonesty, disloyalty, gross misconduct, willful violation of the provisions of the constitution and by-laws of the Foundation or any act which the Board of Trustees may deem seriously inimical to the interest and objectives of the Foundation.

SEC. 9. Exemption from Taxes . — Any donation, contribution, bequest, subsidy or financial aid which may be made to the Foundation shall be exempt from taxes of any kind, and shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income of the donor or giver for income tax purposes.

Cash prizes which are awarded to the players or participants in professional tournaments sanctioned by and/or sponsored at the Foundation shall be exempt from all taxes.

Foreign contributions or donations to the Foundation shall constitute allowable deductions in full from the income tax of the branch, affiliate or subsidiary corporation of the donor doing business in the Philippines.

The Foundation, its assets, acquisition, income and its operations and transactions shall be exempt from any and all taxes, fees, duties, dues, charges, imposts, licenses and assessments, direct or indirect, imposed by the Republic of the Philippines or any of its instrumentality, political subdivision or taxing authority thereof, any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

SEC. 10. Effectivity Clause . — This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: CDAsia