PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 202

AMENDING SECTIONS FOUR AND FIFTEEN OF REPUBLIC ACT NUMBERED FOUR THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY-FOUR, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE “GEODETIC ENGINEERING LAW”

WHEREAS, the Philippines is presently engaged in an expanded land reform requiring massive cadastral and public land subdivision surveys which are the basic requirements in the perfection of rights over the areas;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that technical men especially trained in geodetic and photogrammetric surveying and mapping shall be utilized in this social reform program to undertake the land capability surveys as well as the planning and programming of economic development of the country through surveying and mapping;

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to make some courses especially in the field of technology relevant to the goals and objectives of the government and to produce technical men to meet the immediate needs of the government and the private sector in the field of surveying;

WHEREAS, there is currently a shortage of qualified geodetic engineers to perform geodetic engineering, surveying and/or mapping activities on land property and public land subdivision surveys as well as land reform mapping on rice and corn lands throughout the country;

WHEREAS, few colleges and universities are now offering courses leading to the Bachelor’s degree in geodetic engineering due to lack of students enrolling in the course;

WHEREAS, there are graduates with the title of Association in Surveying and civil engineering undergraduates who do not quality to take the board examination for geodetic engineers, but competent to undertake mapping and land survey work;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1103 dated January 17, 1973, and in order to effect the desired changes and reforms in the social, economic and political structure of our society do hereby order and decree the amendment of Republic Act No. 4374, as follows:

Section 1. Section four of Republic Act Numbered Four thousand three hundred seventy-four is hereby amended by adding a sub-paragraph to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. . . .

(i) Give two kinds of examinations, namely:

1. Junior Geodetic Engineer; and

2. Geodetic Engineer”

Section 2. Section fifteen of the same Act is hereby amended by adding a sub-paragraph to read as follows:

“Sec. 15. . .

(e) To qualify in the Junior Geodetic Engineer Examination, he must, likewise, satisfy the foregoing requirements (a) to (c) of this Section and he shall have completed an Associate in Surveying or third year in Geodetic Engineering course or fourth year Civil Engineering course; Provided, That those Civil Engineering undergraduates must also have completed or earned to their credit the following courses: Laws on Natural Resources, Land Registration and Property, Land Reform Laws, Land Property Surveys, Photogrammetry and Cartography from any recognized school, college or university. The certificate to be issued if he qualifies shall authorize him to execute land property surveys for judicial and administrative land registration proceedings; Provided, That this provision shall not affect those geodetic engineers to whom the Board has issued the Geodetic Engineering Certificate.”

Section 3. This Degree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office