MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1774

FURTHER AMENDING PARAGRAPH (B) SECTION 20 OF THE NATIONAL INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1977, AS AMENDED.

WHEREAS, upon the lifting of martial law, the reform programs initiated under Proclamation No. 1081 should continue to be institutionalized and made permanent and lasting;

WHEREAS, Articles XVII, Section 3(2) of the Constitution provides for the validity of all proclamations, orders, decrees, instructions, and acts of the incumbent President under Proclamation No. 1081 and their effectivity until expressly and explicitly modified or repealed by the incumbent President or the regular National Assembly;

WHEREAS, in the continuing implementation of these proclamations, orders, decrees, instructions, and acts and in the institutionalization of reform programs, it is essential that all public officials and employees be encouraged to perform their functions efficiently and expeditiously free from vexatious and time-consuming delays and litigations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree that all official acts, decisions or orders performed, executed or issued by the Minister of National Defense or any other Cabinet member or by any other public officer of the civilian government or member of the Armed Forces, the Integrated National Police, or Civilian Home Defense Force in carrying out orders or regulations issued by me 1104 are and shall be deemed to have been authorized by me and considered for all intents and purposes as the official acts, decisions, and orders of the incumbent President.

Evidence of any act done in accordance to or in implementation of an order, rule, regulation, decree or instruction, issued or promulgated by me or any Cabinet member authorized by me shall not be admissible in any criminal or civil case against the officer or employee of the civil government or the military or defense establishment concerned. Neither shall such act constitute a cause of action in any civil case for wrongdoing or damages or a basis for criminal liability in any court of law.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of January in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOAQUIN T. VENUS, JR. Deputy Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1774 January 14, 1981