PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1043

AMENDING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 3835 ESTABLISHING THE WOMEN’S AUXILIARY CORPS IN THE ARMED FORCE OF THE PHILIPPINES TO PROVIDE FOR THE PROCUREMENT OF ITS OFFICERS AND ENLISTED PERSONNEL AND OTHER PURPOSES.

Section 1. Section 1 of the Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 1. There is established in the Armed Forces of the Philippines a Women’s Auxiliary Corps which shall perform non-combat/administrative duties and such other functions and service as may be prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense. It shall composed of officers and enlisted women, the full complement of which shall be as determined annually by the Chief of Staff, AFP, subject to the approval of the Secretary of National Defense; Provided, that the ratio of officers to enlisted women shall be one officer for every twenty enlisted women; and Provided, further, that the number of officers in each grade shall be considered within the total authorized strength of the AFP for each grade in accordance with Republic Act No. 291, as amended by Presidential Decree No. 360.”

Section 2. Section 2 of the Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 2. Officers of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps shall be commissioned in the Regular and Reserved Forces of the AFP by the President of the Philippines upon the recommendation of the Secretary of National Defense. All persons appointed officers in the Regular Force pursuant to this Section shall be unmarried female native-born citizens of the Philippines between the ages of twenty-one and twenty-six years who are holders of Bachelor’s degrees from any school, college or university recognized by the government and who possess such additional qualifications as may be prescribed by the Secretary of National Defense; Provided, however, that all initial commission in the Regular Force shall be in the rank of Second Lieutenant; Provided, further, that, the President, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, is hereby authorized to commission officers in the Regular Component of the Corps in ranks above Second Lieutenant but not higher than Captain from among the officers in the active service within one year from the effectivity of this Decree.”

Section 3. Section 3 of the Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 3. Any unmarried and without dependent female citizen of the Philippines, between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six years, able-bodied, physically and mentally fit, of good moral character and habits and who has completed the second year of any course from a college or university recognized by the government may be enlisted in the Women’s Auxiliary Corps for a term of three years; Provided, that, insofar as practicable, enlistments shall be apportioned among the various provinces of the Philippines; Provided further, that high school graduates who possess technical or special skills necessary in the performance of non-combatant/ administrative duties and other functions and services as may be determined by the Secretary of National Defense may be enlisted in the Women’s Auxiliary Corps.”

Section 4. Section 4 of the Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. The names of all commissioned officers of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps shall be contained in separate Promotion Lists, which shall be known as the Women’s Auxiliary Corps Promotion Lists, similar to but separate and distinct from those prescribed by law and regulations for the other Major and Technical Services of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. These officers of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps shall be promoted in the same manner as other commissioned officers of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Enlisted women of the Corps shall likewise be promoted in the same manner as enlisted men of the Armed Forces of the Philippines.”

Section 5. Section 5 of the Act is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 5. Except as otherwise specifically provided, all laws and regulations now or hereafter applicable to commissioned officers and enlisted men of the AFP shall likewise be applicable respectively to commissioned officers and enlisted women of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps: Provided, that any commissioned officer or enlisted woman who contracts marriage while in the active service shall be automatically separated from the service, unless she has, at the time of said marriage, already completed at least five (5) years of continuous active military service in the AFP; Provided further, that all laws and regulations on maternity leave now or hereafter applicable to female employees of the government shall be applicable to married members of the Corps, and provided finally that members of the Women’s Auxiliary Corps who were previously separated or discharged honorably by reason of marriage may be called to active duty subject to the conditions aforementioned and in accordance with rules and regulations as the Secretary of National Defense, upon recommendation by the Chief of Staff, AFP may prescribe.”

This Decree take effect upon approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1043 October 25, 1976