PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 12

CREATION OF ADJUDICATION AND INVESTIGATION BOARDS IN THE POLCOM.

WHEREAS, pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, the Philippines was declared under a state of martial law, for the reasons, among others, that criminal and lawless elements have conspired and are conspiring with those who want to undermine the faith of the people in, and to overthrow by force, violence and deceit, the duly constituted government;

WHEREAS, among these criminal and lawless elements are ranking officers and members of the city and municipal police forces throughout the country;

WHEREAS, in order to rid the police service of said criminal and lawless elements, and to inculcate a sense of discipline among all city and municipal policemen, it is urgently necessary that administrative cases against them to be expeditiously disposed of:

WHEREAS, in order to expedite the disposition of such administrative cases, it is necessary that Adjudication and investigation Boards be created with the principal function of investigating the disposing of administrative cases against all members of the city and municipal police forces.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, do hereby order and decree that:

1.The Chairman of the Police Commission shall create as many Adjudication Boards in the Office of the Police Commission as are necessary to review and dispose of all administrative cases of city jail and municipal police forces heretofore and/or hereafter referred to the Police Commission for final action. Each Board shall be composed of a senior official of the Police Commission as Chairman and a senior officer of the Philippine Constabulary and a representative of the Secretary of Justice as members.

2. The Adjudication Boards shall perform the functions of the Police Commission en banc in the review and final adjudication of administrative cases of members of police forces falling under Police Act of 1966.

3. In lieu of the Board of Investigators provided for under the Police Act of 1966, the Chairman of he Police Commission, in coordination with the Secretaries of Justice and National Defense, will create at least one board for each province and city, to be composed of one representative of Police Commission, as Chairman; one representative of the Secretary of Justice and a Constabulary Officer as members, which shall control the Police Commission. These Boards shall perform the same duties as the Board of Investigators in accordance with rules and regulations. Said Boards shall submit a bi-monthly report on the cases referred to them for investigation, indicating the status and/or disposition thereof, to the Chairman of the Police Commission, who shall see to it that cases filed with, and/or referred to, the Boards shall be acted upon and disposed without undue delay.

4. By virtue hereof, the provisions of the Police Act of 1966 and all Executive Orders, rules and regulations which are in conflict with this Decree are hereby modified and/or amended.

5. The Chairman of the Police Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement this Decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

Source : National Library of the Philippines