MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1003-A

CREATING THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

WHEREAS, SEC. 9(1), Article XV of the Constitution provides that “(T) he State shall promote scientific research and invention”, and enjoins that “(T) he advancement of science shall have priority in the national development”;

WHEREAS, in the implementation of the foregoing constitutional mandate, there is need to provide meaningful incentives to those engaged in scientific and technological research, as well as to give due recognition to outstanding achievements in technology and the sciences;

WHEREAS, the development of science and technology has largely brought about the material progress of the country;

WHEREAS, the professionalization of the government scientific and technological research services will contribute to a large extent in effecting the constitutional objectives of promoting scientific research and invention and the advancement of science and technology for national development.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created the National Academy of Science and Technology, hereinafter referred to as the Academy, which shall be composed of outstanding scientists to serve as a reservoir of competent scientific and technological manpower for the country. The Academy shall be attached to the National Science Development Board (NSDB) for general coordination. The Secretariat of the Academy shall be provided by the NSDB.

SEC. 2. For the purposes of this Decree, a scientist shall be defined as an individual who has earned a doctoral degree in any field of the sciences in an accredited University and has demonstrated and earned distinction in independent research or significant innovative achievement in the basic and applied sciences, including agricultural, engineering, and medical sciences, in mathematics and in the social sciences as manifested by his published works in recognized scientific and technical journals; Provided, that, in highly meritorious and extremely exceptional cases the foregoing doctoral degree requirement may be waived.

SEC. 3. The general administration and direction of the affairs of the Academy shall be vested in an Executive Council of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the President of the Philippines from among at least ten members nominated by the Academy.

SEC. 4. The members of the Executive Council shall serve for a term of three (3) years; Provided, That, in case of any vacancy, the appointee thereto shall serve only the unexpired term.

SEC. 5. A scientist who is a Filipino citizen and who is in sympathy with the purposes of the Academy may become a member therein when his nomination for membership, which shall be made at least three (3) members of the Academy who shall certify that the nominee is qualified under the provisions of SEC. 2 of this Decree, is formally approved by a majority of the full membership of the Academy.

Except when terminated for cause or by voluntary resignation, membership in the Academy shall be for life.

SEC. 6. The Academy shall be initially composed of scientists who shall be nominated by different national scientific societies and recognized research and academic institutions of higher learning and screened by a temporary Committee of five (5) members to be appointed by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Board of Governors of the National Science Development Board. This Committee shall be representative of five (5) major fields of sciences, including basic and applied, biological, physical, mathematical engineering, and social sciences.

The temporary Committee shall screen and evaluate the nominee pursuant to the provisions of Section 2, and may confer membership by a favorable vote of at least four (4) members.

The Committee shall exist for a period of not more than eighteen (18) months after promulgation of this Decree.

SEC. 7. The Academy may provide its members the following benefits and privileges:

a. Free publication of scientific and technological works;

b. Travel support for attendance and participation in international conference; and

c. Such other incentives, financial or otherwise, designed to promote a scientific and technological effort and achievement.

SEC. 8. The Academy may recommend annually for Presidential awards not more than ten (10) scientists for distinguished individual or collaborative achievement in science and/or technology who shall be accorded by the President the rank and title of “National Scientist”. Said “National Scientists” shall each be given a gratuity in such amount to be fixed by the Academy and shall be entitled to other privileges as are enjoyed by the “National Artists”.

SEC. 9. Members of the Executive Council and of the temporary Screening Committee shall be entitled to reasonable allowances for attendance at Council and Committee sessions, at the same rate as members of the Board of Governors of the NSDB, in addition to the reimbursement of actual reasonable travelling expenses.

Initially, each members of the Academy shall receive a gratuity of Six Thousand Pesos (P6,000.00) per annum, subject to adjustment by resolution of the membership, provided that such adjustment shall be approved by the NSDB Board of Governors.

SEC. 10. The total membership of the Academy shall not exceed Fifty (50) at any one time. This number may be increased by a two-thirds vote at all the members and approval thereof by the President.

SEC. 11. The Academy shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions and objectives of this Decree.

SEC. 12. To implement this Decree, the amount of Two Million Pesos (P2,000,000.00) is hereby authorized to be appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated.

SEC. 13. All laws, executive orders, decrees, instructions, rules and regulations contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Done in the City of Manila this 16th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Presidential Museum and Library