PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 140

REQUIRING ALL OWNERS OR OPERATORS OF XEROX AND OTHER TYPES OF COPYING MACHINES OR EQUIPMENT TO REGISTER THEIR EQUIPMENT OR MACHINES

WHEREAS, xerox and other similar copying machines or equipment have been utilized for the production of subversive propaganda materials;

WHEREAS, the copying machines or equipment have also been utilized in the falsification of letters and important papers and documents;

WHEREAS, it has, therefore, become necessary for the Government to regulate the use of those machines or equipment;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby decree and order:

1. That all such machines or equipment be registered with either the Philippine Constabulary or the National Bureau of Investigation;

2. That these equipment or machines shall be registered within a period of fifteen (15) days from the date hereof, and in the event of failure to register within a period herein prescribed, the machine or equipment shall be confiscated by the National Bureau of Investigation or the Philippine Constabulary;

3. That the Chief, Philippine Constabulary or the Director, Bureau of Investigation shall inform the Secretary of National Defense, the Secretary of Justice and the Secretary of Public Information of the registration herein required for their information and guidance.

4. That the Secretary of Public Information shall widely publish this order especially during the period of fifteen (15) days prescribed for the registration of these equipment and machines;

5. That all future acquisitions by purchase, lease or other modes, of these machines or equipment shall be registered as herein prescribed.

6. That the Chief, Philippine Constabulary, and the Director, National Bureau of Investigation, shall prescribe any rules or regulations needed to implement this decree.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-three.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office