MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1652

CREATING THE POSITION OF VICE-MAYOR IN THE CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES OF METRO MANILA AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the four cities and 13 municipalities comprising the Metropolitan Manila area have been integrated and placed under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Manila Commission to achieve economy, efficiency and simplicity in the local government system in this area and to enhance its growth and development as the country’s capital region;

WHEREAS, there is a need to augment and strengthen the implementing arm of the Metropolitan Manila commission by creating the position of vice- mayor in the four cities and 13 municipalities in Metropolitan Manila.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the constitution, do hereby decree and order as follows:

Section 1. Position and functions of the Vice Mayor. There is hereby created the position of vice- mayor in each of the cities and municipalities in Metropolitan Manila. The vice-mayor shall be elected by the duly qualified voters of his city or municipality, shall hold office for a term of six (6) years, and shall assist the local chief executive in the exercise of the powers and the performance of functions vested by law in the local chief executive.

Section 2. Succession to the office of the local chief executive. The vice-mayor shall assume the office of the local chief executive for the unexpired term of the latter in the event of permanent vacancy in the office of the local chief executive. Should the local chief executive died before assumption of office or fail to qualify for any reason, the vice-mayor shall assume the office of the local chief executive, but in the latter case, he shall hold such office only until the local chief executive qualifies.

Section 3. Rule on temporary incapacity. In the event of the temporary incapacity of the local chief executive to perform the duties of his office on account of absence on leave, sickness, or any temporary cause, including absence from the country, the vice-mayor shall perform the duties and exercise the powers of the local chief executive except the power to appoint, suspend or dismiss employees.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office