PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1297

CENTRALIZING THE IMPORTATION OF RUMINANTS FOR BREEDING AND SLAUGHTER AND BEEF

WHEREAS, the state is conscious of the significance of animal protein foods for the health and well-being of the people, and one of the national objectives is to achieve self-sufficiency in food of animal origin;

WHEREAS, both the government and the private sector have invested millions of pesos to attain the above objective and national beef/carabeef program was launched by the state to speed up the attainment of self-sufficiency in foods of animal origin through effective animal health and quarantine measures, good livestock nutrition through pasture resources development, sound management systems, livestock dispersal and allied services;

WHEREAS, the problem of inadequate breeder base hampering the development of the beef program could be resolved by large-scale as the main source of breeder animals for upgrading the indigenous cattle;

WHEREAS, to strengthen the beef/carabeef program, the government encourages large scale ranching projects over wide grazing lands, and has set aside for this purpose and for experimental purposes approximately 40,000 has. of grazing land located at Busuanga Palawan;

WHEREAS, to insure the effective development and growth of this experimental area, as set aside for cattle breeding, the technology expertise, knowledge and skill of King Ranch (U.S. and Australia), which is well-known and acknowledged throughout the world, has been enlisted and the entire experimental area placed under the management of King Ranch pursuant to a Technical Assistance Agreement;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the importation of cattle and goats for breeding and slaughter purposes, and beef products and by-products to maximize the benefits that could be derived therefrom and accelerate the development of beef processing industry.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order and make as part of the law of the land the following:

Section 1. The importation of breeder and slaughter cattle, goats, and beef (choice cuts and briskets) shall be done by the government through this large-scale experimental ranching project, being pioneered in and placed under the management of King Ranch.

Section 2. That such importation shall have prior approval of the Department of Agriculture, through the Bureau of Animal Industry.

Section 3. The Bureau of Animal Industry shall promulgate rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Decree.

Section 4. The Budget Commission shall appropriate annually the amount of Twenty Million Pesos (P20,000,000.00) for the importation of breeder cattle, and goats for experimental and dispersal purposes, as well as beef (choice cuts and briskets).

Section 5. Any violation of any provision of this Decree or the rules and regulations to be promulgated pursuant herewith shall be punishable, upon conviction, by imprisonment of not less than one year nor more than two years, or by a fine of not less than Four Thousand nor more than Six Thousand Pesos, or both, at the discretion of the court.

Section 6. Any provision of law, order, decree, or Letter of Instruction inconsistent with provisions of this Decree is hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1297, January 30, 1978