MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1532

PROVIDING FOR THE EX-OFFICIO MEMBERSHIP OF CABINET MINISTERS IN APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT BOARDS AND BODIES OR MEMBERSHIP IN OTHER BODIES IN REPRESENTATION OF THE GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide an administrative mechanism by which the policies, plans and programs of government corporations, boards and similar bodies are integrated within the mainstream of national policies, plans and programs;

WHEREAS, there is need to secure the participation of ministries concerned in the formulation of policies of appropriate government corporations, boards and similar bodies in order to secure the desired coordination;

WHEREAS, towards this end, it is desirable to continue the practice of making cabinet ministers as ex-officio chairman or member of such boards and bodies as appropriate; and

WHEREAS, it is also desirable to allow cabinet ministers to sit in representation of the government in other bodies where the government has controlling or substantial interest.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. No member of the Cabinet who is also a member of the Interim Batasang Pambansa shall occupy any other office or employment in the government, except of government boards or bodies in an ex-officio capacity. He may also be authorized to sit in representation of the government or any of its agencies in other boards or bodies where the government or any of its agencies has controlling or substantial interest, provided that membership in such boards or bodies is clearly related to his official duties. Any provision of existing laws to the contrary notwithstanding, the positions which may be occupied by Ministers, in an ex-officio capacity or in representation of the government, shall be as prescribed by the President/Prime Minister.

Section 2. The corresponding charters of or laws creating such government boards or bodies are hereby deemed amended to allow the ex-officio membership of Ministers therein in accordance with the determination of the President/Prime Minister pursuant to Section 1 hereof.

Section 3. In cases where a Minister was previously not a member, whether in an ex-officio or a personal capacity, of a government board or body in which he is now authorized to sit by virtue of the determination of the President pursuant to Section 1 hereof, the President shall be authorized to appoint an additional member, if necessary, to the board or body concerned in order to maintain an odd-numbered membership; provided, that the additional member shall have qualifications suitable to the functions and duties of the board or body; and provided, further, that the additional member need not be appointed where all the members of the board or body are now serving in an ex-officio capacity.

Section 4. Ministers whose ex-officio membership in government boards or bodies or whose membership in representation of the government in other boards and bodies are authorized pursuant to Section 1 hereof shall be entitled to reasonable per diems, allowances and others of a similar nature as are or may be authorized by virtue of their membership in said boards or bodies, any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Section 5. Should any provision of this Decree or any part thereof be declared unconstitutional, the remaining provisions or parts thereof shall continue to be valid and binding.

Section 6. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed, altered or modified accordingly.

Section 7. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office