PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1151

PHILIPPINE ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

WHEREAS, the individual and, at times, conflicting, demands of population growth, urbanization, industrial expansion, rapid natural resources utilization and increasing technological advances have resulted in a piecemeal-approach concept of environmental protection;

WHEREAS, such tunnel-vision concept is not conducive to the attainment of an ideal environmental situation where man and nature can thrive in harmony with one another; and

WHEREAS, there is now an urgent need to formulate an intensive, integrated program of environmental protection that will bring about a concerted effort towards the protection of the entire spectrum of the environment through a requirement of environmental impact assessments and statements:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. Policy. It is hereby declared a continuing policy of the State (a) to create, develop, maintain and improve conditions under which man and nature can thrive in productive and enjoyable harmony with each other, (b) to fulfill the social, economic and other requirements of present and future generations of Filipinos, and (c) to insure the attainment of an environmental quality that is conducive to a life of dignity and well-being.

Section 2. Goal. In pursuing this policy, it shall be the responsibility of the Government, in cooperation with concerned private organizations and entities, to use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of national policy, in promoting the general welfare to the end that the Nation may (a) recognize, discharge and fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee and guardian of the environment for succeeding generations, (b) assure the people of a safe, decent, healthful, productive and aesthetic environment, (c) encourage the widest exploitation of the environment without degrading it, or endangering human life, health and safety or creating conditions adverse to agriculture, commerce and industry, (d) preserve important historic and cultural aspects of the Philippine heritage, (e) attain a rational and orderly balance between population and resource use, and (f) improve the utilization of renewable and non-renewable resources.

Section 3. Right to a Healthy Environment. In furtherance of these goals and policies, the Government recognizes the right of the people to a healthful environment. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each individual to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the Philippine environment.

Section 4. Environmental Impact Statements. Pursuant to the above enunciated policies and goals, all agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as private corporations firms and entities shall prepare, file and include in every action, project or undertaking which significantly affects the quality of the environment a detail statement on

(a) the environmental impact of the proposed action, project or undertaking

(b) any adverse environmental effect which cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented;

(c) alternative to the proposed action;

(d) a determination that the short-term uses of the resources of the environment are consistent with the maintenance and enhancement of the long-term productivity of the same; and

(e) whenever a proposal involve the use of depletable or non-renewable resources, a finding must be made that such use and commitment are warranted.

Before an environmental impact statement is issued by a lead agency, all agencies having jurisdiction over, or special expertise on, the subject matter involved shall comment on the draft environmental impact statement made by the lead agency within thirty (30) days from receipt of the same.

Section 5. Agency Guidelines. The different agencies charged with environmental protection as enumerated in Letter of Instruction No. 422 shall, within sixty (60) days from the effectivity of this Decree, submit to the National Environmental Protection Council (NEPC), their respective guidelines, rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of Sec. 4 hereof on environmental impact assessments and statements.

Section 6. Repealing Clause. All Acts, Presidential Decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

Section 7. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 6th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-nine.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1151, June 06, 1977