MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 86

CREATING BARANGAYS (CITIZENS ASSEMBLIES )

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 3590, otherwise known as the Revised Barrio Charter, provides for the Barrio Assembly consisting of all persons who are residents of the barrio for at least six months, eighteen years of age or over, citizens of the Republic of the Philippines and who are duly registered in the list of Barrio Assembly members kept by the barrio secretary; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary to broaden the base of citizen participation in the democratic process and to afford ample opportunities for the citizenry to express their views on important national issues;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, do hereby decree as part of the law of the land the following:

1. There is hereby created in each barrio in every municipality and municipal district, and in each district in every chartered city a Barangay (Citizens Assembly): Provided, That in the case of the City of Manila and other cities or municipalities where there are no barrios there shall be a Citizens Assembly for every barangay.

2. The Barangay (Citizens Assembly) sisal consist of all persons who are residents of the barrio, district or barangay for at least six months, fifteen years of age or over , citizens of the Philippines and who are registered he the list of Barangay (Citizens Assembly) members kept by the barrio, district or barangay secretary.

3. The Barangay (Citizens Assembly) shall meet at the call of the barrio captain, the district or barangay chairman or at the request of at least one tenth of the members to consider matters of local or national concern.

4. For the purpose of conducting business and taking any official action in the Barangay (Citizens Assembly), at least one-fifth of the members should be present to constitute a quorum. The proceedings shall be recorded by the barrio, district or barangay secretary or, in his absence, any member designated as acting secretary by the barrio captain or district or barangay chairman.

5. This decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two .

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 86, December 31, 1972