PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 724

FURTHER AMENDING SECTION SIXTEEN HUNDRED SEVENTY FOUR OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the government to ensure the swift dispensation of justice;

WHEREAS, there is a need to restate this policy by establishing an effective prosecution service in the recently created provinces in Mindanao; and

WHEREAS, the steady population growth in some other provinces makes it necessary to increase the present number of prosecutors therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The following sub-paragraphs in Section Sixteen Hundred and Seventy-Four of the Revised Administrative Code relative to the number of assistant provincial fiscals in the following provinces are hereby amended to read as follows:

“OccidentalNegros, ten assistant provincial fiscals”

“Oriental Negros, nine assistant provincial fiscals”

“Rizal, twenty-eight assistant provincial fiscals”

Section 2. The same section of the Code is further amended by inserting, in the appropriate alphabetical sequence, the following lines:

“Basilan, one assistant provincial fiscal”

“Maguindanao, two assistant provincial fiscals”

“Sultan Kudarat, two assistant provincial fiscals”

“Tawi-Tawi, two assistant provincial fiscals”

Section 3. The assistant provincial fiscals mentioned above shall receive the salaries provided by law for said positions.

Section 4. Such sum as may be necessary is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated for the salaries of the positions created in this Decree. Thereafter, the necessary funds for the purpose shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Decree.

Section 5. All laws, executive orders, rules and regulations, parts thereof inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office