PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 585

INTEGRATION OF OTHER POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS AND JAILS

WHEREAS, in order to implement Section 12, Article XV of the Constitution of the Philippines, the police and fire departments and jails in the Greater Manila Area have been constituted in the Metropolitan Police Force pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 421, dated March 21, 1974; while the police and fire departments and jails of some other cities and municipalities have been constituted into Provincial Integrated Police Forces, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 481, dated June 13, 1974 and No. 531, dated August 8, 1974;

WHEREAS, initial assessment of said pilot projects in police integration revealed encouraging results in terms of the improvement of the discipline and general attitude of the members of the police and fire departments and jails concerned, thereby enhancing their efficiency in the performance of duty, which contribute to the promotion of better peace and order condition;

WHEREAS, to accelerate the attainment of a desirable peace and order condition in wider areas of the country, it is necessary that other police and fire departments and jails be integrated into law enforcement units similar to those integrated pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 421, No. 482 and No. 531;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pursuant to Proclamations No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972 and No. 1140, dated January 17, 1973 and General Order No. 1, dated September 22, 1972, do hereby order and decree to be part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Integration of city/municipal police and fire departments and jails in additional provinces. All laws to the contrary notwithstanding, the city/municipal police and fire departments and jails in the following provinces, are hereby integrated into law enforcement units to be known as indicated:

(1) All municipalities of the Province of Cagayan, to be known as the Cagayan Integrated Police Force;

(2) All municipalities of the Province of Isabela, to be known as the Isabela Integrated Police Force;

(3) All municipalities of the Province of Nueva Vizcaya, to be known as the Nueva Vizcaya Integrated Police Force;

(4) All municipalities of theProvinceofQuirino, to be known as the Quirino Integrated Police Force;

(5) All municipalities of the Province of Ilocos Norte, including the City of Laoag, to be known as the Ilocos Norte Integrated Police Force;

(6) All municipalities of the Province of Ilocos Sur, to be known as the Ilocos Sur Integrated Police Force;

(7) All municipalities of the Province of Abra, to be known as the Abra Integrated Police Force;

(8) All municipalities of the Province of Pangasinan, including the Cities of Dagupan and San Carlos, to be known as the Pangasinan Integrated Police Force;

(9) All municipalities of the Province of Zambales, including the City of Olongapo, to be known as the Zambales Integrated Police Force;

(10) All municipalities of the Province of Tarlac to be known as the Tarlac Integrated Police Force;

(11) All municipalities of the Province of Camarines Norte, to be known as the Camarines Norte Integrated Police Force;

(12) All municipalities of the Province of Camarines Sur, including the Cities of Iriga and Naga, to be known as the Camarines Sur Integrated Police Force;

(13) All municipalities of the Province of Albay, including the City ofLegaspi, to be known as the Albay Integrated Police Force;

(14) All municipalities of the Province of Sorsogon, to be known as the Sorsogon Integrated Police Force;

(15) All municipalities of the Province of Catanduanes, to be known as the Catanduanes Integrated Police Force;

(16) All municipalities of the Province of Masbate, to be known as the Masbate Integrated Police Force;

(17) All municipalities of the Province of Aklan, to be known as the Aklan Integrated Police Force;

(18) All municipalities of the Province of Antique, to be known as the Antique Integrated Police Force;

(19) All municipalities of the Province of Capiz, including the City ofRoxas, to be known as the Capiz Integrated Police Force;

(20) All municipalities of the Province of Bohol, including the City ofTagbilaran, to be known as the Bohol Integrated Police Force;

(21) All municipalities of the Province of Siquijor, to be known as the Siquijor Integrated Police Force;

(22) All municipalities of the Province of Surigao del Norte, including the City of Surigao, to be known as the Surigao del Norte Integrated Police Force;

(23) All municipalities of the Province of Surigao del Sur, to be known as Surigao del Sur Integrated Police Force;

(24) All municipalities of the Province of Agusan del Norte, including the City of Butuan, to be known as the Agusan del Norte Integrated Police Force;

(25) All municipalities of the Province of Agusan del Sur, to be known as the Agusan del Sur Integrated Police Force;

(26) All municipalities of the Province of Bukidnon, to be known as the Bukidnon Integrated Police Force;

(27) All municipalities of the Province of Camiguin, to be known as the Camiguin Integrated Police Force;

(28) All municipalities of the Province of Misamis Occidental, including the Cities of Oroquieta, Ozamis and Tangub to be known as the Misamis Occidental Integrated Police Force;

(29) All municipalities of the Province of Zamboanga del Norte, including the Cities of Dapitan and Dipolog, to be known as the Zamboanga Integrated Police Force;

(30) All municipalities of the Province of Zamboanga del Sur, including the Cities of Pagadian and Zamboanga to be known as the Zamboanga del Sur Integrated Police Force; and

(31) All municipalities of the Province of Basilan, including the City of Basilan, to be known as the Basilan Integrated Police Force.

Section 2. Head of the Integrated Police Forces. The heads of the Cagayan Integrated Police Force, the Isabela Integrated Police Force, the Nueva Vizcaya Integrated Police Force, the Quirino Integrated Police Force, the Ilocos Norte Integrated Police Force, the Ilocos Sur Integrated Police Force, the Abra Integrated Police Force, the Pangasinan Integrated Police Force, the Zambales Integrated Police Force, the Tarlac Integrated Police Force, the Camarines Norte Integrated Police Force, the Camarines Sur Integrated Police Force, the Albay Integrated Police Force, the Sorsogon Integrated Police Force, the Catanduanes Integrated Police Force, the Masbate Integrated Police Force, the Aklan Integrated Police Force, the Antique Integrated Police Force, the Capiz Integrated Police Force, the Bohol Integrated Police Force, the Siquijor Integrated Police Force, the Surigao del Norte Integrated Police Force, the Surigao del Sur Integrated Police Force, the Agusan del Norte Integrated Police Force, the Agusan del Sur Integrated Police Force, the Camiguin Integrated Police Force, the Misamis Occidental Integrated Police Force, the Bukidnon Integrated Police Force, the Zamboanga del Norte Integrated Police Force, the Zamboanga del Sur Integrated Police Force, and the Basilan Integrated Police Force designated by the Chief of Constabulary from among the officers of the Philippine Constabulary.

Section 3. Jurisdiction of the Integrated Police Forces. The Integrated Police Force constituted pursuant to Section 1 hereof shall be responsible for the public safety and discharge the function of the enforcement of the laws and maintenance of peace and order within the territorial limits of each of the above-mentioned provinces and the cities therein. These Integrated Police Forces shall have the power to prevent crimes, take necessary measures for public safety, effect arrest of criminal offenders, investigate the commission of all crimes and offenses in their respective jurisdiction and bring the offenders to justice.

Section 4. Operational control and direction over the Integrated Police Forces. The Philippine Constabulary shall exercise operational control, direction and supervision over the Integrated Police Forces herein constituted. For this purpose, the Chief of Constabulary shall integrate the above-mentioned Integrated Police Forces in the organizational and operational set-up of the Philippine Constabulary and exercise control, direction and supervision through the head of each of the said Integrated Police Forces: Provided, That such Integrated Police Forces shall not form part of the Philippine Constabulary as a military organization and a Major Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines but as civilian components thereof, except as may be directed by the President in time of emergency.

Section 5. Extent of control and direction. The power of control and direction over each of the Integrated Police Forces shall include the power to control and direct the tactical, strategic movements deployments, placements and/or utilization of the Integrated Police Force concerned, or any of its components, elements, equipment, facilities, and all other resources, within its territorial jurisdiction; the training of the members thereof; and such other powers that may be necessary to make such control and direction real and effective.

Section 6. Power of administrative control and supervision. Administrative and supervision over the police and fire departments and jails composing each of the Integrated Police Forces herein constituted shall, prior to the transfer provided for in Section 7 hereof, remain with the offices, agencies and officials in which said power is vested in accordance with existing laws; Provided, That such power shall not be exercised in a manner that will adversely affect the integrity, capability and operational efficiency of said Integrated Police Forces or any of their components/elements. Accordingly, administrative matters, such as appointment, promotion, suspension, separation and other administrative disciplinary action; grant/payment of salary and/or allowance, compensation, leave, and other benefits, logistical support, and such other matters pertaining to personnel administration which are currently vested in and exercised by other officials pursuant to existing laws, rules and regulations shall remain with said officials: Provided, further, That the appointment, promotion, suspension and separation of, and other disciplinary action upon, any member of the Integrated Police Forces herein constituted shall be effected only upon recommendation of the Head thereof; Provided, finally, That in case of conflict between the exercise of administrative control and supervision, on the one hand, and operational control, direction and supervision, on the other hand, the latter shall prevail.

Section 7. Administrative control and supervision to be transferred to the Philippine Constabulary. After one year, but not later than two years, from the effectivity of this Decree, the power of administrative control and supervision provided for in Section 6 hereof shall be taken over and exercised by the Philippine Constabulary. For this purpose, the personnel, records, funds, property, equipment, facilities and other resources belonging to, being used by or intended for the several police and fire departments and jails composing such Integrated Police Forces, including firearms, motor, vehicles, communications and criminal laboratory facilities, if any, shall be transferred to the administration and custody of the Philippine Constabulary: Provided, That upon the effectivity of this Decree but before such transfer, no such personnel, records, funds, property, equipment, facilities and other resources shall be transferred out, or removed or diverted from said police and fire departments and jails.

Section 8. Funding of the Integrated Police Forces. Effective upon the transfer of the power of administrative control and supervision over the several police and fire departments and jails to the Philippine Constabulary as herein provided, each of the cities and municipalities referred to in Section One of this Decree shall allocate at least eighteen (18%) per centum of its annual gross income as its contribution for the maintenance of the Integrated Police Force to which its police and fire departments and jails are integrated. The National Government shall provide subsidies and other types of funds support to insure a minimum standard salary for the members thereof and provide for the modernization of their public safety equipment/installations in accordance with existing laws and policies or as may hereafter be provided.

Section 9. Funding for integration activities. Upon the promulgation of this Decree but prior to the allocation of the eighteen (18%) per centum of annual gross income of the cities and municipalities referred to in the preceding Section 8 hereof for the support of the Integrated Police Force into which their respective and police and fire departments and jails have been integrated, the sum of forty million pesos is hereby authorized to be drawn from the unreleased or unprogrammed appropriation and/or savings of any government agency for the current fiscal year 1975 to be used solely by the Philippine Constabulary to support the police integration activities called for in this Decree: Provided, That the unexpended balance of this fund at the end of the fiscal year shall be available and is hereby authorized for expenditure in the succeeding years.

Section 10. No reduction in salary. This Decree shall be implemented in such manner that will not result, except for cause provided by law, in the reduction of salary among the personnel of the Integrated Police Forces.

Section 11. Chief of the Constabulary to promulgate rules and regulations. The Chief of the Constabulary shall with the approval of the Secretary of National Defense, promulgate the necessary rules and regulations for the effective implementation of this Decree.

Section 12. Penal Provision. Any person who directly or indirectly obstructs or interferes with the implementation of this Decree or the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Constabulary in accordance herewith shall, upon conviction, suffer imprisonment of not less than three (3) years not more than six (6) years and/or a fine of not less than 5,000 pesos not more than 10,000 pesos, at the discretion of the court.

When the offender is a public officer or employee, he shall, in addition to the foregoing penalty suffer disqualification from holding any public office or employment for life.

Section 13. Repealing Clause. The provisions of Republic Act No. 4864, otherwise known as the “Police Act of 1966”, as amended by Presidential Decrees No. 1, dated September 22, 1972; No. 12, dated September 24, 1972; No. 12-A, dated October 4, 1972; No. 12-B, dated October 28, 1972; No 170 dated April 4, 1973 and No. 448, dated May 9, 1974; the provisions of the City Charters of the Cities of Laoag, Dagupan, San Carlos, Olongapo, Iriga, Naga, Legaspi, Roxas, Tagbilaran, Surigao, Butuan, Oroquieta, Ozamis, Tangub, Dapitan, Dipolog, Pagadian, Zamboanga and Basilan, all as amended, all laws, decrees, orders, instructions, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 14. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect upon approval.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 18th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office