MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1604

GRANTING FRANKING PRIVILEGE TO MEMBERS OF THE BATASANG PAMBANSA.

WHEREAS, in the exercise of their official functions and duties of Members of Batasang Pambansa have to send officials mail matter; and

WHEREAS, it is deemed necessary and proper to grant or extend to them franking privilege to enable them to carry out their functions and duties more effectively.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree;

Section 1. All official mail matter of Members of the Batasang Pambansa addressed for delivery within the Philippines, shall be received, transmitted and delivered in the mails of the Philippines free of postage: Provided, That such mail matter, when addressed to persons or offices other than government officers or offices, shall not exceed one hundred and twenty grams in weight.

Section 2. The envelope or wrapper of such mail matter shall bear on the left corner the name and official designation of the official sending the mail matter, and the words “BATASANG PAMBANSA,” and on the right upper corner the words “Penalty for private or unauthorized use to avoid payment of postage, P500.”

Section 3. Mails intended for transmission as registered, airmail, and/or special delivery matter, shall be subject to the payment of the necessary registry, airmail, and/or special delivery fee.

Section 4. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Decree shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred pesos.

Section 5. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Decree are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office