PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1138

CREATING THE POSITION OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT IN EVERY EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

WHEREAS, the requirements of the development of the 1970’s characterized by rapid technological and administrative changes, necessities the continuing improvement of manpower capabilities;

WHEREAS, the development programs of the government which are being carried out within this milieu of change, calls for a similar upgrading in the attitudes and skills of its personnel;

WHEREAS, this can be adequately met only with the acceleration of its personnel management and development programs;

WHEREAS, while the Civil Service Commission acting in accordance with my instructions and in coordination with other departments, bureaus and agencies of the government, has been vigorously pursuing programs in this direction, it is deemed necessary that greater attention and efforts be given to these programs; and to achieve this, the department heads be assisted by a ranking capable officials;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order the following:

Section 1. There shall be created in each of the executive departments the position of Assistant Secretary for Personnel Management and Development which shall advice the Secretary of all matters pertaining to personnel planning, management and development for the Department and the bureaus and agencies under it, and shall implement the programs of the Government or the Department along these lines in order to improve the quality of the public service, and he shall likewise be the principal liaison official of the Department with the Civil Service Commission, the central personnel agency of the government, and the office responsible for establishing a career system in the civil service, for professionalizing the service, for initiating, establishing and integrating the career and employee development programs of the Government.

Section 2. In those departments where there are two or more Undersecretaries, one of whom is an Undersecretary for Administration, the Secretary may assign these personnel planning management and development duties to said Undersecretary or in his discretion appoint an Assistant Secretary as provided in this Decree.

Section 3. Except those which are attached or otherwise administered or supervised by a department, government-owned or controlled corporations may create a similar position with the same duties as prescribed under this Decree, if such is considered necessary by them.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 11th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office