PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 966

DECLARING VIOLATIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF RACIAL DISCRIMINATION TO BE CRIMINAL OFFENSES AND PROVIDING PENALTIES THEREFOR.

WHEREAS, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination which was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on December 21, 1965, entered into force on January 4, 1969;

WHEREAS, the Senate of the Philippines concurred in the ratification of the Convention on May 18, 1967;

WHEREAS, the instrument of ratification of the Convention by the President was deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations on September 15, 1967;

WHEREAS, the Convention is now part of the law of the land; and

WHEREAS, the Convention provides in its Article 4, that State Parties, inter alia.

“(a) Shall declare an offense punishable by law all dissemination of ideas based on racial superiority or hatred, incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons of another color or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist activities, including the financing thereof;

“(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and also organized and all other propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall recognize the participation in such organizations or activities as an offense punishable by law;

“(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or local, to promote or incite racial discrimination.”

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND, E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, in order to implement the treaty obligations of the Philippines under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, do hereby decree and order that:

Section 1. All organizations and all propaganda activities, which promote and incite racial discrimination, and hereby declared illegal and prohibited.

Section 2. Violation of this Decree, as well as of Article 4, paragraphs a, b and c of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination, shall be punished with:

(a) Imprisonment of not less than ten days nor more than six months, if the offender is guilty of the dissemination and advocacy of policies based on racial superiority or hatred; incitement to racial discrimination; membership in any organization or participation in organized or other propaganda activities, which promote or incite racial discrimination; or providing assistance to racist activities, including the financing thereof.

(b) Imprisonment of not less than one month nor more than one year, if the offender is guilty of inciting to acts of violence against any race or group of persons of another color or ethnic origin or is an officer or organizer of an organization engaged in propaganda activities, which promote or incite racial discrimination.

Section 3. The penalties provided in the preceding section shall be imposed in the maximum if the offender be a Government officer or employee.

The imposition of the penalties provided in the preceding section shall be without prejudice to any liability which the offender may incur under other applicable laws.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 20th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office