MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1593

AMENDING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1297 CENTRALIZING THE IMPORTATION OF RUMINANTS FOR BREEDING, SLAUGHTER AND BEEF.

WHEREAS, there is a need to strengthen existing guidelines for the effective implementation of Presidential Decree No. 1297, centralizing the importation of ruminants for breeding and slaughter and beef;

WHEREAS, to accomplish the above purpose, it is necessary to amend Presidential Decree No. 1297.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution do hereby order and decree the following as part of the law of the land:

Section 1. Section 1 of the Presidential Decree No. 1297 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“The importation of cattle (breeder and/or slaughter) and frozen beef (special choice cuts and/or briskets, trimmings, and other low-cost manufacturing grade beef) shall be in accordance with the following specific guidelines and such guidelines as may be issued by the Bureau of Animal Industry through the Ministry of Agriculture as approved by the President.

“(a) Low-cost manufacturing grade beef such as briskets, trimmings, cow crops, shall be imported by the government directly or through legitimate and bona-fide meat processors, in such quantities as shall be certified by the Ministry of Agriculture upon the recommendation of the Bureau of Animal Industry, taking into consideration the actual direct raw material requirements for processed and canned meat products according to the actual operating capacity on officially established rated operating capacities of their respective plants, machinery and equipment as inspected and certified by the Ministry of Industry whichever is lower;

“(b) Special choice cuts for selective institutional outlets may be imported directly by five-star hotels chains, and such other entities authorized by the President upon recommendation of the Ministry of Tourism, subject to the condition that the quantity and volume imported by such five-star hotels or hotel chains or other entities shall be limited strictly to what is needed to service their own direct restaurant requirements; and

“(c) Importations by the government for breeding and/or slaughter shall be discharged and unloaded only at the Government Cattle Breeding Grazing Reserve and Experimental Station at Busuanga, Palawan and in such other places designated by the President upon the recommendation of the Ministry of Agriculture, at which places continued studies and evaluation will be undertaken to determine the suitable breed of cattle that can be properly dispersed or slaughtered to ensure protection of the local cattle industry and adequate beef supply from certified healthy cattle at reasonable price.”

Section 2. Section 2 of the same decree is hereby amended to read as follows:

“All importation of live cattle for breeding and/or slaughter shall have prior approval of the Ministry of Agriculture, upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau of Animal Industry, attesting to the quality and breed of the cattle to be brought in, the need for and timeliness of such importation, the cost thereof, the benefits to be derived therefrom and the contributions such importation can make to the intended overall economic and social objectives.”

Section 3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office