MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1603

AUTHORIZING MINISTRIES, BUREAUS AND OFFICES OF THE GOVERNMENT TO ISSUE IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS.

WHEREAS, for the effective implementation of laws, decrees, orders and instructions pertaining to, or the enforcement of which ministries, bureaus and offices of the Government are in charged, it is necessary that they be authorized to issue rules and regulations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree as follows:

Section 1. Each ministry, bureau or office of the Government shall have the power to promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the effective implementation of the provisions of laws, decrees, orders or instructions pertaining to such ministry, bureau or office or which it is in charged of enforcing, unless the contrary is specifically provided. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval by the President of the Philippines and shall take effect upon such approval: Provided, That rules and regulations referred to in Section 2 of this Decree shall take effect fifteen days after their publication on the Official Gazette.

Section 2. Any person who shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to Section 1 hereof which does not involve merely matters of internal administration but necessary for the effective implementation of essential governmental policies as certified by the President shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year or fine not exceeding twenty thousand (P20,000.00) pesos, or both such fine and imprisonment.

Section 3. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office