MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1471

AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 604 ENTITLED “INTEGRATING NATIONWIDE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT, PHYSICAL FITNESS AND AMATEUR SPORTS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND CREATING FOR THIS PURPOSE THE DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH AND SPORTS DEVELOPMENT” AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, in view of the magnitude of the task assigned for the total development of the Filipino youth through physical fitness and sports programs, there is an imperative need to revitalize and strengthen the organizational set-up of the Department of Youth and Sports Development (DYSD) to maximize its capabilities, further intensify and generate mass involvement and greater public participation in such programs;

WHEREAS, This measure is necessary to accelerate the achievement of the objectives of Presidential Decree No. 604, dated December 10, 1974, for the inculcation of national discipline as an instrument of national progress;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E, MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree the amendment of Presidential Decree No. 604 as follows:

Section 1. Section Four of Presidential Decree No. 604 is hereby amended to read as follows:

“Sec. 4. Department Proper. The Department shall have an Administrative, Finance and Planning Office, and Programs and Operations Office. Each Office shall be headed by an Assistant Secretary, who shall be appointed by the President. The Assistant Secretary for Administration, Finance and Planning shall be assisted by a Director and Assistant Director for Administration and a Director and Assistant Director for Finance and a Director and Assistant Director for Planning. The Assistant Secretary for Programs and Operations shall be assisted by a Director and Assistant Director for Programs and Operations. Considering the nature of the functions of the Department, positions of Project Directors may be created subject to approval by the President. All their salaries shall be consistent and in accordance with the approved budgetary and organizational structure of the Department.

The Department Proper shall provide specialized knowledge and consultancy services at the regional level in the execution of sports programs, as well as establish the necessary linkages and coordination with the Philippine Olympic Committee, National Sports Council and the Inter-Agency Services Committee created under Letter of Instructions No. 662 dated 25 January 1978, and such other agencies of the government and private institutions which the Department Secretary or Undersecretary shall deem necessary in the promotion of the objectives of the Decree.

The Administrative Office shall, among others, be responsible for providing the Department with economical, efficient and effective services relating to personnel, legal, supplies, procurement thereof, information, records and custodial works, security and other general services.

The Finance Office shall, among others, be responsible for providing the Department with efficient and effective services on the budgetary requirements, accounting and auditing of expenditures, and such other staff assistance and advice on financial and budgetary matters.

The Planning Office shall, among others, be responsible for providing the Department with economical, efficient and effective services on drawing up plants and programs, policy formulation, analysis and coordination, project evaluation, research development and regional monitoring.

The Program and Operations Office shall, among others, be responsible for providing the Department with economical, efficient and effective services on the implementation and execution of approved plants and specialized projects including the drawing of the necessary detailed program of work, program development and improvement, coordination of regional activities, and the monitoring of implementation and performance.”

Section 2. Separability Clause. If any provision of this Decree is declared unconstitutional, the same shall apply only to the provision and the remainder hereof remains valid.

Section 3. Repealing Clause. All laws, decrees, executive orders, rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 4. Effectivity. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office