Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE MANILA URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

WHEREAS, it is the commitment of the government to establish, maintain and ensure adequate social services in the field of urban development and squatter relocation to guarantee the enjoyment by the people of a decent standard of living; and to assign priority to blighted urban areas in order to alleviate the problems arising from rapid population growth, high unemployment, widespread poverty, malnutrition and inadequate shelter and urban services thru a program of upgrading blighted areas, provision of employment opportunities, improvement of urban services and enhancement of operating capabilities of national and local agencies involved;

WHEREAS, in line with these objectives, the government has embarked on an urban development program in Metropolitan Manila involving the upgrading of sites and services in the Tondo Foreshore and the development of the Dagat-Dagatan resettlement area, particularly the provision of improved environmental sanitation, infrastructure and social services such as roads and pathways, drainage system, water and sewerage system, public buildings, programs for the socio-economic development of the people, housing materials and small business loans and traffic engineering and management;

WHEREAS, the government has sought financial assistance from the World Bank in the form of loans amounting to about US$ 32M.

WHEREAS, there is a need to appropriate counterpart funds to cover the cost of the project;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as President of the Philippines, do hereby decree and authorize:

1. The appropriation of the sum of P598.10 million out of funds not otherwise appropriated in the National Treasury for the following components of the Manila Urban Development Project to be made available to appropriate agencies concerned in the four-year period of implementation of the project as indicated:

2. The total amounts indicated above shall be made available for the corresponding project component thru the implementing agencies over the duration of project implementation as indicated in the accompanying schedules.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of May in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-six.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) J. C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Annex: Yearly Schedule of Disbursement, Manila Urban Development Project

Source: Malacañang Records Office