MALACAÑANG Manila

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1422

CONFIRMING AND EXPANDING THE SCOPE OF THE AUTHORITY AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL CENTER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.

WHEREAS, cancer ranks among the first five killers of mankind throughout the world;

WHEREAS, the nationwide incidence, morbidity and mortality from cancer in the Philippines is rising as compared to the reduction of communicable and other diseases;

WHEREAS, cancer, a complex disease, spares no social class and strikes regardless of sex, age and social status;

WHEREAS, it is one of the goals of the New Society to provide first class cancer management for all, most especially the rural and urban poor;

WHEREAS, the National Cancer Control Center of the Department of Health was created to plan, establish and carry out an effective nationwide program of cancer prevention detection, diagnosis, pre-treatment evaluation, treatment, rehabilitation, and continuing care through a nationwide promotion and application of the available and new methods for reducing the incidence, morbidity and mortality from cancer;

WHEREAS, the National Cancer Control Center has assumed the leadership and is now the nucleus and coordinating body for all cancer work in the Department of Health;

WHEREAS, the National Cancer Control Center is presently studying and evaluating the cancer problem in the Philippines and formulating effective nationwide policies to solve this problem; and

WHEREAS, then ultimate goal of the government, through the National Cancer Control Center, is to totally eradicate this disease which causes so much misery, suffering and death among our people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree:

Section 1. The authority and functions of the National Cancer Control Center of the Department of Health as promulgated by Department of Health Administrative Order No. 188-A, s. 1973, are hereby confirmed and shall be expanded in scope in order to assume leadership in coordinating cancer control activities of other government and private agencies to unify and render more effective their efforts and in order to avoid overlapping and duplication of activities.

Section 2. TheNationalCancerControlCenter of the Department of Health, through its Director, shall, whenever necessary, call meetings with the heads of all agencies involved in cancer work in order to render advice and assistance in their respective activities thus helping them attain their objectives.

Section 3. To carry out its expanded authority and function, the National Cancer Control Center of the Department of Health, aside from its regular budget appropriation, shall be appropriated additional funds out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, the year amounts of which shall be determined by the Secretary of Health through the recommendation of the Director of the National Cancer Control Center. The appropriation of additional funds for this purpose shall be made available the year following the effectivity of this Decree.

Section 4. Repealing Clause. Any provisions of the law, decree, order, rules or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, revised or amended accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity Clause. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Presidential Decree No. 1422 June 09, 1978