PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 7

PRESCRIBING THE ORDERLY MARKETING OF LIVESTOCK AND ANIMAL PRODUCTS AND NEW REGULATIONS ON ANIMAL FEEDS

WHEREAS, the prices of meat and other livestock products have been increasing to the detriment of our people inspite of government efforts to expand the production of livestock and animal products;

WHEREAS, the livestock and poultry industry is one of the major agricultural industries of the Philippines and its accelerated development would mean the increased production of meat and other animal products necessary to improve the health of the people and to bolster the national economy;

WHEREAS, the producers and marketers of livestock and animal products encounter numerous legal and illegal fees and charges in the production, transport, and marketing of their products;

WHEREAS, these fees and charges operate to increase livestock production and marketing costs and therefore increase meat prices;

WHEREAS, the livestock industry also largely depends upon the quality of animal feeds and therefore a stricter law to control and regulate the manufacture, importation, sale and distribution of animal feeds is imperative;

WHEREAS, there were pending before Congress prior to the promulgation of Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, certain priority measures vital to the livestock industry.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, as Commander-in-Chief of all the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081, dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, in order to effect the desired reforms in the social, economic, and political structure of the country, do hereby order and decree that, with the exception of ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection fees, as well as delivery, stockyard, and slaughter or fees as may be authorized by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources the collection of all other fees and charges including reinspection fees, inventory fees, certificate of ownership fees, transfer certificate fees, Mayor’s permits, City Hall fees, custom fees, shipping certificate fees, and check-point charges are hereby terminated. (See Presidential Decree No. 45 to amend this paragraph.)

Ante-mortem and post-mortem inspection of animals and their carcasses done by duly designed veterinarians in the employ of the national government shall be valid when the said carcasses are transported from any accredited slaughterhouse in the Philippines to any trading center in the country, provided the safeguards for the proper transport of the meat are undertaken. Any additional post-mortem inspection if deemed necessary are to be done only at the request of the buyer and only by veterinarians duly accredited by the National Meat Inspection Commission to be organized as specified hereunder.

The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources is hereby authorized to establish a National Meat Inspection Commission which shall promulgate, with his approval, specific policies and procedures governing the flow of livestock and livestock products through the various stages of marketing and the proper preservation and inspection of such products. Such policies and procedures shall thereafter have the effect of law and shall be implemented by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, by the National Meat Inspection Commission, by the Bureau of Animal Industry, and by all other agencies and instrumentalities of the national, provincial, city and municipal governments.

I also hereby order and decree that Senate Bill No. 627, as hereto attached and entitled “An Act to Amend the Title and certain sections of Republic Act Numbered one thousand five hundred fifty-six, otherwise known as the Livestock and Poultry Feeds Act, and to provide funds therefor”, shall be adopted and approved, as it is hereby adopted, approved, and made as part of the law of the land.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-two.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) ROBERTO V. REYES Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office