MALACAÑANG MANILA

PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1660

PROVIDING PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTION 31 OF THE 1978 ELECTION CODE

WHEREAS, it has come to the attention of Commission on Elections that in past elections, political parties and candidates appointed watchers who were not qualified voters of the city or municipality where the voting center is located, ex-convicts or other persons of doubtful reputation, contrary to the provisions of Sec. 31 of the 1978 Election Code;

WHEREAS, the practice of appointing watchers from places other than the city or municipality of the voting center where said watcher is appointed has been abused to the extent that politicians have resorted to the services of persons of questionable character, goons and terrorists who committed acts of terrorism and intimidation against the voters as well as the members of the Citizens Election Committees;

WHEREAS, violation of Section 31 on appointment of watchers is not included as one of the election offenses punishable under Section 179 of the 1978 Election Code.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND, E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, hereby decree as follows:

SECTION 1. Watchers who are not registered voters of city of municipality. — Any political party or candidate appointing a watcher who is not a registered voter, of the city or municipality where he is a watcher, or persons of questionable reputation who have been convicted of any election offense or any other crime shall be guilty of an election offense as provided under Section 179 of the 1978 Election Code.

SEC 2. Penalty . — Any person found guilty of the election offense provided in the preceding section shall suffer the same penalty provided under Sec. 181 of the Election Code of 1978.

SEC 3. Effectivity . — This Decree shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Assistant

Source: CDAsia