PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 633

CREATING A NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE ROLE OF FILIPINO WOMEN

WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the United Nations has designated 1975 as International Women’s Year with its central theme of “Equality, Development and Peace”;

WHEREAS, the United Nations will convene during International Women’s Year an International Conference in which, inter alia, will be launched an international action-program including short and long term measures aimed at achieving the integration of women as full and equal partners with men in the total development effort;

WHEREAS, the Government of the Republic of the Philippines recognizes the significant contribution of Filipino women as citizens, homemakers, workers, volunteers, as well as their increasing participation in the development of friendly relations and cooperation among nations, and the promotion of world peace, and

WHEREAS, there is a need for a body to review, evaluate and recommend measures, including priorities, to ensure the full integration of women for economic, social, and cultural development at national, regional and international levels and to ensure further equality between men and women;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby create under the Office of the President a National Commission on the Role of the Filipino Women. The membership shall be as follows:

Chairman Mrs. Imelda Romualdez Marcos

Member:

(1) Members of the Cabinet whose respective departments directly or indirectly affect the participation of Women in national development and their integration therein;

(2) The heads of women’s organizations as the President may designate;

(3) The heads of the different chambers of commerce and industry.

(4) Representatives of government and private sectors as the President may designate who would be in a position to help implement the aims of International Women’s Year;

(5) Others as may be deemed necessary by the Commission.

The members of the Commission may designate qualified and competent representatives to act in their stead. The Commission may create such committee as it may deem necessary to carry out its functions:

The Commission shall have the following functions:

(1) To advice the President in formulating policies and implementing programs on increased contribution by women in national development;

(2) To ensure that the gains which Filipino women have achieved because of Philippine culture and tradition will be preserved and enhanced in the process of modernization;

(3) To continuously review and evaluate the extent to which women are integrated in all sectors of economic and social life at all levels on a basis of equality with men;

(4) To make recommendations which would guarantee the enjoyment by women and men of full equality before the law in all fields where it does not exist;

(5) To prepare a national program for International Women’s Year which can be implemented throughout the Philippines.

This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-five.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office