PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1316

CREATING BARANGAY BALONG-BATO IN QUEZON CITY

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a must in line with the desire of the State to hasten up the economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the primordial aim of development can be best achieved by the creation of local government units which could, through faster administrative response, greatly contribute to the social, educational, cultural and economic needs of our people;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of the proposed barangay with the conformity of the local officials, to create the proposed barangay, so that closer supervision in the execution of developmental programs of the locality could very well be achieved;

WHEREAS, the proposed barangay will become a self-reliant community once intensified government projects are made in line with the declared policy of the government to uplift the socio-economic well being of the residents therein;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in me vested by the Constitution, do hereby order and decree as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. The former civil barrio of Balong-Bato, 2nd district, in Barangay Apolonio Samson, Quezon City, is hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent barangay which is hereby created to be known as Barangay Balong-Bato without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the mother barangay of Apolonio Samson.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular barangays shall be applicable to the new Barangay of Balong-Bato.

Section 3. The present elective barangay officials of Barangay Apolonio Samson shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Barangay Balong-Bato until the barangay officials of said barangay shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for barangay officials following the issuances of this Decree and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or complete the government personnel of Barangay Balong-Bato shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Barangay Balong-Bato in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of Barangay Apolonio Samson shall be transferred by the President to the newly created barangay upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of March in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-eight.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office