PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 372

AMENDING CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE INTEGRATED REORGANIZATION PLAN AS ADOPTED UNDER PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1

I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and pursuant to Proclamation No. 1081 dated September 21, 1972, and General Order No. 1 dated September 22, 1972, as amended, do hereby decree the following as part of the law of the land:

Section 1. Paragraphs 8, 10 and 11, Article III, Chapter 1, Part VI of the Integrated Reorganization Plan as adopted under Presidential Decree No. 1, are hereby amended to read as follows:

“8. There shall be a Director-General with a Cabinet rank, and two Deputy Directors-general with the rank of Undersecretaries, who shall serve as the executive and assistant executive officers of the NEDA, respectively. The Director-General shall hold office at the pleasure of the President, while the Deputy Director-General shall be career officials.”

“Whenever the Director-General is unable to perform his duties owing to illness, absence or other cause, or in case of vacancy in the office, the Deputy Director-General designated by the President shall temporarily perform the functions of said office.

“10. The Director-General and the Deputy Directors-General shall be required to work full-time in the NEDA and shall not be extended any other appointment to public office in a concurrent capacity except as ex-officio member of government bodies as specifically provided for by law or a part-time member thereat as may be designated by the President.”

“11. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the budget of NEDA shall be in the form of lump-sum appropriations with the Director-General having sole authority to determine the details of the expenditures: Provided, That, the Director-General may use any savings from any item in the said appropriation for strengthening the NEDA offices.”

Section 2. A new paragraph designated as paragraph 16 is hereby added to Article III, Part VI of the Integrated Reorganization Plan to read as follows:

“16. Any provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Director-General may authorize the assignment of government motor vehicles under the custody of NEDA for use of its officers from the rank of Director or higher: Provided, That those officers with assigned vehicles shall not any more be entitled to transportation allowances.”

Section 3. Paragraph 2, Article V, Chapter I, Part VI of the Integrated Reorganization Plan is hereby amended to read as follows:

“2. The Committee shall be composed of the Director-General of the Authority, as Chairman; the Chairman of the Board of Investments, as Vice-Chairman; and the following as members: the Secretary of Finance, the Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, the Chairman of the Development Bank of the Philippines, the President of the Philippine National Bank, the General Manager of the Government Service Insurance System, the Administrator of the Social Security System, the President of the Land Bank and the President of the Amanah Bank: Provided, That the head of any other financial institution that may hereafter be created may also be designated by the President of the Philippines as member upon the recommendation of Authority.

Section 4. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-four.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS

By the President:

(Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office