PRESIDENTIAL DECREE No. 1247

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SAN MARIANO IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

WHEREAS, self-reliant communities are a most in line with the intensified governmental development projects geared toward the hastening up of the pace of economic development throughout the country;

WHEREAS, the effective implementation of the declared programs of the government on development hinges primarily on the administrative efficiency of each and every local government unit;

WHEREAS, it has been the clamor of the residents of barangays comprising the Maragusan Valley with the conformity of the local officials, to create the proposed municipality, so as to achieve a closer supervision of the execution of the developmental programs of the locality;

WHEREAS, the physical distance of the said Maragusan Valley from Barangay Cuambog, which is the seat of the municipal government, plus the lack adequate means of transportation and communication, are factors not conducive to the attainment of the desired development of said region;

WHEREAS, the creation thereof will not only redound and contribute greatly to the maintenance of peace and order but will also enhance the pacification drive to restore normalcy in the area;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby decree and order as part of the law of the land, the following:

Section 1. Barangays Maragusan, Mapawa, Bagong Silang, New Albay and Tupaz, all in the Municipality of Mabini, Province of Davao, are hereby detached and separated therefrom to form and constitute into a distinct and independent municipality which is hereby created to be known as the Municipality of San Mariano without affecting in any manner the legal existence of the Municipality of Mabini. The seat of government of the newly created municipality shall be in Barangay Maragusan.

Section 2. Except as hereinafter provided, all provisions of law, now or hereafter applicable to regular municipalities shall be applicable to the new Municipality of San Mariano.

Section 3. The present elective municipal officials of the Municipality of Mabini shall continue to perform their duties as such officials in the newly created Municipality of San Mariano until the municipal officials of said municipality shall have been appointed by the President. Such officials so appointed shall hold office until their successors shall have been elected in the regular elections for municipal officials following the issuance of this Decree and shall have qualified unless sooner removed at the pleasure of the President. Such appointive officers and employees as may be necessary to organize or to complete the government personnel of the municipality of San Mariano shall be appointed as provided for under existing laws.

Section 4. Upon the effectivity of this Decree, the proportionate share of the new Municipality of San Mariano in the obligations, funds, assets and other property of the Municipality of Mabini shall be transferred by the President to the newly created municipality upon the recommendation of the Commission on Audit.

Section 5. All laws or parts of laws as well as all executive orders or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Decree shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President  of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: Malacañang Records Office