MALACAÑANG RESIDENCE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 2099

DECLARING AUGUST 2-8 OF EVERY YEAR AS CRIME PREVENTION AND CRIME CONTROL CONSCIOUSNESS WEEK.

WHEREAS, crime is a phenomenon that will continue to confront mankind and will remain to be a national problem;

WHEREAS, crime exacts a heavy toll on national resources in terms of valuable lives and properties of the citizens and shall therefore be a national concern:

WHEREAS, the national government recognizes that crime prevention and control is the best recourse that shall be undertaken to minimize the effects of crime in national progress and development;

WHEREAS, successful crime prevention programs involves the participation of practically all sectors of society which requires the cooperation of the citizens in all fields and activities of the Philippine Criminal Justice System;

WHEREAS, it is necessary that the nation, the government and the citizens give high importance to crime prevention and crime control by extending their full cooperation to reduce the opportunity of misguided elements of our society to commit crimes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers Vested in me’ by the Constitution and the laws, do hereby declare that:

1. The period August 2-8, 1981 and of every year thereafter be celebrated as Crime Prevention and Crime Control Consciousness Week.

2. The following shall be highlighted to lend significance to the occasion:

a. Convocations to be conducted in schools, colleges and universities to dramatize the national effort in preventing and reducing crime.

b. The Police Advisory Councils created under Presidential Letter of Instructions No. 337 at all levels shall plan for the celebration of the Crime Prevention and Crime Control Consciousness Week involving the various sectors of their respective communities. Local communities crime prevention programs with appropriate slogans to focus attention and solution to their criminality and peace and order problems must be developed and espoused upon leaders and/or government officials involved in the administration of criminal justice in the provinces, cities and municipalities.

2. The Ministries of Local Government and Community Development, Justice, National Defense, and Education and Culture and their subordinate instrumentalities shall jointly evolve the necessary programs to make the occasion very meaningful and significant.

Done in the City of Manila, this 16th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-one.

(Sgd.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Source: National Library