National Intelligence Coordinating Agency

SECTION 9. Functions.—The National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, hereinafter referred to as the Agency, shall:

(1) Serve as the focal point for coordination and integration of government activities involving national intelligence;

(2) Prepare intelligence estimates of local and foreign situations for the formulation of national policies by the President; and

(3) Provide support and assistance to the National Security Council.

SECTION 10. The Director-General.—The Agency shall be headed by a Director-General who shall be assisted by a Deputy Director-General. Both officials shall be appointed by the President and shall hold office at the pleasure of the President.

SECTION 11. The Deputy-Director General.—The Deputy Director-General shall assist the Director-General in the performance of official functions and, in his absence, perform the functions of the Director-General.

SECTION 12. Organizational Structure.—The organization of the Agency shall consist of the following:

(1) The Office of the Director-General which shall undertake the overall management and operation of the various components of the agency, provide executive staff support, public relations, legal service, and internal audit for the Agency;

(2) The Directorate for Operations, headed by the Assistant Director-General for Operations, which shall be responsible for the collection of information;

(3) The Directorate for Production, headed by the Assistant Director-General for Production, which shall be responsible for the preparation of intelligence estimates and other reports, and the maintenance of automated data processing for the Agency;

(4) The Directorate for Administration, headed by the Assistant Director-General for Administration, which shall be responsible for personnel and training, transportation and communications, supplies and materials, grounds and buildings maintenance, security, and other support services;

(5) The Management and Planning Office which shall formulate plans, policies and programs on the direction, integration and coordination of national intelligence activities and on the operation and management improvement of the Agency;

(6) The Office of the Comptroller which shall provide financial management and control for the Agency; and

(7) As many Field Stations as may be determined by the Director-General which shall undertake intelligence collection activities and provide reports necessary for the preparation of assessments and estimates.

The organization and staffing pattern of the Agency shall be recommended by the Director-General for approval of the President.

SECTION 13. Administrative Supervision By the National Security Council.—The Agency shall be under the administrative supervision of, and give support services to, the National Security Council; however, the agency may report directly to the President, as the President may require.

SECTION 14. National Intelligence Board.—(1) The National Intelligence Board shall serve as an advisory body to the Director of the Agency, on matters pertaining to the integration and coordination of intelligence activities, and shall make recommendations on such matters as the Director may from time to time submit to it for consideration.

(2) The members of the National Intelligence Board shall be appointed by the President. The National Security Director may sit in all meetings of the Board.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987