MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 300

CONSTITUTING THE OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR GENERAL AS AN INDEPENDENT AND AUTONOMOUS OFFICE ATTACHED TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the office of the Solicitor General performs functions vital not only to Government, but more so to national interest;

WHEREAS, there is compelling need to adequately and suitably equip the Office of the Solicitor General;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Office of the Solicitor General shall be an independent and autonomous office attached to the Department of Justice. It shall continue to perform its function as are provided by law.

SEC. 2. The Office of the Solicitor General shall be headed by the Solicitor General, who is the principal law officer and legal defender of the Government. He shall have the authority and responsibility for the exercise of the Office’s mandate and for the discharge of its duties and functions, and shall have supervision and control over the Office of its constituent units. The Solicitor General, who shall be appointed by the President, shall have the same qualifications for appointment, rank, prerogatives, and privileges as those of the Presiding Justice of the Court of Appeals.

The Solicitor General shall be assisted by a Legal Staff composed of fifteen (15) Assistant Solicitors General, and such number of Solicitors and Trial Attorneys as may be necessary to operate the Office, which shall be divided into fifteen (15) divisions: Provided , That the Solicitor General may assign or transfer the Assistant Solicitors General, Solicitor and/or Trial Attorneys to any of the divisions.

The Assistant Solicitor General and the Solicitors shall be appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Solicitor General. The Trial Attorneys and administrative personnel in the Office of the Solicitor General shall be appointed by the Solicitor General.

In case of absence or temporary incapacity of the Solicitor General, the President shall designate an Acting Solicitor General. In case of death, permanent incapacity, removal or resignation of the Solicitor General, or vacancy thereof, the President shall designate an Acting Solicitor General, who shall act as such until a new Solicitor General is appointed, or appoint a new Solicitor General.

Section 3. The existing incumbents shall continue to remain in office, without need of new appointments.

Section 4. Funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Executive Order shall be taken from the appropriations of the Office of the Solicitor General in the current General Appropriations Act.

Section 5. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 26th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.