MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 160

FURTHER AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 79, AS AMENDED, ENTITLED “REVISING THE POPULATION ACT OF NINETEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY ONE”

WHEREAS, in pursuance of the State policies on the family and other related policies enunciated in the 1987 Constitution, the Population Commission must be strengthened by making the composition and membership of its Board more responsive to the roles of the Commission is called upon to perform in the light of the 1987 Constitution;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Section 6 of Presidential Decree No. 79, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 6. Board of Commissioners . – All the functions and powers of the Population Commission shall be vested in and exercised by a Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the Board, composed of eleven (11) members from the government and three (3) members as representatives of the private sector, as follows:

Private Sector Representatives:

The private sector representatives shall serve at the pleasure of the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 2. Section 8 of the Presidential Decree No. 79, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 8. The Chairman . – The Chairman of the Board of the Population Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To call and preside over the meetings of the Board;

(b) To review, and with the concurrence of the Board, authorize major policies and programs as a whole;

(c) To appoint, with the approval of the Board, the Executive Director and such number of Deputy Executive Directors and Regional Directors as the exigencies of the service may require and recommend to the Board their respective compensation and the suspension and removal of said officials for cause;

(d) To submit to the President an annual report and such periodic reports as may be necessary on the accomplishments and programs of the POPCOM;

(e) To accept on behalf of the POPCOM, gifts, grants or donations and administer, obligate and disburse the same in accordance with the provisions of this decree;

(f) To constitute committees consisting of members of the Board or such other experts and consultants from both the private and public sectors as are deemed necessary to conduct studies for the POPCOM or to assist in the discharge of its functions; and subject to the approval of the Board, authorize the payment of honoraria or additional compensation and commutable traveling allowances for services rendered, except to the members of the Board;

(g) To delegate to the Executive Director subject to the Approval of the Board any of the powers vested in him as may be necessary in the performance of functions; and

(h) To perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Board from time to time.”

SECTION 3. Section 9 of Presidential Decree No. 79, as amended, is hereby further amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 9. Meetings . – The Board shall meet at least once every four months or oftener at the call of the Chairman. Eight (8) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be considered as a decision of the Board unless it carries the affirmative vote of at least eight (8) members present and voting. The members of the Board who are government officials shall serve without additional compensation.”

SEC. 4. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of April in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.