Miscellaneous Provisions

SECTION 61. Examining Committee, Special Examiners and Special Investigators.—Subject to approval by the proper head of a department or agency, the Commission may select suitable persons in the government service to act as members of examining committees, special examiners or special investigators. Such person shall be designated examiners or investigators of the Commission and shall perform such duties as the Commission may require, and in the performance of such duties they shall be under its exclusive control. Examining committees, special examiners or special investigators so designated may be given allowances or per diems for their services, to be paid out of the funds of, and at a rate to be determined by, the Commission.

SECTION 62. Fees.—The Commission shall collect and charge fees for civil service examinations, certifications of civil service ratings, service records, and other civil service matters, training courses, seminars, workshops in personnel management and other civil service matters. For this purpose, the Commission shall prescribe standard and reasonable rates for such examinations, certifications, training courses, seminars, and workshops: Provided, That no examination fees shall be collected in examinations given for the selection of scholars.

SECTION 63. Income.—The income of the Commission from fees, costs for services it may assess and levy, and such other proceeds generated in the performance of its functions shall be directly utilized by the Commission for its expenses.

SECTION 64. Authority of Officers to Administer Oaths, Take Testimony, Prosecute and Defend Cases in Court.—Members of the Commission, chiefs of offices, and other officers and employees of the Commission designated in writing by the Chairman may administer such oath as may be necessary in the transactions of official business and administer oaths and take testimony in connection with any authorized investigation. Attorneys of the Commission may prosecute and defend cases in connection with the functions of the Commission before any court or tribunal.

SECTION 65. Liability of Appointing Authority.—No person employed in the Civil Service in violation of the Civil Service Law and rules shall be entitled to receive pay from the government; but the appointing authority responsible for such unlawful employment shall be personally liable for the pay that would have accrued had the employment been lawful, and the disbursing officials shall make payment to the employee of such amount from the salary of the officers so liable.

SECTION 66. Liability of Disbursing Officers.—Except as may otherwise be provided by law, it shall be unlawful for a treasurer or other fiscal officer to draw or retain from the salary due an officer or employee any amount for contribution or payment of obligations other than those due the government or its instrumentalities.

SECTION 67. Penal Provision.—Whoever makes any appointment or employs any person in violation of any provision of this Title or the rules made thereunder or whoever commits fraud, deceit or intentional misrepresentation of material facts concerning other civil service matters, or whoever violates, refuses or neglects to comply with any of such provisions or rules, shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand pesos or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987