MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 79

PROVIDING GUIDELINES ON THE TOUR OF ACTIVE DUTY OF RESERVE OFFICERS AND STRENGTHENING THEIR SECURITY OF TENURE AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, to prevent the demoralization of reserve officers, it is necessary to provide guidelines on the call to active duty and extensions thereof of reserve officers and to strengthen their tenure of office;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Any provision of existing law to the contrary notwithstanding, the following guidelines shall be observed in the call of Active Duty and Extensions of Active Duty of Reserve Officers:

a. A reserve officer will be initially called to active duty for a period of three (3) years. Upon satisfactory completion of his tour of active duty, it shall be extended for a period of another three (3) years.

b. A reserve officer who has satisfactorily rendered six (6) continuous years of active military service shall, upon satisfactory completion of his extended tour of active duty, be granted another extension for a period of four (4) years.

c. A reserve officer who has satisfactorily rendered a total of ten (10) years of continuous active commissioned military service shall not be reverted to inactive status, except upon his own request or for cause as may be adjudged by a court martial or by appropriate bodies existing by provisions of law or by virtue of the operation of Presidential Decree No. 1638 which provides for the forced attrition of officers based on exigencies of the service, up to the time he reaches the compulsory retirement of thirty (30) years of service or fifty six (56) years of age, whichever comes later, but not later than sixty (60) years of age.

SEC. 2. The Minister of National Defense shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to carry out this Executive Order.

SEC. 3. All laws, orders, issuances, rules and regulations, or parts thereof, inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 4. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.