Regional Offices

SECTION 20. Regional Offices.—Regional Offices shall be responsible for highways, flood control and water resource development systems, and other public works within the region, except those defined in Section 3, par. (4) hereof. For this purpose, their duties and responsibilities shall be as follows:

(1) Undertake and evaluate the planning, design, construction and works supervision functions of the Department for the above mentioned infrastructure within the region;

(2) Undertake the maintenance of the above mentioned infrastructure within the region and supervise the maintenance of such local road and other infrastructure receiving national government financial assistance as the Secretary may determine;

(3) Ensure the implementation of laws, policies, programs, rules and regulations regarding the above mentioned infrastructure as well as all public and private physical structures;

(4) Provide technical assistance related to their functions to other agencies within the region especially the local government;

(5) Coordinate with other departments, agencies, institutions and organizations, especially local government units within the region in the planning and implementation of infrastructure projects;

(6) Conduct continuing consultations with the local communities, take appropriate measures to make the services of the Department responsive to the needs of the general public, compile and submit such information to the central office, and recommend such appropriate actions as may be necessary; and

(7) Perform such other related duties and responsibilities as may be assigned or delegated by the Secretary or as may be required by law.

The Department shall retain and have such Project Management Offices as may be required which shall be under the supervision and control of the appropriate Regional Director, unless otherwise determined by the Secretary for reasons of supra-regional scope, magnitude, and multi-functional coverage.

SECTION 21. Regional Director.—The Regional Office shall be headed by a Regional Director who shall be responsible for efficiently and effectively carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the Regional Office. Towards this end, and in line with the policy of decentralization, he shall, within his defined powers, exercise functional and administrative supervision over District Offices within the region including the authority to commit their resources and personnel to integrated province or city-wide development thrusts.

He shall also perform such other related duties and responsibilities as may be assigned or delegated by the Secretary or as may be required by law.

The Regional Director shall be assisted by two (2) Assistant Regional Directors who shall exercise supervision, respectively over: (1) the construction, maintenance and works supervision functions in the region; and (2) the planning, project design, evaluation and technical assistance functions of the Regional Office.

SECTION 22. District Office.—There shall be a District Office in each of the provinces and cities throughout the country to be headed by a District Engineer appointed by the Secretary. A province or city may, however, be divided into two (2) or more engineering districts, upon determination and issuance of an administrative order by the Secretary. The District Office shall be responsible for all highways, flood control and water resource development systems, and other public works within the district, except those defined under Section 3, par. (4) hereof. For this purpose, it shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

(1) Undertake and evaluate the planning, design, construction, and works supervision functions of the Department for the above mentioned infrastructure in the district;

(2) Undertake the maintenance of the abovementioned infrastructure within the district and supervise the maintenance of such local roads and other infrastructure receiving national government financial assistance as the Secretary may determine;

(3) Coordinate with other departments, agencies, institutions, and organizations, especially local government units within the district in the planning and implementation of infrastructure projects;

(4) Provide technical assistance to other agencies at the local level on public works planning, design, construction, maintenance and other engineering matters including securing from the Regional Office or, through the same office, assistance from the Department Proper or Bureaus;

(5) Conduct continuing consultations with the local communities, take appropriate measures to make the services of the Department responsive to the needs of the general public, compile and submit such information to the Regional Office and recommend such appropriate actions as may be necessary; and

(6) Perform such other related duties and responsibilities as may be assigned or delegated by the Secretary or as may be required by law.

SECTION 23. District Engineer.—The District Engineer of or within a province or city shall be accountable for the efficient and effective conduct of the duties and responsibilities of the District Office of which he is the head. Within his defined powers, he shall exercise functional and administrative supervision over district operations including the authority to recommend that field resources and personnel be committed to integrated district-wide development thrusts. He shall also perform such other related duties and responsibilities as may be assigned or delegated by the Secretary or as may be required by law.

SECTION 24. Equipment Services.—The Regional Equipment Services, including regional depots and area shops are hereby reorganized to undertake the management, repair, maintenance and rehabilitation of construction and maintenance equipment. Each depot or shop shall be operated, to the extent practicable, as a profit center. The Regional Equipment Services shall be under the administrative supervision of the Regional Director and technical supervision of the Bureau of Equipment.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987