Assignments and Transfers

SECTION 43. Rotation Plan.—The Secretary shall establish a system of assignments and transfers to ensure that all qualified officers and employees, except the employees in the non-career service, shall serve in diplomatic and consular establishments in different regions of the world. The assignment and transfer of personnel shall follow a regular rotation plan. For purposes of assignments, the home office shall be considered a post. All personnel shall be available for assignment to any post.

SECTION 44. Initial Home Office Requirement.—No Foreign Service Officer, Staff Officer or Employee shall be assigned to any foreign service establishment unless he has rendered continuous and satisfactory service in the home office for at least three (3) years.

SECTION 45. Tour of Duty.—(1) The tour of duty of a Foreign Service Officer at any post shall be four (4) years commencing on the date of his arrival at the post, after which he shall be transferred to another post;

(2) The tour of duty of a Foreign Service Staff Officer or Employee at any post shall be for a period of six (6) years commencing on the date of his arrival at the post, after which he shall be transferred to another post;

(3) No Foreign Service Officer, Staff Officer or Employee shall serve more than two (2) consecutive tours of duty abroad;

(4) No Foreign Service Officer may serve more than four (4) consecutive years in the home office, except when designated as Secretary or Undersecretary.

SECTION 46. Retirement.—(1) Any Foreign Service Officer, Staff Officer or Employee who has reached the age of sixty-five (65) shall be compulsorily retired from the service unless his service is extended by the President in the interest of the service. Alien employees shall be allowed to retire from the service at the same age as that provided for employees of the governments of their respective countries, provided that retirement age shall not be beyond sixty-five (65) years.

(2) Foreign Service Officers reinstated to the service after retirement and who are assigned abroad as ambassadors or chiefs of mission, and persons who are appointed as ambassadors without previously serving as Career Foreign Service Officers shall be considered automatically separated from the Foreign Service upon termination of their assignment abroad as ambassadors or chief of missions.

SECTION 47. Resignation.—The Secretary shall have authority to accept the resignation of any Foreign Service Officer, Staff Employee, Honorary Consul and Alien Employee.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987