Board of Pardons and Parole

SECTION 17. Board of Pardons and Parole.—The Board of Pardons and Parole shall continue to discharge the powers and functions as provided in existing law and such additional functions as may be provided by law.

SECTION 18. Board Composition.—The Board shall be composed of the Secretary as Chairman and six (6) members consisting of: The Administrator of the Parole and Probation Administration as ex-officio member, a sociologist, a clergyman, an educator, a person with training and experience in correction work, and a member of the Philippine Bar; Provided, that one of them is a woman. The members of the Board shall be appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Secretary and shall hold office for a term of six (6) years, without prejudice to reappointment.

In case of vacancy by reason of death, incapacity, resignation or removal of any of the Board members, the Secretary shall have the authority to designate a temporary member possessing the qualifications of his predecessor and to serve out his unexpired term or until the President shall have appointed a regular member to fill the vacancy.

SECTION 19. Executive Director and Board Secretary; Support Staff.—In the performance of his duties as Chairman of the Board of Pardons and Parole, the Secretary shall be assisted by a staff headed by the Executive Director who is at the same time the Secretary of the Board. The Executive Director shall be appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the Secretary. The Executive Director shall receive a monthly salary of thirteen thousand five hundred pesos.

The Board Secretary shall prepare and keep the minutes of all the board sessions in a book of records kept for the purpose, as well as all the resolutions and recommendations of the Board on all actions involving parole, pardons and executive clemency to the President; authenticate and/or attest all minutes, resolutions and recommendations of the Board; prepare and serve all notices of board meetings or sessions to the members of the Board; prepare an annual report of all resolutions and recommendations for parole or executive clemency and other reports that the Department may require. He shall also perform such other functions as the Board may from time to time assign to him.

SECTION 20. Board Meetings.—The Board shall meet regularly every week, or as the Board may direct, or upon call by the Chairman/Secretary. The members shall act only as a Board, and every decision of the majority shall be valid as an act of the Board provided, that the Board may direct a Board member to prepare and submit a report involving any application for parole, pardon or any request for executive clemency for appropriate action by the Board.

SECTION 21. Board Rules and Regulations.—The Board is hereby authorized to establish and prescribe, subject to the approval of the Secretary, rules and regulations to govern the proceedings of the Board.

SECTION 22. Indeterminate Sentence Law.—The provisions of Act No. 4103, otherwise known as the Indeterminate Sentence Law, as amended, shall continue to apply except as otherwise amended, modified or repealed by this Code.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987