MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 391-A

PROVIDING FOR THE PRESIDENTIAL COORDINATING ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by law, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby established the Presidential Coordinating Assistance System in the Office of the President, to be composed of:

(a) The Executive Secretary who shall also be the Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Political and Security Affairs;

(b) a Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Agro-Industrial, Economic and Financial Affairs; and

(c) a Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Human Resources and Public Welfare.

The latter two shall be appointed by the President with Cabinet rank.

The President or, in her absence, the Executive Secretary shall call and preside over the meetings of the Presidential Coordinating Assistance System and may ask, from the time to time, other Cabinet members to attend such meetings.

SECTION 2. The Presidential Coordinating Assistants shall assist the President, in the manner hereinafter specified, concerning the management of the operations of the executive departments, including their attached agencies, as well as in the liaison with Constitutional Commissions and offices, the Judicial and Legislative Departments. They shall report directly to the President.

SECTION 3. (a) The Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Political and Security Affairs shall advise the President for purposes of monitoring, coordinating and facilitating the operations and activities of the Department of Foreign Affairs, National Defense, Justice, Local Government, and other offices involved in peace and order, law enforcement, national security, good government, public ethics and accountability as well as in maintaining close liaison with the Constitutional Commissions and offices and the Judicial and Legislative Departments.

(b) The Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Agro-Industrial, Economic and Financial Affairs shall advise the President for purposes of monitoring, coordinating and facilitating the operations and activities of the Departments of Budget and Management, Finance, Agriculture, Agrarian Reform, Environment and Natural Resources, Tourism, Trade and Industry, Science and Technology, Public Works and Highways, Transportation and Communications, the NEDA Secretariat, and their attached agencies as well as in maintaining close liaison with the Central Bank of the Philippines and Monetary Board.

(c) The Presidential Coordinating Assistant for Human Resources and Public Welfare shall advise the President for purposes of monitoring, coordinating and facilitating the operations and activities of the Departments of Health, Education, Culture and Sports, Labor and Employment, Social Welfare and Development, their attached agencies and other offices involved in public information, housing and rural development and public assistance.

SECTION 4. The Presidential Management Staff shall serve as the common administrative research and technical secretariat to the Presidential Coordinating Assistants. The head of the Presidential Management Staff shall enjoy the Cabinet rank.

SECTION 5. The Executive Secretary shall continue to act on matter referred to the Office of the President, attend to matters internal to the Office of the President, including the administration of the operations of the Office of the President, and be responsible for the offices and agencies attached to or under the Office of the President as defined by law. He shall continue to exercise the special functions and powers provided for in Book III, Title III, Chapter 9(B), Section 27 of the Administrative Code of 1987.

SECTION 6. The Department Secretaries shall continue to perform their respective duties and functions as heads of the departments, and be responsible directly to the President for their departments.

SECTION 7. Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to diminish the President’s power of control of all the executive departments, bureaus and offices.

SECTION 8. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant the Presidential Coordinating Assistants the power of supervision or regulation over the Departments and agencies or any line function over said entities.

SECTION 9. The Executive Order amends Executive Order No. 391, Series of 1989, and shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Published in the Official Gazette , Vol. 86 No. 24 Page 4193 on June 11, 1990.

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.