MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 335

ENJOINING ALL DEPARTMENTS/BUREAUS/OFFICES/AGENCIES/INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT TO TAKE SUCH STEPS AS ARE NECESSARY FOR THE PURPOSE OF USING FILIPINO LANGUAGE IN OFFICIAL TRANSACTIONS, COMMUNICATIONS AND CORRESPONDENCE

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution provides that the “national language of the Philippines is Filipino”; that “as it evolves, it shall be further developed and enriched on the basis of existing Philippine and other languages”; and that for “purposes of communication and instruction, the official languages of the Philippines are Filipino and, until otherwise provided by law, English”; and

WHEREAS, the intensified use of Filipino language in official transactions, communications and correspondence in government offices will hasten greater understanding and appreciation among the people of government programs, projects and activities throughout the country, thereby serving as an instrument of unity and peace for national progress.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do thereby enjoin all departments/bureaus/offices/agencies/instrumentalities of the government to undertake the following:

1. Take steps to enhance the use of Filipino in all official communications, transactions and correspondence in their respective offices, whether national or local;

2. Assign one or more personnel, as may be necessary, in every office to take charge of all communications and correspondence written in Filipino;

3. Translate into Filipino names of offices, buildings, public offices, and signboards of all offices, divisions or its instrumentalities, and if so desired, imprint below in smaller letters the English text;

4. Filipinize the “Oath of Office” for government officials and personnel;

5. Make as part of the training programs for personnel development in each office the proficiency in the use of Filipino in official communications and correspondence.

To implement such objectives, the Institute of Philippine Languages is hereby ordered to formulate and implement programs and projects, which include: 1) information campaign on the importance and necessity of Filipino as an effective instrument for national unity and progress; 2) translation into Filipino of this Executive Order, as well as government terms to be utilized as reference materials for all offices; 3) training of all government officials and personnel in the use of Filipino; 4) monitoring of the implementation of this Order and submitting periodic progress report of implementation to the Office of the President of the Philippines thru the Department of Education, Culture and Sports; and 5) taking into account other strategies for the full implementation of the objectives of this Order.

In consonance therewith, the Institute of Philippine Languages is hereby authorized to coordinate with and request support from all departments/bureaus/offices/agencies/instrumentalities of the government, national and local.

This Executive Order supersedes Executive Order No. 187 dated August 6, 1969.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-eight.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1988). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.