MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 270

AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 94 PROVIDING FOR THE HOLDING OF LOCAL ELECTIONS PURSUANT TO THE SECOND PARAGRAPH OF SECTION 1, ARTICLE XVIII OF THE 1987 CONSTITUTION, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR

WHEREAS, under Section 1, paragraph 2, Article XVIII of the 1987 Constitution, the first local election shall be held on a date to be determined by the President;

WHEREAS, in Proclamation No. 94, dated April 14, 1987, the date of the first local elections under the 1987 Constitution has been set on August 24, 1987; and

WHEREAS, after conducting a public hearing and consultations on the matter, and considering that up to the present, the Commission on Elections is still occupied with the national canvass of the result of the May 11, 1987 elections for Senators and Representatives, leaving less than two (2) months for the extensive preparations required for said local elections, involving more than 16,000 local officials, the Commission on Elections has recommended that said date of the local elections be reset to November, 1987;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution, do hereby amend Proclamation No. 94 and hereby order that:

SECTION 1. Election of local officials . – There shall be elections for provincial governors, provincial vice-governors, city and municipal mayors, city and municipal vice-mayors, and members of each Sangguniang Panlalawigan, Sangguniang Panlungsod and Sangguniang Bayan, including all members of the city or municipal councils in the Metropolitan Manila area, to be held on Monday, November 9, 1987: Provided, That all local officials, whether elected, acting or officers-in-charge, shall be deemed automatically resigned from their positions effective upon the filing of their certificates of candidacy for any local position which shall not be later than thirty (30) days prior to the said elections. If the governor or the city or municipal mayor is a candidate but the vice-governor or the city or municipal vice-mayor is not a candidate in said elections, then the latter shall become the acting governor or mayor, as the case may be, until the election and assumption to office of the duly elected governor or mayor. If both the governor and the vice-governor or both the mayor and the vice-mayor are candidates, an acting officer-in-charge to the position vacated shall be designated by the Department of Local Government from the following local officials:

(a) Provincial/City/Municipal Administrator (b) Provincial/City/Municipal Planning and Development Coordinator (c) Provincial/City/Municipal Secretary in the absence of the Administrator and Coordinator

Local officials duly elected shall assume office on the first day of December, 1987.

SEC. 2. Election and Campaign Periods. – As recommended and designated by the Commission on Elections, the election period shall be from September 10, 1987 to December 9, 1987; and the campaign period shall be thirty (30) days commencing on October 10, 1987 and ending on November 8, 1987;

SEC. 3. As an additional prohibited form of election propaganda, no posters shall be allowed anywhere except in the COMELEC poster area as provided for in Section 91 of the Omnibus Election Code (Batas Pambansa Blg. 881, as amended). Any person found guilty of violating the above-mentioned prohibition shall suffer the penalties imposed in Section 264 of the Omnibus Election Code.

SEC. 4. Special Registration of Voters . – There shall be special registration on Saturday, September 26, 1987, for voters who will reach the age of eighteen (18) on November 9, 1987, or those who failed to register in the general registration of voters last December, 1986 or in the special registration before the elections for members of Congress on May 11, 1987; Provided, That the Commission may order a general re-registration of all voters on such dates it may set in certain provinces, cities or municipalities, where it deems it necessary to eliminate rampant illegal registration of voters and thereby ensure the holding of free, orderly, honest, peaceful and credible elections.

SEC. 5. Law to Govern the Conduct of Elections . – The conduct of local elections shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the Omnibus Election Code of 1985, as amended by Executive Order Nos. 50, 94, 134, 144, and 162, unless otherwise further amended hereafter.

SEC. 6. Appropriations . – The amount of TWO HUNDRED MILLION (P200,000,000.00) PESOS, or so much thereof as may be necessary for the holding of the local elections, is hereby set aside out of the annual budget and savings of the Commission on Elections, which shall be released automatically by the Department of Budget and Management upon request of the Chairman of the Commission on Elections, based on the approved special budget. In case of deficiencies, the funds herein provided shall be augmented from the contingent fund or any other applicable appropriations authorized in the Current General Appropriations Act, which shall likewise be released automatically upon similar request of the Chairman of the Commission on Elections.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause . – All laws, orders, rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 25th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 171 – 390]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.