MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 107

PROVIDING FOR THE SURRENDER OF LOOSE FIREARMS, AMMUNITION AND EXPLOSIVES, GRANTING BENEFITS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, reports from the law enforcement agencies reveal that there are still a big number of loose or unlicensed firearms, ammunition or explosives in the possession of persons, a majority of whom, not having used such contraband for the commission of any offense may be desirous to surrender the same but are prevented from doing so for fear of being penalized in accordance with existing laws;

WHEREAS, the government is intent on minimizing, if not eradicating, possession of loose or unlicensed firearms, ammunition and explosives;

WHEREAS, in order to give the aforementioned holders of loose or unlicensed firearms, ammunition or explosives the opportunity to dispose of the same without incurring criminal liability, it is necessary to adopt a liberal scheme for that purpose;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. All laws, rules and regulations to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who possesses any firearm, ammunition or explosive without any license or permit as prescribed by law may, without incurring any criminal liability therefor, surrender the same to the proper authorities within a period of six (6) months from the date of the effectivity of this Executive Order: Provided , That the foregoing provisions shall not be construed as barring the prosecution of any person for illegal possession of firearms, ammunition or explosives, as the case may be, in violation of existing laws, if he, within the abovementioned period of six (6) months:

a. Carries outside of his residence, any loose or unlicensed firearm, ammunition or explosive, unless it is for the purpose of surrendering the same, as evidence by a written authority to transport the same for the aforesaid purpose priorly secured by him from the proper authorities;

b. Commits any other offense with the use of such loose or unlicensed firearm, ammunition or explosive.

SECTION 2. Those who have been arrested, charged with, and/or convicted for illegal possession of firearms, ammunition or explosives, with or without resultant offense or offenses, shall be disqualified to avail themselves of the provisions of this Executive Order.

SECTION 3. The holder or possessor of any firearm, surrendered in accordance with this Executive Order may apply to possess the same under license: Provided , That he is qualified to possess the said firearm in accordance with existing laws, and with the rules and regulations implementing this Executive Order.

SECTION 4. Any firearm which can not be possessed under license by the person who surrendered it may be sold to and licensed in the name of qualified individuals, firms or corporations who/which shall pay the corresponding price of such firearm. The payment shall accrue in favor of the person who surrendered the firearm.

SECTION 5. The Chief of the Philippine Constabulary is hereby authorized to promulgate the necessary rules and regulations to implement this Executive Order.

SECTION 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.