MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 488

CONSTITUTING THE PRESIDENTIAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE PRAWN INDUSTRY

WHEREAS , the prawn industry has become a major foreign exchange earner for the country;

WHEREAS , there is an urgent need to unite all sectors of the Philippine prawn industry for it to remain competitive in the world market; and

WHEREAS , it is necessary for the Government and the private sector to work together in active partnership to realize the full potential of the industry;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby constituted a Presidential Coordinating Committee on the Prawn Industry, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, composed of the following:

Any member of the Committee may designate a duly authorized representative to attend committee meetings and other activities in his behalf.

SEC. 2. The Committee shall coordinate all efforts to develop and support the national prawn industry. The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

a. Recommend directions, programs and strategies for the industry in the areas of research, training, financing, production, processing and marketing;

b. Recommend an appropriate mechanism that will provide the industry with timely market and other relevant information;

c. Provide the forum for discussion of issues and concerns affecting the industry and recommend measures on such matters;

d. Identify possible sources of funding to finance programs and projects that will contribute to the growth of the industry; and

e. Assist in the generation and dissemination of pertinent information for the industry and the general public.

SEC. 3. The Committee may call upon other departments, agencies and instrumentalities of the Government to provide assistance in the performance of its functions and discharge of its responsibilities.

SEC. 4. The Philippine Federation of Prawn Growers, Incorporated (PFPG) shall provide the secretariat support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. The Committee shall submit to the President regularly on a quarterly basis a report of its activities and accomplishments.

SEC. 6. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Bacolod, this 22nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-one.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FRANKLIN M. DRILON Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1991). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.