Department Services

SECTION 8. Policy Development and Management Services Group.—The Policy Development and Management Services Group, which shall be headed by an Undersecretary, shall consist of the following:

(1) Planning and Policy Research Office;

(2) Central Management Information Office;

(3) Central Administration Office;

(4) Central Financial Management Office;

(5) Public Information and Assistance Office;

(6) Legal Office; and

(7) Regional Coordination Office.

SECTION 9. Planning and Policy Research Office.—The Planning and Policy Research Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Formulate long-range and annual projections of revenue needs, cash position and borrowing capacity of the Government as basis for policy decisions of the department;

(2) Supervise policy research and development on fiscal and tax measures undertaken by the operating bureaus and offices of the department;

(3) Coordinate with other government agencies on policy research and its impact on fiscal and tax measures; and

(4) Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Secretary or his undersecretaries.

SECTION 10. Central Management Information Office.—The Central Management Information Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Establish a Management Information System and sub-systems for monitoring and evaluation of department-wide programs and projects, including those that are executed by operating Bureaus and Offices;

(2) Formulate policies, plans and procedures for data control and systems management;

(3) Act as the central repository of existing and future computer files; and

(4) Perform such other appropriate functions as may be assigned by the Secretary or his undersecretaries.

SECTION 11. Central Administration Office.—The Central Administration Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Supervise Department-wide services relating to internal cash management, personnel administration, property and supplies procurement and custody; and maintenance of central files, and corresponding reporting systems;

(2) Assist in the formulation of policies and guidelines on the management of human and physical resources and general housekeeping activities for uniformity and standardization;

(3) Serve as a center for the establishment and periodic evaluation of management operation systems, internal control and work outputs to determine Department-wide performance efficiency;

(4) Design and develop training policies and guidelines, administer and evaluate training programs and in coordination with external training institutions, screen and recommend to the Secretary the participation of Department personnel in training programs, seminars and conferences in the country or abroad;

(5) Ensure that Department-wide activities and efforts are focused towards a central direction as embodied in the national socio-economic development plans; and

(6) Perform such other appropriate functions as may be assigned by the Department or his Undersecretaries.

SECTION 12. Central Financial Management Office.—The Central Financial Management Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Supervise Department-wide activities relating to budget preparation and management, department accounting, and internal audit;

(2) Perform such other appropriate functions as may be assigned by the Department or his Secretary or his Undersecretaries.

SECTION 13. Public Information and Assistance Office.—The Public Information and Assistance Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Provide policy direction and guidance to the operating Bureaus and Offices of the Department for the proper dissemination of appropriate information or Department- wide programs, operations and activities;

(2) Provide the operating Bureaus and Offices with the general framework for rendering direct assistance to the general public;

(3) Receive complaints and grievances from the general public; prepare referrals to concerned Bureaus and Offices and monitor responses or actions taken; and

(4) Perform such other appropriate functions as may be assigned by the Secretary or Undersecretary for Policy Development and Management Service.

SECTION 14. Legal Office.—The Legal Office shall have the following functions:

(1) Prepare draft opinions or rulings for the signature of the Department Secretary or his Undersecretaries on matters elevated to it by the Bureaus and Offices of the Department;

(2) Conduct legal researches on all matters referred to it by the Secretary or his Undersecretaries; and

(3) Perform such other appropriate functions as may be assigned by the Secretary or his Undersecretaries.

SECTION 15. Regional Coordination Office.—The function of the Regional Coordination Office is to coordinate the operations of the Regional Offices.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987