MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 97

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGICAL INFORMATION PILOT SYSTEM (TIPS), AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development (UNFSSTD) has established a Technological Information Pilot System (TIPS), a global network designed to promote technology transfer, and technical and economic cooperation among developing countries;

WHEREAS, the participation of the Philippines in the global information system necessitates the creation of an Inter-Agency Committee;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on Technological Information Pilot System (TIPS), otherwise known as the government counterpart agency, to be composed of the following members:

The members may designate their duly authorized representatives to any meeting of the government counterpart agency.

The government counterpart agency shall designate technical personnel from other government ministries or agencies to provide technical assistance to it in the performance of its functions.

SECTION 2. The government counterpart agency shall discharge the following functions:

(a) Coordinate with the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development (UNFSSTD)/United National Development Programme (UNDP) on all Technological Information Pilot System (TIPS) matters;

(b) Monitor and oversee all Technological Information Pilot System (TIPS) activities in the Philippines;

(c) Formulate guidelines on the effective and efficient implementation of Technological Information Pilot System in the Philippines, taking into consideration the national economic and development policies of the government; and

(d) Perform such other functions related to any Technological Information Pilot System (TIPS) matter or activity as may be authorized by the President.

SECTION 3. The government counterpart agency shall be assisted by a Secretariat to be headed by an Executive Director appointed by the Chairman thereof. The Executive Director shall administer the funds of the Committee on the Technological Information Pilot System in accordance with existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations. The Secretariat may be staffed from the personnel on part-time or full-time detail of the member agencies of the Committee on Technological Information Pilot System and from other agencies under taking related work.

SECTION 4. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and/or the National Science and Technology Authority shall provide the necessary funds for the government counterpart agency.

SECTION 5. The Inter-Agency Committee on Technological Information Pilot System shall issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 6. All laws, orders, issuances and rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 7. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.