MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 82

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE FOR THE URBAN POOR

WHEREAS, to focus the government efforts to alleviate the plight of the urban poor, there is a need to establish a government agency which shall serve as a direct link of the urban poor to the government in policy formulation and program implementation addressed to their needs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. There is hereby created the Presidential Committee for the Urban Poor under the Office of the President. It shall be headed by a Chairman and four (4) members, to be appointed by the President of the Philippines. The Chairman and the members shall serve at the pleasure of the President.

SECTION 2. The Presidential Committee for the Urban Poor shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

(a) To coordinate the speedy implementation of government policies and programs for the urban poor;

(b) To set up a consultative mechanism which shall provide a forum for continuing dialogue between the government and the urban poor on the proper planning and evaluation of programs and projects affecting them;

(c To accredit legitimate urban poor organizations for purposes of representation in the formulation of recommendations to the President;

(d) To review existing legislation, policies and programs of the government relating to the Urban Poor, in consultation with the latter, and recommend appropriate actions thereon to the President;

(e) To evaluate post and on-going shelter-related projects of the government in squatter and resettlement areas in consultation with beneficiary communities, and recommend appropriate action thereon to the President;

(f) To help coordinate the various activities and services being rendered by different government organizations and non-government organizations for the Urban Poor;

(g) To plan and monitor programs and projects for the development of urban poor communities in coordination with agencies involved;

(h) To request the assistance of any ministry, bureau, office or agency in the performance of its functions;

(i) To facilitate the funding of urban poor programs and projects both from foreign and domestic fund sources; and

(j) To perform such other functions as may be authorized by the President of the Philippines.

SECTION 3. The Chairman shall be the chief executive officer of the Presidential Committee for the Urban Poor. The Chairman shall exercise the following functions and duties:

(a) To direct and supervise the operations and the internal affairs of the Committee;

(b) To establish the organizational structure and the staffing pattern of the Committee;

To appoint the necessary administrative and subordinate personnel;

To suspend, dismiss or otherwise discipline for cause any employee, and/or to approve or disapprove the appointment, transfer or detail of employees;

To approve and submit the annual and supplemental budgets of the Committee; and

To perform such other functions as may be authorized by the President.

SECTION 4. To carry out the provisions of this Executive Order, the initial sum of FIVE MILLION PESOS (P5,000,000.00) or so much thereof as may be necessary is hereby authorized to be released from the National Treasury from any fund not otherwise appropriated, and thereafter, such amount necessary for the operations of the Presidential Committee for the Urban Poor shall be included in the annual General Appropriations Act.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and eighty-six.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1986). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.