The Department Proper

SECTION 6. Composition.—The Department Proper shall be composed of the Office of the Secretary, the Offices of the Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries, and the Public Affairs Office, Special Concerns Office, and the Pollution Adjudication Board.

SECTION 7. Office of the Secretary.—The Office of the Secretary shall consist of the Secretary and his immediate staff.

SECTION 8. The Secretary.—The Secretary shall:

(1) Advise the President on the promulgation of rules, regulations and other issuances relative to the conservation, management, development and proper use of the country’s natural resources;

(2) Establish policies and standards for the efficient and effective operations of the Department in accordance with the programs of the government;

(3) Promulgate rules, regulations and other issuances necessary in carrying out the Department’s mandate, objectives, policies, plans, programs and projects.

(4) Exercise supervision and control over all functions and activities of the Department;

(5) Delegate authority for the performance of any administrative or substantive function to subordinate officials of the Department; and

(6) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the President.

SECTION 9. Undersecretaries.—The Secretary shall be assisted by five (5) Undersecretaries upon the recommendation of the Secretary. The Secretary is hereby authorized to delineate, assign and/or reassign the respective functional areas of responsibility of each Undersecretary, Provided, That such responsibility shall be with respect to the mandate and objectives of the Department; and Provided, further, That no Undersecretary shall be assigned primarily administrative responsibilities. Within his functional area of responsibility, an Undersecretary shall have the following functions:

(1) Advise the Secretary in the promulgation of Department orders, administrative orders and other issuances, with respect to his area of responsibility;

(2) Exercise supervision and control over the offices, services, operating units and officers and employees under his responsibility;

(3) Promulgate rules and regulations, consistent with Department policies, that will efficiently and effectively govern the activities of units under his responsibility;

(4) Coordinate the functions and activities of the units under his responsibility with those of other units under the responsibility of other Undersecretaries;

(5) Exercise such authority on substantive and administrative matters related to the functions and activities of units under his responsibility to the extent granted by the Secretary through administrative issuances; and

(6) Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the Secretary.

SECTION 10. Assistant Secretaries.—The Secretary and the Undersecretaries shall, in the formulation, management and implementation of natural resources laws, policies, plans, and programs and projects, also be assisted by seven (7) Assistant Secretaries who shall be responsible for the following: one (1) for Policy and Planning Studies, one (1) for Foreign-Assisted and Special Projects, one (1) for Field Operations in Luzon, one (1) for Field Operations in the Visayas, and one (1) for Field Operations in Mindanao, one (1) for Legal Affairs, and one (1) for Management Services.

SECTION 11. Public Affairs Office.—The Public Affairs Office, under the Office of the Secretary, shall be headed by a Director to be assisted by an Assistant Director, and shall serve as the public information arm of the Department. It shall be responsible for disseminating information on natural resources development policies, plans, programs and projects and respond to public queries related to the development and conservation of natural resources.

SECTION 12. Special Concerns Office.—The Special Concerns Office, also under the Office of the Secretary, shall be headed by a Director to be assisted by an Assistant Director, and shall be responsible for handling priority areas or subjects identified by the Secretary which necessitate special and immediate attention.

SECTION 13. Pollution Adjudication Board.—The Pollution Adjudication Board, under the Office of the Secretary, shall be composed of the Secretary as Chairman, two Undersecretaries as may be designated by the Secretary, the Director of Environmental Management, and three others to be designated by the Secretary as members. The Board shall assume the powers and functions of the Commission/Commissioners of the National Pollution Control Commission with respect to the adjudication of pollution cases under Republic Act 3931 and Presidential Decree 984, particularly with respect to Section 6 letters (e), (f), (g), (j), (k) and (p) of P.D. 984. The Environmental Management Bureau shall serve as the Secretariat of the Board. These powers and functions may be delegated to the regional officers of the Department in accordance with rules and regulations to be promulgated by the Board.

Executive Order No. 292 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OF 1987