MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 412

INSTITUTIONALIZING THE ENERGY CONSERVATION INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, it is the policy thrust of the government to conserve energy through efficient and judicious utilization thereof particularly in times of critical power situation either nationwide or in some areas in the country;

WHEREAS, there is a need for continuing efforts to promote and adopt energy conservation measures through a coordinative, consultative and mutually-supportive implementation mechanism;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Energy Conservation Inter-Agency Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee, is hereby established as a regular and permanent body with the Executive Director of the Office of Energy Affairs  as Chairman and one representative each of the following agencies, corporations and entities as members;

1. Manila Electric Company 2. National Electrification Administration 3. Philippine Electric Plants Owners Association 4. National Power Corporation 5. Joint Government and Private Sector Initiatives Task Force on Power 6. Department of Science and Technology 7. Department of Trade and Industry 8. Metro Manila Authority 9. Philippine Information Agency

SECTION 2. The Committee shall be tasked to perform the following functions:

(1) To continue monitoring energy consumption in both the public and private sectors for the purposes of issuing, from time to time, guidelines to achieve energy savings;

(2) To undertake energy conservation information dissemination campaigns to create greater awareness on energy conservation measures;

(3) To perform such other tasks that may be necessary and incidental to the implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 3. The Office of Energy Affairs in coordination with the members of the committee shall promulgate the necessary implementing guidelines for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Executive Order.

SECTION 4. The Committee through the Office of the Energy Affairs is hereby authorized to call on and mobilize any government agency and instrumentality including local government units and government owned or controlled corporations for support and assistance in the implementation of this Executive Order.

SECTION 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of July, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CATALINO MACARAIG, JR. Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1990). [Executive Order Nos. : 391 – 522]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.