MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 120-A

FURTHER STRENGTHENING THE OPERATION OF THE PHILIPPINE CONVENTION BUREAU, RENAMING THE BUREAU AS THE PHILIPPINE CONVENTION AND VISITORS CORPORATION THEREBY AMENDING PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 1448, SERIES OF 1978, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

WHEREAS, the Philippine Convention Bureau, herein renamed as the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation has to be strengthened further in order to be a more efficient and effective implementing arm of the Department of Tourism, in a manner consistent with Executive Order No. 120, Series of 1987.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, CORAZON C. AQUINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the sovereign will of the Filipino people and the Constitution, do hereby order and direct:

Section 1. Change of Name . The Philippine Convention Bureau is hereby renamed the Philippine Convention and Visitors Corporation.

Section 2. General Objectives . The general objectives of the Corporation shall be those stated in Section 2 of Presidential Decree No. 1448, Series of 1978.

Section 3. Membership . The Corporation shall be open for membership to entities, groups and individuals with direct and indirect economic, social or cultural interest in travel trade, congresses and conventions.

Section 4. Board of Trustees . There shall be a policy making body to be known as the Board of Trustees composed of:

1. The Secretary of Tourism, Chairman;

2. The Head of Office, United Nations and International Organization, Department of Foreign Affairs, Member;

3. The Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines or his duly authorized representative, Member;

4. The Representative of the paying members belonging to the Travel Trade Sector, Member;

5. The Representative of the paying members belonging to the Congresses and Conventions Sector, Member;

6. The President of the Philippine Airlines, Inc. or his duly authorized representative, Member;

7. The Undersecretary for Planning, Product Development and Coordination, Department of Tourism, Member;

8. The Undersecretary for Tourism Services and Regional Offices, Department of Tourism, Member;

9. The Undersecretary for Tourism Promotions, Department of Tourism, Member; and

10. The General Manager, Philippine Tourism Authority, Member.

The Chairman of the Board of Trustee shall be assisted by a Vice Chairman who shall be elected from among the members of the Board and who upon the incapacity or absence of the Chairman, act in his stead. The Chief Executive officer of the Corporation shall sit in the Board as an ex officio Member.

The Board shall appoint a corporate Secretary who shall be responsible for the efficient planning and organization of its activities.

The Board of Trustees shall, in addition to the powers and duties enumerated in Section 7 of Presidential Decree No. 1448, Series of 1978, be involved in the planning, marketing and facilitation of the travel trade, international congresses and convention.

Section 5. Terms of Office . The term of the Board Members representing the private sector shall be two years.

The terms of all the members from the government sector shall be co-terminus with their tenures of office in their respective government positions.

Section 6. Compensation of the Board of Trustees . Members of the Board of Trustee shall not receive compensation in any form for their services as such, except per diem to be determined by the Board for every actual attendance in meetings.

Attendance in meetings of any Committee created by and composed of members of the Board of trustees shall be considered as attendance in Board Meetings; provided, that in regular meetings of the Board, no proxies shall be allowed.

Section 7. Executive Power . The executive power shall be vested in the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation hereinafter referred to as Executive Director, whose primary duty is to manage and supervise the operations of the Corporation, with powers as prescribed by the Board of Trustees. He shall be assisted by three (3) Deputy Executive Directors, namely, Deputy Executive Director for Travel Trade, Deputy Executive Director for Convention and Incentive Travel, and Deputy Executive Director for Corporate Affairs.

The Executive Director, and the three (3) Deputy Executive Directors shall be elected by at least eight members of the Board of Trustees.

The tenure of the Executive Director and the three (3) Deputy Executive Directors shall be fixed by the Board of Trustees.

All other appointments to all positions in the Bureau shall be approved by the Board of Trustees upon the recommendation of the Executive Director.

Section 8. Duties of the Executive Director . The Executive Director shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

1. Execute and/or administer the policies and measures approved by the Board of Trustees;

2. Direct, manage, and supervise the operations of the Corporation and be responsible for the efficient and effective conduct thereof;

3. Formulate the general work program of the Corporation;

4. Represent the Corporation in all dealings with other government offices, agencies, and private organizations whether foreign or domestic, as may be authorized by the Board of Trustees;

5. Prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees the annual budget and other supplemental budgets as exigencies demand;

6. Prepare and submit to the Board of Trustees the annual report including statements of finances covering the operations of the Corporations;

7. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as the Board of Trustees may authorize.

Section 9. Organizational Set-up . The Corporation shall have the following offices, namely, Office of the Executive Director, Office of Travel Trade, Office of Convention and Incentive Travel, Office of Corporate Affairs, and such regional and/or foreign offices as may be created under Section 13 hereof.

Section 10. Functions of the Office of Travel Trade . The Office of Travel Trade to be headed by the Deputy Executive Director for Travel Trade shall oversee all programs and activities relating to travel trade marketing. It shall initiate and support the development of sales and promotional programs to attract and encourage travellers to visit the Philippines, including advertising, publication and dissemination of pamphlets, brochures and other publicity materials, the production and distribution of audio-visual materials and participation in international travel fairs and consumer promotion activities.

Section 11. Functions of the Office of Conventions and Incentive Travel . The Office of Conventions and Incentive Travel to be headed by the Deputy Executive Director for Conventions and Incentive Travel shall plan and implement a sustained promotional campaign covering all general and specialized markets to project the country as an ideal meeting, convention and incentive travel destination through sales efforts, special projects, trade exhibits, advertising and other related marketing activities. It shall also serve as a technical arm in assisting organizers of booked conventions and incentive travel programs to ensure the efficient and effective conduct thereof.

Section 12. Functions of the Office of Corporate Affairs . The Office of Corporate Affairs to be headed by the Deputy Executive Director for Corporate Affairs shall take charge of providing the Corporation with services relating to personnel management, compensation administration, human resources development, records management, supplies and equipment procurement, maintenance service, collection and disbursement administration, legal service and shall assist the Corporation in all matters relative to budgetary, financial and management improvement matters. The Office shall also establish a continuous program of market research and data collection as well as take charge of disseminating information and providing marketing and creative services to members as well as training programs geared towards professionalizing the tourism and convention industry.

Section 13. Regional/Foreign Offices . The Board of Trustees may create regional and/or foreign offices as may be necessary to effectively implement any of the general objectives of the Corporation.

Section 14. Funds of the Corporation . Funds for the operation programs and projects of the Corporation shall be drawn from the following sources.

1. Two hundred thousand pesos (P200,000.00) annual contribution from each of the government offices represented in the Board of Trustees which shall be automatically provided in key budgetary inclusions in the General Appropriations Act, provided , That the Central Bank shall contribute five hundred thousand pesos (P500,000.00). Additionally, the national flag carrier shall, in consonance with their respective development policies, provide substantial support to the programs and activities of the Corporation;

2. An annual subsidy representing fifty percent (50%) of the annual collection of hotel room tax; provided, that the actual expenditure of this allocation shall be subject to government audit;

3. Annual membership dues from the voluntary members in accordance with rates to be established by the Board of Trustees;

4. Subsidies or grants, from any local or foreign sources, that may be received by the Corporation.

Section 15. GSIS Membership . The officers and other personnel of the Corporation shall, by virtue of this Executive Order, become compulsory members of the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) and, as such, they shall be entitled to all the benefits normally accorded to GSIS members such as retirement benefits, insurance medicare, leave and similar benefits.

Section 16. Assistance of Other Government Agencies, Offices and Instrumentalities . To accomplish any of its general objectives, the Corporation may request and secure the assistance of any government agency, office or instrumentality.

Section 17. Applicability of the Corporation Code . The provisions of the Corporation Code of the Philippines shall apply to the Corporation insofar as they are not inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this Executive Order.

Section 18. Prohibition Against Change . No change in the reorganization herein prescribed shall be valid except upon prior approval of the President for the purpose of promoting efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of public services.

Section 19. Implementing Authority of the Board of Trustees . The Board of Trustees shall issue such rules, regulations and other issuances as may be necessary to ensure the efficient and effective implementation of the provisions of this Executive Order.

Section 20. Separability . Any portion or provision of this Executive Order that may be declared unconstitutional shall not have the effect of nullifying other portions or provisions hereof as long as such remaining portions or provisions can still subsist and be given effect in their entirety.

Section 21. Repealing Clause . All laws, orders, rules, regulations, issuances or parts thereof, inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 22. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

APPROVED in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 20th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Eighty-Seven.

(Sgd.) CORAZON C. AQUINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOKER P. ARROYO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1987). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 170]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.