MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 178

CREATING A TASK FORCE TO DRAFT THE PHILIPPINE PROGRAM ON BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT

WHEREAS , the prime importance of nature’s diversity in terms of global food security, sustainable agriculture and rural development, environmental management and international commodity trade cannot be overemphasized;

WHEREAS , biological diversity not only assures humanity’s food and environmental security but also maintains the Earth’s life support system needed for the sustainable production of essentials such as food and fuel;

WHEREAS , at least forty percent of the world’s economy and eighty percent of the needs of the poor are derived from biological diversity and genetic resources;

WHEREAS , the conservation of biological diversity is a global concern;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1. Task Force . — There is hereby created a Task Force to draft the Philippine Program on Biodiversity Management, including its implementing guidelines.

Section 2. Composition . — The Task Force shall be composed of the Secretary of Agriculture as Chairman, the Secretary of Science and Technology as Vice-Chairman, and the following members: Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, Secretary of Trade and Industry, Secretary of Interior and Local Government, Chairperson of the Cooperative Development Authority, Chairman of the Philippine Council for Sustainable Development, the President of the University of the Philippines and three (3) representatives from national non-governmental organizations involved in this discipline to be appointed/designated by the President upon the recommendation of the Task Force Chairman.

Section 3. Functions . — The Task Force shall primarily draft the Philippine Program on Biodiversity Management, including its implementing guidelines. To achieve this mandate, the Task Force shall, among others:

a) Review all government programs with the end view of synchronizing them with the over-all Philippine Program on Biodiversity Management; and

b) Enlist the support of all departments, government-owned and controlled corporations, non-governmental organizations, the private sector in the drafting of the Philippine Program on Biodiversity Management.

Section 4. Secretariat . — The Department of Agriculture shall provide the technical and administrative support to the Task Force.

Section 5. Submission of Output . — The Task Force shall finish its work and submit the same to the President not later than 30 November 1993.

Section 6. Effectivity . — This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, Philippines this 27th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia