MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 184

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO INVENTORY OF ALL LANDS IN METRO MANILA AND IDENTIFY LANDS AND SITES FOR SOCIALIZED HOUSING

WHEREAS , the Urban Development and Housing Act (Republic Act 7279) directs the ” x x x local government units concerned, in coordination with the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board and with the assistance of the appropriate government agencies x x x” to “indicate the type of land use and the degree of land utilization, and other data or information” in the conduct of the inventory of lands;

WHEREAS , “after the inventory, the local government units, in coordination with the National Housing Authority, the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board, the National Mapping Resource Information Authority, and the Land Management Bureau, shall identify lands for socialized housing and resettlement areas x x x”;

WHEREAS , pursuant to Section 40 of the same Act, the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) shall, through the key housing agencies, provide local government units with necessary support such as formulation of standards and guidelines as well as providing technical support in the preparation of town and land use plans;

WHEREAS , it is imperative that the identification of lands and sites for socialized housing be fast tracked because of the proliferation of squatters in Metro Manila;

IN VIEW of the foregoing premises, the following are hereby ordered:

Section 1. There is hereby created a Committee composed of the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Committee as Chairman and the following as members: Department of Public Works and Highways, Department of Transportation and Communications, Department of Agrarian Reform, Department of Environment and Natural Resources, Department of Health, Department of Education, Culture and Sports, Department of Trade and Industry, and the Metropolitan Manila Authority.

Section 2. Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7279 as well as the Guidelines for the Inventory of Lands and Identification of Sites for Socialized Housing, the Committee shall conduct an inventory of all lands in Metro Manila and identify lands and sites suitable for socialized housing, such as but not limited to the idle government lands identified by the Ad-hoc Committee on the Disposition of Idle Properties of the Philippine Government Located in the Philippines under Administrative Order No. 9 dated 11 September 1992.

Section 3. The Committee shall finish its task on or before 30 November 1993.

Section 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 19 November 1993

Source: CDAsia