MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 64

DIRECTING THE IMMEDIATE IMPLEMENTATION OF ENERGY CONSERVATION MEASURES IN THE GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS , it is imperative that continuing efforts in conserving electricity be pursued more aggressively to complement the government’s efforts in assuring adequate power supply;

WHEREAS , specific measures have to be adopted to cushion the effects of the power shortage;

WHEREAS , there is a compelling need for the government to take the lead in promoting the judicious conservation and efficient utilization of energy resources;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby mandate compliance to the following orders:

SECTION 1. The Office of Energy Affairs, in coordination with the Office of the President, shall institute a more vigorous electricity conservation campaign.

SEC. 2. Agencies with their own power generators are encouraged to use them during hours of peak demand (10-11 A.M.; 1:30-2:30 P.M.; 6-7 P.M.) in the Luzon Grid.

SEC. 3. All government department, agencies, offices, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, local government units and other instrumentalities shall adopt additional measures to reduce their electricity consumption by 10% based on their December 1991 consumption.

SEC. 4. The Department of Education, Culture and Sports shall develop educational packages on energy conservation for introduction of the subject matter in the elementary, secondary and college levels.

SEC. 5. The Energy Conservation Inter-Agency Committee (ECIAC) created under Executive Order No. 412 shall undertake an extensive promotion campaign to further enhance public awareness on the need for energy conservation and provide greater sense of involvement in addressing the power problem.

SEC. 6. The Office of Energy Affairs shall orchestrate, coordinate and monitor the implementation of this order, including the submission of quarterly report on agency compliance and savings generated.

SEC. 7. All government agencies are hereby directed to assign an energy conservation officer who will be responsible for the quarterly reporting of the agencies’ activities on energy conservation and its monthly electric consumption.

SEC. 8. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila this 25 day of November, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

By the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia