MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 405

PROVIDING POLICIES AND MEASURES TO FURTHER REGULATE THE ISSUANCE AND USE OF COMMEMORATIVE PLATES

WHEREAS, the issuance and use of commemorative car plates in the country are allowed by the government to promote the observance and/or commemoration of international and national events, both past and present, which have direct and vital impact on national life;

WHEREAS, there is a need to regulate the issuance and use of commemorative car plates to ensure the integrity of the registration system for motor vehicles operating in the country and thereby enhance public safety and security, in particular for the riding and motoring public;

WHEREAS, there is a need to adopt well-defined policies and measures to ensure that the use of commemorative car plates is confined to the purpose for which it was issued.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the strict observance of the herein policies and measures on the issuance and use of commemorative car plates;

SECTION 1. General Policy. The issuance and use of commemorative car plates shall be limited to events which are of national, international and/or historical significance as defined in the herein attached Annex A.

SEC. 2. Authority to issue Commemorative Car Plate. The use of commemorative car plates in the country shall have the prior written approval of the Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), upon the recommendation of the Land Transportation Office (LTO) and concerned government Department/Agencies covering the events requiring the plates, including the Department of Foreign Affairs for international events and the National Historical Institute for historical events.

SEC. 3. Limitations . The issuance and use of the commemorative plates shall have the following limitations:

a. Only the lead agency, committee and/or group duly authorized by the DOTC Secretary for the purpose, may issue commemorative car plates. Application for the issuance of commemorative car plates shall include the total number of plates to be issued.

b. The display period for any commemorative car plate shall not be more than six (6) months from its approval by the DOTC Secretary. Such expiry date shall be prominently indicated in the plate design. Only one commemorative plate may be issued per motor vehicle which shall be non-transferable.

c. The commemorative plate shall not be used in place of the regular car plate. As such, the display of the latter in the motor vehicle shall be maintained in the space provided for the purpose even during the period of use of a commemorative plate.

SEC. 4. Penalties. In line with Section 13 (e) of E.O. 125, the DOTC, through the LTO shall review and increase to the extent allowed by law, the penalties imposed on any violation of the above guidelines on the issuance and use of commemorative plates. The new penalty rates shall be properly issued and publicly disseminated by the LTO prior to implementation.

SEC. 5. Monitoring . The DOTC, through the LTO, shall strictly monitor the issuance and use of commemorative plates. In this regard, it may issue implementing guidelines based on the above policies and measures, and require the prompt submission by the concerned agencies, committees or groups of the list of individual holders and/or users of the commemorative plate.

SEC. 6. Reporting. The LTO, through the DOTC, shall submit regular reports to the Office of the President on the implementation of the above policies and measures.

SEC. 7. Repealing Clause . All orders, rules and regulations, or parts thereof which are inconsistent with this order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4 th day of November in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Reference: Annex A

Source: CDAsia