MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 399

DIRECTING THE OPERATIONALIZATION OF THE PHILIPPINE AGENDA 21 AND MONITORING ITS IMPLEMENTATION

Whereas, Article 2, Section 16 of the Constitution mandates as a policy of the State the protection and advancement of the right of the people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature;

Whereas, the government adheres to the sustainable development principles embodied in the Rio Declaration and adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992, and to which the Philippines is a signatory;

Whereas, the Philippine Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD), created by virtue of Executive Order No. 15 (Series of 1992) is mandated to coordinate the formulation of the Philippine Agenda 21;

Whereas, the Philippine Agenda 21 was formulated after an extensive and intensive process of coordination, cooperation, counterparting and consensus-building among the various stakeholders of society;

Whereas, the operationalization of the Philippine Agenda 21 shall provide the overall direction and serve as an enabling environment in achieving sustainable development;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Adoption and Operationalization of the Philippine Agenda 21. – The Philippine Agenda 21, as the national action agenda for sustainable development, is hereby adopted.

SEC. 2. Overall Administration. – The Philippine Council for Sustainable Development shall oversee and monitor the operationalization of the Philippine Agenda 21. In this regard, the Council shall provide the coordinating and monitoring mechanisms for its implementation. For this purpose, it shall mobilize coordinating bodies including the Regional Development Councils (RDCs) and the local councils for sustainable development.

SEC. 3. Collaborating Agencies. – All government agencies, departments and instrumentalities are directed to adopt and translate the principles and action agenda contained in the Philippine Agenda 21 in their respective workplans, programs and projects and report on their progress and impacts to the PCSD.

SEC. 4. Role of the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) and the Local Government Units (LGUs). – The DILG is tasked to coordinate and monitor the localization of the Philippine Agenda 21 with the LGUs. The LGUs, in coordination with the local business and civil society, shall implement the Philippine Agenda 21 through the integration of sustainable development concerns in their respective plans, programs and projects and the formulation of their respective Local Agenda 21, where appropriate.

SEC. 5. Role of the Civil Society, Labor and Business Sectors. – The PCSD shall coordinate with civil society, labor and business sectors in operationalizing Philippine Agenda 21. Major stakeholders from these sectors are thereby enjoined to adopt and implement the principles and action agenda contained in the Philippine Agenda 21.

SEC. 6. Funding. – The PCSD, in coordination with the Department of Finance (DOF), Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), shall identify funding sources in implementing and monitoring the Philippine Agenda 21.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 26 day of Sept in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia