MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 88

CREATING A FACT FINDING COMMITTEE ON INVOLUNTARY MISSING PERSONS

WHEREAS , there are indications that since 1972, there have been involuntary disappearances of persons;

WHEREAS , the search for these missing persons have been arduous and painful; and

WHEREAS , there is a need to assist the said families and relatives of involuntary missing persons to ascertain their whereabouts.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law do hereby order:

Section 1. A Fact Finding Committee on Involuntary Missing Persons hereinafter referred to as the Committee, is hereby created to be composed of the heads or their representatives of the following government agencies/departments:

The Chairman shall determine and designate the membership of non-government organizations (NGOs) in the Committee.

Section 2. The Committee shall determine the whereabouts of the said missing persons. It shall search mass graves and conduct careful and scientific explanations of the circumstances surrounding the missing persons that will preserve the latter’s possible evidence of identity and causes of death, if necessary. The Committee shall also recommend to the President, a package of indemnification for the heirs of the missing persons, to be shouldered by the responsible agents of the State.

Section 3. Pursuant to the above purpose, the Committee shall have access to all detention camps, interrogation areas and safe houses. All relevant files should also be made available to the Committee. Moreover, it may request the assistance of other government agencies in this endeavor.

Section 4. The Committee shall make a report and provide recommendations of its findings to the President after a period of one (1) year from the effectivity of this Order.

Section 5. This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 8th day of February, 1993.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia