MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 460

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF A TASK FORCE ON MT. DIWALWAL

WHEREAS, the State promotes the rational, exploration, development, utilization and conservation of mineral resources for their sustainable development;

WHEREAS, Mt. Diwalwal area in Monkayo, Davao del Norte is considered to have gold deposits that may be developed into one of the country’s major industries;

WHEREAS, the proliferation of mining and mining-related activities in Mt. Diwalwal area has caused the environmental degradation of the area, eroded the viability of the local small-scale miners, and affected the health and safety of the local communities;

WHEREAS, there is a need to rationalize the mining activities in Mt. Diwalwal area, Monkayo, Davao del Norte to promote the rational exploration, development, utilization and conservation of its gold deposits, and to protect the environmental and ecological sustainability of the area;

WHEREAS, there is a need to establish a mechanism at the regional level to coordinate the formulation and implementation of the government and private sector initiatives on the rationalization of these mining activities and on the environmental and ecological protection of the area from the adverse effects of said activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. Creation of a Task Force on Mt. Diwalwal. There is hereby created a Task Force on Mt. Diwalwal to serve as the coordinating mechanism at the regional level for the rationalization of mining and mining-related activities in Mt. Diwalwal area, including the promotion of environmental and ecological protection of the area.

Section 2. Composition of the Task Force. The Task Force shall be based in Region XI and shall be composed of the Heads of the Offices in the Region of the following agencies and Local Government Units:

Section 3. Duties and Functions. The Task Force shall have the following duties and functions:

a. Formulate the Master Plan, in consultation with all the stake holders, particularly the small-scale miners, for the sustainable development of the mining industry in Mt. Diwalwal area consistent with the development framework of Region XI;

b. In consultation with the concerned government agencies and the private sector, formulate and coordinate the efficient implementation of an integrated Action Plan to address the immediate issues and concerns affecting the development and protection of the Mt. Diwalwal area, including the health, income, and other concerns affecting the small-scale miners therein;

c. Provide policy and program recommendations to further enhance the effective implementation of the Master Plan and Action Plan for the development of the mining industry in the Mt. Diwalwal area;

d. Provide a mechanism for the resolution of issues and concerns affecting the development of the Mt. Diwalwal area;

e. Monitor the implementation of the policies and programs on the area; and

f. Perform other functions deemed necessary by the President.

Section 4. Secretariat. The Regional Office of the Mines and Geosciences Bureau in Region XI shall serve as the Secretariat of the Task Force. As such, it shall provide technical and administrative support to the Task Force. The Task Force may also tap the assistance of other concerned agencies in the discharge of its duties and functions.

Section 5. Institutional Arrangements. The concerned national agencies shall provide policy direction in the discharge of the Task Force’s duties and functions. In line with this, the implementation of the policies and programs affecting the Mt. Diwalwal area shall be coordinated by the Task Force with the national agencies.

Section 6. Initial Output. The Task Force, within thirty (30) days from the date of this Order, shall formulate and cause the implementation of the above integrated Action Plan, which shall include, among others, the effective rationalization of mining and mining-related activities in the Mt. Diwalwal area.

Section 7. Funding. The DENR shall provide P5.0 Million from its 1997 savings to fund the initial year of operation of the Task Force. Its budgetary outlay for the succeeding years shall be included in the regular annual budget of the DENR.

Section 8. Reportorial Clause. The Task Force shall submit a monthly report to the President on the progress of its activities, including the status of the implementation of the Master Plan for the development of the mining industry in the Mt. Diwalwal area and the integrated Action Plan to address the immediate concerns affecting the area and the small-scale miners thereof.

Section 9. Effectivity. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 27th day of January in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Eight.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ALEXANDER P. AGUIRRE Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia