MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 259

REQUIRING HUMAN RIGHTS EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT, POLICE, MILITARY AND PRISON PERSONNEL

WHEREAS, there is a cooperative arrangement existing among the Commission on Human Rights, the Department of Interior and Local Government, the Department of Justice, and the Department of National Defense, vis-a-vis human rights education and training;

WHEREAS, there is a need to preserve and enhance the gains so far achieved along this line by linking the program for human rights education and training with the human resource development needs of law enforcement, police, military and prison personnel;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, do hereby order;

Section 1. The Department of Interior and Local Government, the Department of Justice and the Department of National Defense are hereby directed to include, as an integral part of the continuing education and training of their personnel, the study of human rights as conducted by the Commission on Human Rights. Said human rights education and training shall also include the various international treaties and conventions on human rights to which the Philippines is a party.

Section 2. Successful completion of the appropriate human rights education and training courses shall be required for recruitment, promotion and transfer/reassignment of personnel in these departments, with priority given to personnel directly involved in arresting, investigating and detaining functions.

Section 3. The Commission on Human Rights, in coordination and consultation with the departments and agencies concerned as well as the Civil Service Commission, shall continue to design and periodically review the appropriate human rights education and training courses.

This Order shal take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of February 1995.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia