MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 244

APPROVING AND DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WATER SUMMIT ACTION PLAN

WHEREAS, water is a basic necessity essential to human survival.

WHEREAS, water is not only basic to human activities but is necessary to sustainable economic development.

WHEREAS, water is precious commodity and thus must be conserved and rationally utilized.

WHEREAS, in the Philippines, 2600 people contract water-borne diseases daily, where 30% of household do not have access to potable water, and where 50% of potential irrigable areas still needs to be serviced.

WHEREAS, there is still a need for more investments by all sectors, both government and private, on safe water and sanitation.

WHEREAS, there is an urgent need to properly manage the utilization of the nation’s water resources to ensure that human and economic needs are provided for in a sustainable way.

WHEREAS, there are numerous water agencies undertaking and addressing inter-related water activities and concerns.

WHEREAS, there is a need to further integrate and coordinate all these water-related efforts towards a more focused approach to water resources management.

WHEREAS, all waters belong to the State and as such, its utilization, exploitation, development, conservation and protection is subject to the control and regulation of Government.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The Water Summit Action Plan, hereto attached as “Annex A” is hereby approved.

Section 2. Cabinet Cluster G (Water Resource Management Cluster), as constituted under Memorandum Order No. 243 dated 9 December 1994, is hereby designated as the lead coordinator for the overall implementation of the Water Summit Action Plan.

Section 3. All concerned agencies shall submit their specific workplans including the timetable to implement the Water Summit Agreements to Cabinet Cluster G on or before 20 December 1994. An integrated plan of action on the agreements of the Water Summit shall be submitted by Cluster G to the Office of the President by 28 December 1994.

Regular monthly reports shall also be submitted by Cabinet Cluster G to the Office of the President on the activities and actions taken thereon.

Section 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 9th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Reference: Annex A

Source: CDAsia