MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 139

DESIGNATING THE OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED TO ACT ON CERTAIN MATTERS AND SIGN DOCUMENTS “BY AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT”

In addition to the Executive Secretary, the following senior officials of the Office of the President are hereby authorized to act on the following matters and sign the corresponding documents “By authority of the President”:

I. Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

1. Appointments of OP personnel below the rank of Assistant Secretary:

2. Decisions on appealed cases from departments, agencies or offices; suspension, cancellation or modification of licenses, permits or other privileges;

3. All matters forming part of the duties and functions of the Executive Secretary not otherwise assigned to other officials under this Memorandum Order.

Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Administrative, personnel and finance (OP payroll, vouchers, RIVs, etc.) matters in the Executive Office;

2. Decisions on administrative investigations of employees or officials below the rank of bureau director;

3. Foreign travel of department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank;

4. Retirement papers of military and police personnel.

Deputy Executive Secretary

1. Budgetary and corporate matters as processed by the Office for Budget and Corporate Affairs, upon prior approval of the President;

2. Directives for the release of contingency and calamity funds, upon prior approval of the President.

IV. Head, Presidential Management Staff

1. Economic matters coming from departments, agencies or offices;

2. Implementation of Cabinet decisions;

3. Tax exemption of foreign donations.

V. Presidential Assistant for Political Affairs

1. Referrals or endorsements to departments, agencies or offices involving requests for assistance;

2. Administrative and technical matters coming from the Presidential Action Center and the Political Affairs Office.

VI. Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

1. Decisions on appealed cases affirming orders or actions of departments, agencies or offices;

2. Decisions on administrative investigations of employees or officials below the rank of bureau director where the penalty imposed does not involve suspension or dismissal.

VII. Assistant Executive Secretary for Legislation

1. Transmittal of certifications and other communications to Congress;

2. Matters involving preparation or review of proposed legislations.

This Memorandum Order, which amends Memorandum Order No. 73 dated 4 January 1993 and Memorandum Order No. 128 dated 2 May 1993, shall take effect on 29 June 1993.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of June in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source: CDAsia