Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 41

DELINEATING THE FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SENIOR DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND THE DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARY

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Executive Secretary under Executive Order No. 483, dated 30 September 1991, the functions and responsibilities of the Deputy Executive Secretaries are herein delineated and defined as follows:

SECTION 1. General Functions

The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary and the Deputy Executive Secretary shall:

A. directly assist the Executive Secretary in the performance of his functions as provided for in Section 27, Sub-Chapter B, Chapter 9, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987;

B. perform the duties of the Executive Secretary upon express designation and delegation during his absence or when the Secretary is unable to perform his duties owing to illness and/or other causes;

C. perform such other functions as the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time or as may be provided by law or any appropriate issuance or directive.

SEC. 2. Specific Functions.

A. The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA

(1) to provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans programs and projects, rules and regulations as they relate to the general management and administration of the Office of the President;

(2) to exercise administrative supervision, in behalf of the Executive Secretary, over the various units in the Office of the President;

(3) to oversee, in behalf of the Executive Secretary, the operational activities of the offices attached to the Office of the President, and ensure that these offices effectively and efficiently perform their duties and functions in accordance with their respective mandates;

(4) to provide legal advice and assistance, as may be required, to the Executive Secretary, on decisions requiring Presidential action as well as on matters pertaining to legislation; and

(5) to assist the Executive Secretary in providing over-all coordination in the Office of the President.

B. The Deputy Executive Secretary LUIS C. LIWANAG II

(1) to provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary on matters pertaining to request for the release of contingency; calamity, President’s Social Funds, etc.;

(2) to assist the Executive Secretary in the evaluation of plans and programs, rules and regulations concerning corporate and budgetary matters;

(3) to provide advice, as may be required, to the Executive Secretary concerning request for approval of special budget; and

(4) to assist the Executive Secretary in providing staff support to the President on economic matters.

SEC. 3. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

Manila, 22 September 1992

Source: CDAsia