MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 28

PRESCRIBING THE OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS THAT MAY BE SIGNED BY THE SENIOR DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARY AND THE DEPUTY EXECUTIVE SECRETARY “BY AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT”

The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary and the Deputy Executive Secretary are hereby empowered to sign the following official papers “By authority of the President,” as follows:

I. The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary:

1. Appointments of OP personnel below the rank of Assistant Secretary.

2. Foreign travel authority of department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank.

3. Transmittal and/or implementation of Presidential directives and instructions.

4. Decision on appealed cases, administrative investigations, suspension/cancellation of licenses, etc., coming from line departments and other regulatory agencies.

5. Attestation of Presidential issuances, such as executive orders, proclamations, administrative orders, etc.

6. Transmittal of Presidential appointments and certification of administration bills.

7. Implementation of decisions of the Cabinet.

8. Issuance of Memorandum Orders, special orders and memorandum circulars.

9. Technical and economic matters as processed and/or submitted by PMS.

10. Matters pertaining to the supervision of the Executive Office and the internal management of the Office of the President.

11. Other matters as may be delegated or authorized by the President from time to time.

II. The Deputy Executive Secretary:

1. Directives for the release of contingency, calamity, President’s Social Funds, etc., as cleared and/or approved by the President.

2. Budgetary and corporate matters as processed by the Office for Budget and Corporate Affairs, and duly cleared and/or approved by the President.

3. Other matters as may be delegated by the President from time to time.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately and shall continue to be effective unless revoked, amended or modified.

In the interest of efficiency and speedy disposition of paperwork in the Office of the President, the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may call upon any of the Assistant Executive Secretaries to act upon or decide those matters which, in his opinion, can best be expeditiously disposed of at their level and which need not detract his attention from more pressing and urgent official concerns. In such cases, the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary will prescribe the guidelines and limitations of the signing authority.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of August in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia