Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 146

Pursuant to the authority vested in the Executive Secretary under Memorandum Order No. 143 dated 7 July 1993, the functions and responsibilities of the Deputy Executive Secretaries are herein delineated and defined as follows:

SEC. 1. General Functions of the Deputy Executive Secretaries.

The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary and the Deputy Executive Secretary shall:

A. Directly assist the Executive Secretary in the performance of his functions as provided in Section 27, Sub-Chapter B, Chapter 9, Book III of the Administrative Code of 1987.

B. Perform the duties of the Executive Secretary upon express designation and delegation during his absence or when the Executive Secretary is unable to perform his duties owing to illness and/or other causes.

C. Perform such other functions as the Executive Secretary may assign from time to time or as may be provided by law or any appropriate issuance or directive.

SEC. 2. Specific Functions of Senior Deputy Executive Secretary.

A. The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary shall:

Provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects, rules and regulations as they relate to the general government administration;

2. Assist the Executive Secretary in overseeing the operational activities of the offices attached to the Office of the President, and ensure that these offices effectively and efficiently perform their duties and functions in accordance with their respective mandates;

3. Provide legal advice, as may be required, to the Executive Secretary, on decisions requiring Presidential Action as well as on matters pertaining to legislation;

4. Provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary in the formulation and implementation of policies, plans, programs and projects, rules and regulations as they relate to the general management and administration of the Office of the President;

5. Exercise administrative supervision, in behalf of the Executive Secretary, over the various units in the Office of the President Proper; and

6. Assist the Executive Secretary in providing overall coordination in the Office of the President.

B. In the performance of his functions, the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to act on the following matters and sign the corresponding documents (“By authority of the President”, in proper cases).

1. Decisions on administrative investigations of employees and officials below the rank of bureau director;

2. Decisions on appealed case affirming orders or actions of departments, agencies or offices;

3. Transmittal of certifications and other communications to Congress;

4. Matters involving preparation or review of proposed legislations;

5. Administrative, personnel and finance (OP Payroll, vouchers, RIVs, etc.) matters in the Executive Office;

6. Foreign travel of department secretaries, undersecretaries, assistant secretaries and other officials of equivalent rank; and

7. Retirement papers of military and police personnel.

C. The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary shall supervise the functions of the Assistant Executive Secretaries.

The Senior Deputy Executive Secretary may recommend to the Executive Secretary the delegation to the Assistant Executive Secretaries of authority on matters which, in his opinion, can best be expeditiously acted upon, decided disposed of at their level, indicating the guidelines and limitations of their signing authority.

SEC. 3. Specific Functions of Deputy Executive Secretary.

A. The Deputy Executive Secretary shall:

1. Provide advice and assistance to the Executive Secretary on matters pertaining to request for the release of contingency, calamity, President’s Social Funds, etc.;

2. Assist the Executive Secretary in the evaluation of plans and programs, rules and regulations concerning corporate and budgetary matters;

3. Provide advice, as may be required, to the Executive Secretary concerning request for approval of special budget; and

4. Assist the Executive Secretary in providing staff support to the President on economic matters.

In the performance of his functions, the Deputy Executive Secretary is hereby authorized to act on the following documents (“By authority of the President”, in proper cases):

1. Budgetary and corporate matters as processed by the Office for Budget and Corporate Affairs, upon prior approval of the President; and

2. Directives for the release of contingency and calamity funds, upon prior approval of the President.

SEC. 4. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 13, 1993

Source: CDAsia