MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 181

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE “EMPLOYMENT GENERATION THROUGH COUNTRYSIDE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM”

WHEREAS, to attain the vision of economic recovery as articulated in the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan (Philippines 2000), there is a need to address the unemployment and underemployment problems of the country particularly in the rural areas;

WHEREAS, with the creation of the Presidential Council for Countryside Development (PCCD), the Presidential Commission to Fight Poverty (PCFP), and the Philippine Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD), the President laid down the Government’s policy framework and strategy thrusts to confront these problems;

WHEREAS, there is a need to sustain the efforts of Pump-priming the economy as enunciated in Memorandum Order No. 77, to further stimulate the economy, ensure a sustained economic recovery and create employment opportunities;

WHEREAS, as a strategy to generate employment, it is necessary to develop rural economic enterprises and to promote the adoption of people-oriented “Labor Based/Equipment Supported” appropriate technology in countryside development;

WHEREAS, the Cabinet, during its meeting on 2 November 1993, approved and adopted the “Employment Generation Through Countryside Development Program” which is designed to generate about two (2) million jobs nationwide in three years (1994-1996) through the implementation of various countryside development projects and activities.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in my by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Creation of an Inter-Agency Steering Committee for the “Employment Generation Through Countryside Development Program . There is hereby created an Ad-hoc committee which shall be called the Inter-Agency Committee for the “Employment Generation Through Countryside Development Program” hereinafter referred to as the Committee.

SEC. 2. Composition . The Committee shall be composed of the following:

SEC. 3. Functions . The Committee shall perform the following functions:

a. Set policy directions and formulate implementing guidelines;

b. Coordinate and monitor the implementation of projects and activities of various participating agencies both national and local;

c. Identify and address the problems and bottlenecks affecting the implementation of the Program;

d. Regularly conduct Program review and evaluation; and,

e. Regularly report to the President the status of Program implementation.

SEC. 4. Technical and Secretariat Support . The Department of Interior and Local Government shall coordinate the provision of technical and secretariat support to the Committee. The Committee may, whenever necessary, call upon any department, agency or instrumentality of the government for assistance.

SEC. 5. Effectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE , in the City of Manila, this 9th day of November, in the year of our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia