MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 267

CONSTITUTING AN AD HOC INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE FOR THE CONVERSION OF THE PHILIPPINE REFUGEE PROCESSING CENTER COMPLEX

WHEREAS, the Philippine Refugee Processing Center and the Regional Transit Center in Morong, Bataan, and the Philippine sit Center in Pasay City (hereinafter collectively referred PRPC Complex) were established, upon sponsorship by the community, as part of the Philippine contribution towards landing a lasting solution to the Indochinese refugees problem in the region;

WHEREAS, in view of the significantly decreased population of refugees in the PRPC Complex, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which exclusively funds the operations and maintenance thereof, has programmed the closure of the PRPC Complex within the year at the latest;

WHEREAS, the Agreements entered into by the Philippine Government with the UNCR on the establishment of the PRPC Complex uniformly provide that the facilities constituting the PRPC Complex will be turned over and shall become the property of the Philippine Government to be used for social, economic, cultural and humanitarian purposes, once they are no longer required for the refugee program;

WHEREAS, aside from UNHCR-funded facilities, there are also other properties existing in the PRPC Complex owned by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and international agencies which may be transferred to the Philippine Government;

WHEREAS, there is a need to draw up a comprehensive conversion plan for the PRPC Complex in preparation for the forthcoming phasing out of the refugee program therein and the eventual turn over by the UNHCR, and probably by the NGOs and international agencies, as well, of their respective assets in the PRPC Complex to the Philippine Government; and

WHEREAS, there is also a need to ensure that the physical assets in the PRPC Complex be preserved and maintained pending the drawing up, Approval and implementation of a conversion plan.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Composition . – There is hereby constituted an ad hoc inter-agency committee to oversee the Conversion of the PRPC Complex Committee) to be composed of the Secretary of the Interior and Local Government as Chairman, and the following as members:

The government officials hereinabove enumerated shall serve in an “ ex-officio ” capacity and may be represented by a duly designated representative. The Presidential Management Staff shall provide technical and administrative support to the Committee.

Section 2. Functions . – The Committee shall recommend to the President measures to enhance the successful conversion and development of the PRPC Complex. The Committee shall be under the Office of the President and shall be tasked to perform the following functions:

a. to immediately make a comprehensive inventory of all the properties of the PRPC Complex and take possession of all the assets turned over to the government;

b. to negotiate the acquisition of assets from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other government purposes;

c. to recommend a process for the phasing in of interim measures, including assistance to displaced personnel of the PRPC Complex;

d. to preserve, secure, and maintain the PRPC Complex and convert it to other productive uses until it is turned over permanently to another agency of the government pursuant to the conversion plan;

e. to consult and coordinate with the appropriate government agencies, including affected local government units, concerning the conversion and development of the PRPC Complex;

f. to submit to the President within six (6) months its report and recommendations for the conversion, disposition or development of the PRPC Complex.

Section 3. Departments and Agencies . – The Committee is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality or subdivision of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in discharging its functions.

Section 4. Effectivity . – This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7th day of March in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office