Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 251

REQUIRING STRICT ENFORCEMENT OF THE CIVIL SERVICE AND OFFICE RULES ON PUNCTUALITY AND ATTENDANCE

All rules and regulations on office attendance, e.g. tardiness and habitual absenteeism, embodied in memoranda and orders previously issued by this Office are hereby reiterated for strict compliance. Observance of the following shall be given particular emphasis:

1. Employees of this Office shall not leave their places of assignment during office hours unless they are granted permission to do so by their respective office heads or his/her assistant. All primary units must maintain locator boards conspicuously displayed near the entrance of their rooms. Absentees or employees who leave their offices with permission, shall be properly indicated (Memorandum Order No. 176, dated November 13, 1969).

2. No employee of this Office shall punch in the bundy clock time cards of other employees. Nor shall an employee allow or ask others to punch in the bundy clock in his or her time card. Punching on other employee’s time cards is an act of dishonesty, an offense punishable by outright dismissal. The employee doing the punching in the bundy clock and the owner of the time card being punched are held liable for this serious offense. (New)

Office heads who fail or neglect to see to it that rules on attendance and punctuality are strictly observed in their respective offices shall be held accountable for such failure or neglect. If a violation is committed, it is incumbent upon the office head in whose unit the offending employee belongs, to report the same to the Director, Personnel Office, immediately. Personnel management is equally the responsibility of every office head, not of the Personnel Director alone.

The Director, Personnel Office, is hereby directed to see to it that this Order is strictly implemented, and to report to the undersigned periodically on its observance.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING Acting Executive Secretary

Manila, January 12, 1995

Source: CDAsia