MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 288

DIRECTING THE FORMULATION OF THE PHILIPPINES’ AGENDA 21 AND ACTIVATING ITS FORMULATION PROCESS

WHEREAS, it is the avowed policy of the State in pursuit of its key objectives of global competitiveness and poverty alleviation, to bring about sustainable development, for the benefit of present and future generations of Filipinos;

WHEREAS, sustainable development also calls for a national commitment to social equity and the integration of environmental considerations in economic decision-making process, including the adoption of its operational framework;

WHEREAS, the Government is committed to the operationalization of the Global Program of Action for Sustainable Development (Agenda 21) which was adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992, and to which the Philippines is a signatory;

WHEREAS, the Philippine Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD), created under Executive Order No. 15 (S. 1992), is mandated to formulate the country’s Agenda 21 to pursue the objectives of the Global Program of Action on Sustainable Development and under which the national efforts of sustainable efforts shall be pursued;

WHEREAS, the formulation of the Philippines’ Agenda 21, shall involve wide and long process to allow active participation of multi-stakeholders, broad-based nationwide consultation process, cooperation and coordination of several agencies, bodies and organizations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Fidel V. Ramos, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. Activation of the Formulation Process. The process to formulate the Philippines’ Agenda 21 is hereby activated.

Section 2. Overall Administration. The Philippine Council for Sustainable Development shall, through its Executive Committee, exercise overall control of the formulation process. In this regard, it shall provide policy and operational directions on implementation of the formulation process.

Section 3. Coordinating Mechanism. The National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) provide the coordinating mechanism of the formulation process by serving as the base of its activities. For this purpose, it shall mobilize its regional offices.

Section 4. Collaborating Agencies. In administering the process, the PCSD closely coordinate with the Social Reform Council, the Presidential Council for Countryside Development, the Presidential Committee to Fight Poverty, the DENR’s Integrated Environmental Management and Sustainable Development Project, the Technical Working Groups for the Long-Term Development Plan and other concerned government agencies, private sectors and NGOs, in particular those concerned with initiatives on poverty eradication, operationalization of sustainable development, the advancement of peace process and related objectives, as collaborating agencies/groups/sectors.

Section 5. Role of other Agencies and LGUs. The Local Government Units and other Government Departments/Agencies shall facilitate consultation process with all sectors of society, and shall provide inputs in the formulation process and integrate these concerns in the respective plans and programs;

SECTION 6. Wide Public Participation. All sectors of society, public or private shall be consulted to the fullest to obtain their opinions and positions on matters related to the formulation of the country’s Agenda 21.

Section 7. Funding. The PCSD and the Department of Budget and Management shall jointly identify the funding sources for the budgetary requirements of the formulation process to ensure timely and adequate funds availability for the purpose.

Section 8. Effectivity. This Order shall take effect immediately

DONE in the City of Manila, this 5th day of July in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia