MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 264

DIRECTING THE ACCELERATION OF ACTIVITIES BEING UNDERTAKEN IN PREPARATION FOR THE PHILIPPINE CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION IN 1998

WHEREAS, the National Centennial Commission (the “Commission”) was reconstituted by virtue of Executive Order No. 128 (s. 1993) and tasked to take charge of the nationwide preparations for the National Celebration of the Philippine Centennial of the Declaration of the Philippine Independence and the inauguration of the Malolos Congress (the “Philippine Centennial Celebration”);

WHEREAS, the Commission has only a little over three years from today to undertake and complete such manifold preparations before the Philippine Centennial Celebration in 1998;

WHEREAS, in the pursuit of such endeavor, the Commission has been mandated, inter alia , to prioritize the refurbishment and formulate schemes to ensure the preservation and maintenance of historical sites and structures nationwide; and

WHEREAS, under the Commission’s Five-Year Plan of the Philippine Centennial Celebration submitted to the President, the year 1995 will focus on the commencement of rehabilitation and restoration of all historical landmarks and national shrines as well as the planning and design of the Philippine Centennial Monument.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. Considering that time is of the essence and the magnitude of the Commission’s task of rehabilitating, restoring, refurbishing, preserving and maintaining historical sites, major national shrines and other important historical sites, structures, and landmarks nationwide, particularly the physical aspects of the preparations for the Philippine Centennial Celebration, the Commission and all Departments, Offices and Agencies of Government involved therein shall ensure that there are no delays in the prosecution and timely completion of all its projects.

2. More specifically, the establishment of a Heroes Park, the installation of historical markers, and the constructions of the Philippine Centennial Monument that will serve as a major landmark of the nation are among the priority projects lined up by the Commission as reported in its Five-Year Plan. The prosecution of these projects, including the rehabilitation, restoration, refurnishment and maintenance of existing historical sites, major national shrines and other important historical sites, structures and landmarks nationwide, is a matter of urgent necessity and the Commission and all Departments, Offices and Agencies of Government shall ensure that there are no delays or negative slippage that might prejudice the Commission’s noble mission.

3. In view of the highly specialized character of these projects, the Commission shall engage the services of professional artists, craftsmen, architects, engineers, planners and the like who are equipped with special training, highly technical skills and expertise in order to ensure the highest quality workmanship. One or more national artists, as may be necessary, shall be commissioned to design the structures. The contractor(s) to be hired for the projects shall be acknowledged authority(ies) in his or their field of specialization.

4. The Commission is hereby directed to adopt such measures as world ensure the prompt, speedy and expeditious delivery of the professional services contemplated under Executive Order No. 128 (s. 1993) and this Order, for the purpose of accelerating all its efforts towards a successful celebration of the Philippine Centennial in the year 1998. All Departments, Offices and Agencies of Government are hereby ordered to assist the Commission for this purpose.

5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 28th day of February in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Five.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia