MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 213

APPROVING AND DIRECTING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SOCIAL REFORM AGENDA

WHEREAS , the goal of Philippines 2000 seeks to balance global competitiveness and people empowerment, that is, pursuing economic development not only through the promotion of efficiency in the marketplace, but more importantly, through the advancement of social equity through asset reforms, just sharing of the benefits of growth, and effective people participation in the political and economic mainstream;

WHEREAS , a Social Reform Agenda has been formulated address the minimum basic survival, security, and enabling needs of: (1) identified disadvantaged sectors particularly: farmers and landless rural workers; fisherfolk; urban poor; indigenous cultural communities; workers especially in the informal sector; and, other disadvantaged groups (women, disadvantaged students, children and community youth, persons with disabilities, elderly and victims of disasters and calamities) ; and, (2) the country’s nineteen (19) poorest provinces;

WHEREAS , the Social Reform Agenda also contains a list of Flagship Programs identified as the appropriate interventions to ensure the welfare and early integration into the political and economic mainstream of the disadvantaged groups;

WHEREAS , the Social Reform Agenda was formulated by concerned government agencies, in collaboration with identified advantaged groups; and

WHEREAS , there is now a need to immediately implement the Social Reform Agenda to attain its stated objectives and thereby also accomplish the objectives for Philippines 2000.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Social Reform Agenda, hereto attached as “Annex A” , is hereby approved.

SEC. 2. There shall be Agency Champions for each of the Flagship Programs who shall orchestrate and ensure the accomplishment of program targets and/or agency commitments within specified timeframes. The designated Agency Champions are:

Secretary Ernesto Garilao is hereby designated as Lead Convenor for the Social Reform Agenda. He shall be responsible for orchestrating the overall implementation and consolidating the Champions’ activities and efforts for the Social Reform Agenda.

SEC. 3. All other government departments and agencies are hereby directed to immediately implement their respective commitments and activities, as contained in the Social Reform Agenda.

SEC. 4. The Lead Convenor shall create an ad-hoc study group composed of senior technical representatives from Flagship Champion Agencies and other agencies as may be relevant, to formulate an implementing mechanism, including recommendations for innovative funding sources outside of the General Appropriations Act, for the implementation of the Social Reform Agenda. The recommendations shall be submitted to the Office of the President within sixty (60) days upon the effectivity of this Memorandum Order.

SEC. 5. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety Four.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Reference: Annex “A” The Social Reform Agenda

Source: CDAsia