Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 118-C

PROVIDING FOR THE CREATION OF THE SUGGESTIONS AND INCENTIVE AWARDS COMMITTEE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Section I, Rule X of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of Executive Order No. 292, a Suggestions and Incentive Awards Committee (SIAC) is hereby created to administer the Employee Suggestions and Incentive Awards System (ESIAS), in the Office of the President, and its composition, until revised shall be as follows:

The OP SIAC shall adopt the following procedures in the selection of nominee/s to the OP Honor and Incentive Awards:

1. Establish criteria/qualifications of nominees, subject to the approval of the Executive Secretary.

2. Receive, review and process documents composed of:

2.1 Personnel Data Sheet; or

2.2 Service Record; or

2.3 Performance Appraisal Rating for the last two (2) rating periods; or

2.4 Courteous Service Form; or

2.5 Nomination form containing the act/idea/suggestion/invention and the subsequent result or effect which may neither be monetary nor non-monetary of which has direct benefit to OP; or

2.6 Any other documents to support the nomination.

3. Determine the form of honor or incentive awards to be granted, including the amounts involved.

4. Recommend to the Executive Secretary the personnel who shall be nominated for the honor awards or incentive awards or to both awards.

5. Recommend to the Executive Secretary its proposed annual budget to cover whatever necessary expenses it will incur in granting both the monetary and non-monetary awards in accordance with the provisions of the OP ESIAS.

Furthermore, the SIAC is authorized to issue additional guidelines, aside from the other guidelines and bases specified in the OP ESIAS, to cover situations not specifically covered by this Memorandum Order.

It shall submit its report on the implementation of OP’s incentives and awards program to the Civil Service Commission, through the Executive Secretary, within fifteen (15) working days after the end of each year.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) EDELMIRO A. AMANTE, SR. Executive Secretary

May 31, 1993

Source : CDAsia