Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 29

AUTHORIZING THE CONDUCT OF AN IN-HOUSE GRADUATE PROGRAM IN MASTER IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (MPA) AND MASTER IN PUBLIC AND BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION (MPBA) IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Letter of Instruction No. 468, dated October 1, 1978, embodying the State’s policy on the continuing development of officials and employees of the government, and in line with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 42, dated December 12, 1991, which aims to professionalize the service by requiring candidates for positions of division chief to be holders of masters degree in public administration, and CSC Memorandum Circular No. 13, dated April 6, 1992, authorizing the establishment of Educational Support Program for employees in their respective agencies, the conduct of complete graduate programs in Master in Public Administration (MPA) and Master in Public and Business Administration (MPBA) in collaboration with the Polytechnic University of the Philippines is hereby authorized effective immediately with such scheduling of classes as may be appropriate, provided it shall be after office hours.

The expenses for tuition and miscellaneous charges per participant which shall be subject to consultation with the PUP Graduate School, and shall be embodied in the Memorandum of Agreement by this Office with the said University, shall be advanced by this Office, chargeable against savings pursuant to the aforecited CSC Memorandum Circular No. 13, or the authentication fees set aside as a trust fund by the provisions of LOI No. 1446, dated January 23, 1985, for the exclusive use of the Office of the President. These expenses shall be subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules, which may be deducted later on through monthly deduction for a period of one year from the salaries of the participants or, if their salaries would not be adequate for such deduction, it shall be taken from their retirement pay or any benefits accruing to them.

However, participants who shall have continuously maintained high scholastic records, or at least an average grade of not lower than 1.50 shall no longer be required to make refund in recognition of their exemplary academic performance, provided they shall complete or finish the course.

Heads of primary units/offices are hereby enjoined to nominate participants to the program from their employees and submit the names to the Personnel Office. The following set of criteria shall be observed in the selection of participants in the program:

1. The program shall be open to employees in all levels.

2. To qualify –

participants must have served the government for at least three (3) consecutive years under permanent status; must be a holder o Bachelor’s degree with an average of 2.5; (official transcript of records must be submitted) must be in good and physical and mental condition.

Final admission of participants in the program shall be determined by the head of the Personnel Office.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, August 14, 1992

Source: CDAsia