MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 37

RECONSTITUTING THE CABINET CLUSTER SYSTEM AS PROVIDED IN MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 271 DATED DECEMBER 20. 1989

WHEREAS, it is necessary to introduce changes/additions in the composition of some of the existing Cabinet Clusters to enhance inter-agency coordination and expedite the implementation of vital inter-agency programs and projects; and

WHEREAS, it is also imperative that additional Cabinet Clusters be created to act on matters not specifically falling within the purview of the present Cabinet Clusters.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby modify Memorandum Order 271 dated 20 December 1989, to read as follows:

SECTION 1. The Cabinet Cluster System is hereby reconstituted as follows:

Cabinet Cluster A. Agro-Industrial Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Agriculture 2. Secretary of Trade and Industry3. Secretary of Agrarian Reform 4. Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources 5. Secretary of Tourism 6. Secretary of Science and Technology 7. Presidential Consultant on Countryside Development

Cabinet Cluster B. Macro-Economy and Finance Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary Finance 2. Secretary of Budget and Management 3. Secretary of Trade and Industry 4. Secretary of Socio-Economic Planning 5. Chairman of the Coordinating Council on the Philippines Assistance Program 6. Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines

Cabinet Cluster C. Human Resource Development Support Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Health 2. Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports 3. Secretary of Labor and Employment 4. Secretary of Social Welfare and Development

Cabinet Cluster D. Physical Infrastructure Support Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Public Works and Highways 2. Secretary of Transportation and Communications 3. Secretary of Tourism 4. Chairman, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council

Cabinet Cluster E. Security and Political Development Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Foreign Affairs 2. Secretary of National Defense 3. Secretary of Interior and Local Government 4. Secretary of Justice 5. Director-General of the National Security Council 6. Presidential Legislative Liaison Officer for the Senate and the House of Representatives

Cabinet Cluster F. Development Administration Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Secretary of Budget and Management 2. Secretary of Finance 3. Director-General of National Economic and Development Authority 4. Resource person from Civil Service Commission 5. Resource person from Commission on Audit 6. President of the Development Academy of the Philippines

Cabinet Cluster G. Energy Cluster to be composed of the following:

1. Presidential Consultants on Energy 2. Secretary of Finance 3. Secretary of Justice 4. Secretary of Trade and Industry 5. Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources 6. Secretary of Science and Technology.

SEC. 2. The Executive Secretary, the Secretary to the Cabinet and the Press Secretary may attend all Cluster meetings as regular members.

SEC. 3. The Cabinet Clusters shall serve as advisory committees of the President and the Cabinet. They shall deliberate and recommend measures on policy and operational matters for the consideration of the President and the Cabinet.

SEC. 4. The Cabinet Clusters may create sub-committees or ad-hoc working groups as may be required from time to time.

SEC. 5. The Cabinet Cluster shall meet every month, or as often as necessary. The Chairman, in consultation with the member-agencies, and the Executive Secretary, shall set the date of the regular meetings of the Cabinet Cluster, provided, that the Executive Secretary may, whenever deemed necessary call for a special meeting of one or more Cabinet Clusters when the subject to be taken up may require the presence of said Cabinet Cluster in the resolution thereof.

Notwithstanding the composition of a particular cluster, any Cabinet Secretary may attend any cluster meeting.

While the agenda of the Cabinet Cluster is expected to consist primarily of policy and operational matters, the Cluster shall regularly provide opportunities for reflection and brainstorming on government direction.

SEC. 6. The members of the Cabinet Cluster shall elect a Chairman every six (6) months subject to the approval of the President.

SEC. 7. The Chairman so elected shall establish and set-up an ad hoc secretariat to directly support the cluster in its meetings and other activities, in close coordination with the Executive Secretary. The Chairman may call on any member agency to, extend technical support and assistance to the Cluster as may be required.

SEC. 8. To ensure that policy and operational decisions and their implementation are consistent with the overall thrusts of the government, notices of the cluster meetings and agenda items to be discussed shall be given, to all Cabinet members by the respective cluster secretariat.

SEC. 9. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 14th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-two.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) DIONISIO C. DE LA SERNA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia