Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 80

PRESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN FILLING-UP VACANT DIRECTOR III AND DIRECTOR IV POSITIONS IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

WHEREAS, the Constitution mandates that appointments and promotions in the career service shall be on the basis of merit and fitness;

WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the public service to establish a procedure that guarantees a fair and objective assessment of competence and qualifications especially in the highest career positions in the government.

Consistent therewith and pursuant to Memorandum Order No. 46 dated October 13, 1992 which created a Special Board to screen candidates for vacant positions of Director III and Director IV in the Office of the President, the following procedure shall be observed in filling up those vacancies.

Sec. 1. The Personnel Office shall, within fifteen (15) calendar days from the occurrence of a vacancy in any directorial position, inform the Board and the unit head concerned of such vacancy and post a notice in the bulletin board announcing the same.

Sec. 2. The unit head concerned shall, within fifteen (15) calendar days from notice thereof, submit his/her recommendees, if any, to the Board.

Sec. 3. The Personnel Office which shall be the secretariat of the Board, will undertake the following:

a) collect all pertinent documents and submit them to the Board;

b) schedule meetings as directed by the Board and

c) post the first three nominees selected by the Board on the bulletin board for fifteen (15) calendar days.

Sec. 4. In case of a vacancy in a Director III position, all personnel in the unit concerned with the rank of Presidential Staff Officer VI shall automatically be considered for promotion. In instances where there is no Presidential Staff Officer VI (next in rank) in said unit, Presidential Staff Officers V can be considered for the vacant position if recommended by the unit head concerned.

The same rule shall be followed in case of a vacancy in a Director IV position, vis-a-vis Directors III (next in rank) or, in their absence, Presidential Staff Officers VI.

Sec. 5. Qualified candidates from units other than that in which the vacancy occurs shall be considered on equal basis with the candidates from the unit concerned. The Board shall not limit the nominees for consideration to the recommendees of the unit heads but shall give adequate deference in the evaluation process to the recommendees of the unit heads concerned.

Sec. 6. The Board may consider candidates outside the Office of the President only if no personnel therein is qualified for the position concerned.

Sec. 7. The Board shall evaluate the competence and qualifications of candidates in accordance with the following criteria:

Criteria

Points

40 points

15 points

10 points

20 points

10 points

5 points

100 points

Sec. 8. The Board may administer written examinations, conduct personal interviews and call on expert assistance to gauge the competence and qualifications of the candidates. It may also impose any other appropriate and reasonable requirements(s) on the candidates under consideration.

Sec. 9. The actions of the Board being merely recommendatory, the President or the Executive Secretary, acting by his authority, may exercise his prerogative in choosing the final appointee notwithstanding any contrary recommendations of the Board.

Sec. 10. The Board is hereby authorized to issue additional guidelines, if necessary, to cover situations not specifically covered by this Memorandum Order.

Sec. 11. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) RENATO C. CORONA Assistant Executive Secretary for Legal Affairs

January 15, 1993

Source: CDAsia