MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 126

IMPLEMENTING KASAGANAAN NG SAKAHAN AT KALIKASAN (KASAKALIKASAN), THE NATIONAL INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

WHEREAS , the Government is pursuing sustainable food production programs to ensure adequate food supply and attain higher standards of living for our people;

WHEREAS , the Government is committed to Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Earth summit) in promoting sustainable agriculture and rural development;

WHEREAS , crop protection is a vital component of the Government’s sustained production programs since losses in food production due to pests amount to hundreds of millions of pesos annually;

WHEREAS , scientific studies show that many problems in rice and other crops are exacerbated by the excessive and indiscriminate use of pesticides; and

WHEREAS , as a consequence, there is a need to implement an integrated crop protection strategy that will lead to reduced risks of pesticide-induced pest outbreaks, higher and more stable farm incomes, reduced health hazards for farmers and consumers, reduced environmental damage, and strengthened farmer organizations and farmers’ management capabilities.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order the following:

Section 1. The Department of Agriculture (DA) shall implement Kasaganaan ng Sakahan at Kalikasan (KASAKALIKASAN), the National Pest Management Program, with the long-term goal of making integrated pest management (IPM) the standard approach to crop husbandry and pest management in rice, corn, and vegetable production in the country. To achieve this goal, the DA shall carry out programs of activities on IPM in close collaboration with farmer organizations, non-government organizations, Local Government Units, and other policy makers of the National Government.

Section 2. Provincial Governors and Municipal Mayors of participating provinces and municipalities shall create IPM Training Teams composed of IPM-trained extension workers and agricultural technicians whose sole responsibility shall be to train farmers through season-long Farmer Field Schools. These teams including local program managers shall be detailed to the Program on a full-time basis.

Section 3. An Executive Committee is hereby created to set policy and general operating guidelines of the Program and to source and provide funds and human resources in support of provincial and municipal-based IPM programs. The Committee shall be chaired by the Secretary of Agriculture and shall be composed of the following:

1. The Secretary of the Department of the Interior and Local Government;

2. The Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources;

3. The Secretary of the Department of Health;

4. The Secretary of the Department of Agrarian Reform;

5. The Administrator of Fertilizers and Pesticides Authority;

6. The Executive Director of the National Agricultural and Fishery Council;

7. A representative from a non-government organization involved in the Program as may be designated by the Chairman;

8. A representative from a national farmers organization as may be designated by the Chairman; and

9. The Regional Coordinator of the FAO Intercountry Programme for Integrated Pest Control in Rice in South and Southeast Asia (Chief Technical Adviser).

Section 4. The Executive Committee is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, instrumentality or subdivision of the Government, including government-owned and controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in discharging its functions.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of May in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Three.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) ANTONIO T. CARPIO Chief Presidential Legal Counsel

Source: CDAsia