Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 194

PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES ON DRESS CODE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (PROPER)

Pursuant to Special Order No. 75, dated February 14, 1994, in conjunction with CSC Memorandum Circular No. 14, s. 1991. and Memorandum Order No. 193 dated March 2, 1994, the following Guidelines on Dress Code in the Office of the President (Proper) are hereby prescribed:

1. Concerned officials and employees shall wear their uniforms according to the following schedule, to wit:

A. For Ladies

B. For Gentlemen

1. PSO VI up to the rank of Director shall wear light-colored or dark-colored Barong Tagalog or long-sleeved shirt with tie alternately every other Monday and any other shade of Barong or Polo shirt on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday;

2. White Collar employees shall wear light-colored or dark-colored Polo Barong alternately every other Monday and any other shade of Barong Tagalog or Polo Barong on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.

3. Blue Collar employees (janitors, carpenters, parking attendants, gardeners, electricians, mechanics and other civilian ground/building employees) shall wear light-colored or dark-colored polo shirt or T-shirt with collar alternately every other Monday and Thursday. In addition, blue collar workers working in conspicuous public areas should wear shoes (at least rubber)

4. Employees assigned to drive OP official vehicles shall wear light-colored or dark-colored polo barong from Monday to Friday or during weekdays or as the need arise.

2. a) Wearing of the new prescribed uniform for ladies shall start two (2) months after the release of the appropriated amount for the purpose.

b) Doctors, dentists, nurses and other medical attendants of the Malacañang Clinic shall wear the new outfit worn by the general staff on Mondays with option to wear the prescribed one on Tuesdays and Wednesdays.

c) Personnel of the Internal House Affairs Office and the Social Secretary’s Office shall have their own appropriate Dress Code.

d) Women in mourning or on the family way may wear the customary or appropriate outfit in lieu of the prescribed uniforms.

e) On those days when the personnel are exempted from wearing the prescribed office uniforms, they must be dressed appropriately, but no part attire, picnic clothes, sandos nor T-shirts should be worn at work.

f) The use of tight-fitting, seductive, micro-mini and gauzy/flimsy/transparent dresses by lady employees is prohibited.

g) Walking shorts, pedal pushers, leggings, tights, and jogging pants are likewise prohibited; however, pantaloons or such other pants worn for formal occasions are allowed.

h) The use of too much costume jewelry, flashy bangles and similar accessories are likewise prohibited. Similarly, ostentatious display of expensive jewelry is strongly discouraged and prohibited except for special occasions and official celebrations.

i) Wearing of heavy or theatrical make-up is likewise prohibited.

j) The wearing of slippers, sandals, bakya, etc. in the office premises is banned. Only appropriate footwear shall be allowed.

k) It is likewise considered taboo to use curlers, turbans and bandanas during office hours and within office premises.

3. Sanctions

The respective heads and other senior officials of the Primary Units in the Office of the President (Proper) shall ensure strict compliance with these guidelines. Violations, therefore, shall be subject to the following sanctions:

a. First Offense – warning. Upon the recommendation of the concerned heads of Primary Units, the Pesonnel Office shall prepare the list of erring personnel and submit its recommendations to the Senior Deputy Executive Secretary.

b. Second Offense – reprimand. This will be in accordance with the procedures established under CSC Rules and Regulations.

c. Third Offense – suspension or such appropriate penalty under CSC Rules and Regulations.

Strict compliance with the guidelines prescribed herein is hereby enjoined.

This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

(Sgd.) LEONARDO A. QUISUMBING Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, 02 March 1994

Source : Malacañang Records Office