Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 221

REQUIRING STRICT OBSERVANCE OF ALL EXISTING SECURITY MEASURES AND INSTITUTING ADDITIONAL SECURITY REGULATIONS

In line with the current intensified campaign of the Presidential Security Group (PSG) for the strict enforcement of security measures in the Malacañang Compound and its immediate vicinity, it is hereby directed that all officials and employees of the Office of the President and of the Department of the Budget and Management and of other offices concerned familiarize themselves with, implement and observe strictly, all the security measures that have so far been adopted and disseminated through various issuances. For this purpose, all heads of offices and primary operating units are hereby furnished compilations of all such issuances by Records Office.

More particularly, the following requirements shall be strictly enforced and observed by all concerned, violation of which shall subject the offenders to strict administrative disciplinary action:

I. ON PERSONNEL SECURITY

A. Renewal of clearances. –  All officials and employees are hereby required to accomplish the prescribed NICA clearance forms. These forms shall be distributed by, or may be obtained from, the Personnel Office. Once accomplished, these forms shall be submitted to the Personnel Office not later than June 30,1994.

B. Display of nameplates. – All officials and employees shall always wear the prescribed nameplates as complement to the PSG Security Control Tags upon entering the Malacañang compound and while within their office premises. Likewise, all officials and employees are hereby enjoined to strictly observe the “No PSG Security Control Tag, No Entry” Policy being implemented by the Presidential Security Group.

C. Personnel working overtime. – Officials and employees rendering overtime service after 6:00 p.m. and on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall secure written authorization either from the Executive Secretary or Senior Deputy Executive Secretary. The Personnel Office, PSG and Security men at the Administration Building shall be furnished a copy each of these authorizations.

II. ON VISITOR’S SECURITY

A. Visitor’s tag. – Visitors shall always display their visitor’s tags provided byj the guards at Gate 2 or Gate 7. No one shall attend to, nor transact official busihess with, visitors who are not wearing visitor’s tags. If necessary, visitors without such tags may be referred to the Security Officers.

B. Comfort rooms. – Visitors shall not be allowed to use comfort rooms located inside offices. They may be allowed to use only the public CRs.

All janitors shall always keep themselves in the vicinity of CRs designated for the pubic they are assigned to clean, be on the lookout for any suspicious-looking individuals, and report anyone they may notice.

C. Designated areas for visitors. – All heads of offices and units must provide, space permitting, visitor’s waiting area. Visitors shall not be allowed to stay within the working areas.

D. Guarding against suspicious-looking persons. – All officials and employees are enjoined to be always on the lookout for any suspicious-looking persons. Should anyone spot such kind of a person within the office premises, He or she shall reportlhis matter immediately to the Security Officers at the Administration Building Lobby (local 6110) or NEB Lobby (local 5113 & 5114).

III. ON FIRE. EARTHQUAKE AND OTHER EMERGENCIES

A. Fire Plan. – The office fire plan shall be strictly observed in the event off occurrence of fire, earthquake, or other emergencies. Fire drills shall be conducted periodically by the Malacañang Fire Station, assisted by the Personnel Office and the Engineering Office. For this purpose, all officials and employees shall be given the necessary instruction, including the manner of using fire extinguishers, so that they may know what to do in case of fire, earthquake or other emergency.

B. Fire hazards. – All fire hazards, as may be indicated by the Malacañang Fire Station, shall be removed immediately. Cooking and smoking inside offices are strictly prohibited. For this reason, cooking equipment shall be removed from offices. The Malacañang Fire Station shall enforce this strictly.

C. Fire Alarm. – A fire alarm system shall be installed. In case of fire, the Malacañang Fire Station located near the Malacañang Garage at San Miguel may be called over Telephone Nos. 6900 (local) or 741-9235 (direct line).

IV. ON PHYSICAL SECURITY

A. Building physical defects. – The Engineer’s Office shall always b& on the lookout for building physical defects and shall undertake immediate repairs of said defects.

B. Human traffic inside the Administration Building. – The main lobby of the Administration Building shall be provided with appropriate receptionists or personnel and logbook to properly control the entry and exit of human traffic.

The backdoor facing Pasig River shall be closed at 6:00 p.m. and open for normal human traffic at 7:00 a.m.

V. ON DOCUMENT SECURITY

All concerned are hereby enjoined to observe strictly the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 78, series of 1964, as amended, relative to the security, custody and disposition of classified matters.

All heads of primary units and offices shall instruct all personnel of their respective units to formulate, in coordination with the Malacañang Fire Station, fire/emergency priority plan so that they will always be guided on what records, pieces of equipment and materials have to be evacuated first in case of emergency.

VI. ON VEHICULAR CONTROL

Only officials and employees whose cars are included in the list prepared by the Personnel Office and submitted to the PSG may enter the Malacañang Compound through Gate 7, and park at appropriate spaces provided for the purpose.

Other employees with cars can use the portion of Mendiola Street within the control point for parking, or San Rafael Street.

Those whose cars are authorized to enter Malacañang Compound shall unload their passengers, if any, before entering Gate 7. If their passengers happen to be employees of this Office, these passengers need not get off the cars provided they are wearing their PSG Security Control Tags.

VII. ON INFORMATION CAMPAIGN ON SECURITY

All heads of offices shall see to it that appropriate seminars on security are conducted in their respective units. If they can not conduct this themselves, they may enlist the assistance of the Presidential Security (PSG).

Strict compliance herewith is earnestly enjoined.

(Sgd.) TEOFISTO T. GUINGONA, JR. Executive Secretary

Manila, July 25, 1994

Source : Malacañang Records Office