MALACAÑANG MANILA

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 402

Creating and Constituting the Committee for the Education for Peace Program

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 371 entitled, “Proclaiming a Special Zone of Peace and Development in the Southern Philippines (ZOPAD), and Establishing Therefor the Southern Philippines Council for Peace and Development (SPCPD) and the Consultative Assembly,” was issued by the President on 02 October 1996;

WHEREAS, the ZOPAD and SPCPD will give greater opportunities for participation of the MNLF in economic and social development in certain areas of Mindanao;

WHEREAS, there is a need to further enhance the executive and managerial capabilities of MNLF and community leaders in the implementation of socio-economic development projects in ZOPAD;

WHEREAS, the Education for Peace and Development Program is an intensive and interactive management development program for MNLF and community leaders that will enable them to actively participate and contribute to the implementation of meaningful development programs in the ZOPAD; and

WHEREAS, there is a need to create and constitute a Committee to formulate the guidelines and mechanics for the Program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FIDEL V. RAMOS, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the Constitution, do hereby order the following:

SECTION 1. CREATION OF COMMITTEE FOR PEACE PROGRAM. There is hereby created a Committee for the Education for Peace Program (hereinafter called “Committee”) under the Office of the President, to be chaired by the Executive Secretary with the following as members:

a. Secretary, Department of Agriculture

b. Secretary, Department of Environment and Natural Resources

c. Chairman, Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council

d. Director-General, Technical Education Skills Development Authority;

e. Chairman, Commission for Higher Education;

f. Chairman, Cooperatives Development Authority;

g. Governor, Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao;

h. President, Development Academy of the Philippines and

i. President, Mindanao State University.

The Committee may also invite representatives from the academe, the private sector, non-governmental organizations and people’s organizations and other professional groups whose expertise may be harnessed in the implementation of the various training courses under the Program.

SEC. 2. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAM. The Education for Peace Program shall have the following goals and objectives:

a. Provide education and training opportunities to MNLF and community leaders to enhance their executive and managerial capabilities to plan, implement, and monitor socio-economic development projects in Mindanao;

b. Create a pool of skilled middle level managers and entrepreneurs from among the ranks of former MNLF leaders; and

c. Mainstream the Muslim Filipino graduates of Madrasas to employment and training opportunities for local and overseas employment.

SEC. 3. FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE. The Committee shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate and recommend policies, guidelines, and mechanics for the efficient and effective implementation of the Program;

b. Identify the skills training and education programs for the MNLF and other community leaders;

c. Develop the criteria for the selection and awarding of scholarships/grants under various education and training programs;

d. Perform such other functions as may be necessary.

SEC. 4. SECRETARIAT SUPPORT. The Committee shall organize a Secretariat to be chaired by the Director-General of the Technical Education Skills Development Authority (TESDA), and composed of representatives from the Committee on Higher Education (CHED), Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), Mindanao State University (MSU), and the Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao (ARMM).

SEC. 5. SUBMISSION OF REPORTS. The Committee shall submit to the President status reports on the implementation of the Program every quarter.

SEC. 6. FUNDING. Funds for the operations of the Committee shall be sourced from the office of the President and from such other funding sources as may be recommended by the Department of Budget and Management.

SEC. 7. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE. This Memorandum Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Ninety-Six.

(Sgd.) FIDEL V. RAMOS

By the President: (Sgd.) RUBEN D. TORRES Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia