MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 313

DECLARING SEPTEMBER 19, 2000 AS THE CENTENNIAL DAY OF THE PHILIPPINE CIVIL SERVICE

WHEREAS, the Civil Service has been an institution in the Philippines since its establishment by the Second Philippine Commission on September 19, 1900 by virtue of Public Law No. 5 (An Act for the Establishment and Maintenance of an Efficient and Honest Civil Service in the Philippine Islands);

WHEREAS, the Philippine Civil Service has steadfastly ensured stability and continuity of government operations through all the political and social changes over the years;

WHEREAS, the Civil Service constitutes a significant sector of Philippine society delivering public service in the entire archipelago;

WHEREAS, in accordance with the noble trust reposed in the Civil Service by the 1987 Constitution, government officials and employees must at all times be accountable to the people, serve them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency;

WHEREAS, it is fitting that government officials and employees reaffirm their commitment to the time-honored principle that public office is a public trust by commemorating the day of establishment of the Philippine Civil Service;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order, as follows:

SECTION 1. Declaration of the CENTENNIAL DAY OF THE PHILIPPINE CIVIL SERVICE — September 19, 2000 is hereby declared as the “CENTENNIAL DAY OF THE PHILIPPINE CIVIL SERVICE.”

SEC. 2. Theme of the Centennial Celebration. — It is hereby declared that the theme of the Philippine Civil Service Celebration is “100 Years of Service: Philippine Civil Service at its Best, Mamamayan Muna.”

SEC. 3. Role of the Civil Service Commission. — The Civil Service Commission shall spearhead and coordinate the Centennial Celebration by undertaking appropriate activities for the observance thereof. The Commission shall issue the necessary orders and circulars for the purpose.

SEC. 4. Participation of Government Officials and Employees. — All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the national and local governments, including government owned and controlled corporations with original charter and state colleges and universities are enjoined to actively participate, as well as ensure the involvement of their officials and employees, in the programs and activities that the Civil Service Commission and their respective agencies shall undertake for a meaningful and successful Centennial Celebration. The government agencies involved shall also ensure the participation of the private sector and civil society in the celebration.

SEC. 5. Composition of the National Steering Committee. — There is hereby constituted a National Steering Committee of the Philippine Civil Service Centennial Celebration jointly chaired by the Chairman of the Civil Service Commission and the Executive Secretary and jointly co-chaired by the Chairmen of the Senate and House Committees on Civil Service.

The following shall serve as committee members: Vice President of the Philippines; Department Secretaries of Budget and Management; Education, Culture and Sports; Agrarian Reform; Agriculture; Energy; Environment and Natural Resources; Finance; Foreign Affairs; Health; Interior and Local Government; Justice; Labor and Employment; National Defense; Public Works and Highways; Science and Technology; Social Welfare and Development; Tourism; Trade and Industry; Transportation and Communications; National Economic Development Authority; Press Secretary; Governor, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas; Presidents, respectively, of the Government Service Insurance System; Social Security System; and Land Bank of the Philippines, and Heads of other Government-Owned and/or Controlled Corporations; Heads of Executive Offices; Legislative; Executive Development Advisory Council; State Universities and Colleges; Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines; Presiding Justices, respectively, of Court of Appeals and the Sandiganbayan; the Presiding Judge of the Court of Tax Appeals; Former Civil Service Commission Chairmen; present and former CSC Commissioners; Chairman of the Commission on Elections; Commission on Audit and Commission on Human Rights; the Ombudsman; Director-General, Philippine Information Agency; Heads, respectively, of Autonomous Regional Government in Muslim Mindanao and the Cordillera Administrative Region; Presidents, respectively, of the League of Provincial Governors and the League of City and Municipal Mayors; Presidents, respectively, of the Confederation of Government Employees Organizations; Philippine Government Employees Association; PS Link; and the Confederation of Independent Unions.

SEC. 6. Funding. — The Secretary of Budget and Management is hereby directed to allocate the amount of FIVE MILLION PESOS (Php 5,000,000) to support the celebration. The government agencies are to allocate their respective funds to defray the cost of their participation in the celebration.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. – This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22 nd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia