MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 322

DECLARING THE PERIOD 11 JUNE 2000 TO 11 JUNE 2001 AS THE CENTENARY OF THE SUPREME COURT

WHEREAS , the Supreme Court of the Republic of the Philippines will be celebrating its 100 th year on 11 June 2001 having been established on 11 June 1901 by Act No. 136 of the Philippine Commission;

WHEREAS , the Supreme Court has not been spared, during some crucial periods in its history, from assaults against its judicial independence and integrity but have survived them with becoming dignity consistent with its role as the ultimate protector of the people’s rights;

WHEREAS , the Supreme Court, throughout its growth and development amidst political and social changes over the years, has earned the trust, confidence and respect of the Filipino people truly as the “last bulwark of democracy;”

WHEREAS , it is fitting to commemorate the 100 th Anniversary of the founding of the Supreme Court of the Republic of the Philippines by dedicating a period to enhance the people’s awareness and understanding of its tremendous responsibility as the court of last resort as well as of the history and workings of the Judiciary;

WHEREAS , to ensure the successful celebration of the Supreme Court Centenary, there is a need to complement the efforts of the Supreme Court and its organizing and implementing committees by urging the public and private sectors to conduct and/or participate actively in programs and activities to be held or carried out for the purpose.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from 11 June 2000 to 11 June 2001 as the CENTENARY OF THE SUPREME COURT in commemoration of its 100 th year of existence.

All departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, local government units and government-owned and/or controlled corporations, the public at large as well as the private sector are hereby urge to conduct, participate in and actively support activities, programs and projects for the CENTENARY OF THE SUPREME COURT.

For the above purpose, all government offices and units concerned may, subject to applicable budgetary and auditing laws and rules, allocate a reasonable amount from their respective funds to defray the expenses necessary or incidental to their participation in the CENTENARY celebration.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have unto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 6th day of June in the year of our Lord, two thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA

By the President: (Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia