MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 158

CONDONING BACK RENTALS DUE FROM TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF HACIENDA DE LEON IN THE PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA

WHEREAS, the Hacienda de Leon in the municipality of Talavera, province of Nueva Ecija, was purchased by the government for subdivision and distribution to bona-fide tenants, occupants and other qualified landless individuals;

WHEREAS, the acquisition of said hacienda was in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and Republic Act No. 1400, authorizing the acquisition by the government of big haciendas for subdivision into farm lots and resale at cost to qualified persons;

WHEREAS, in the computation of the selling price of the farm lots, rentals and interests thereon from the date of the acquisition of the hacienda were added to the cost of the land;

WHEREAS, the imposition of said rentals and interests on the tenants and occupants of the hacienda has resulted in the institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and Republic Act No. 1400; and

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals and interests was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay the land at cost and not for the use thereof, since the Hacienda de Leon was purchased by the Government in their behalf,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the best interest of the government so requiring, do hereby order:

That the outstanding rentals of bona-fide tenants, occupants and other qualified persons under the law, rules and regulations to acquire farm lots in the Hacienda de Leon, Talavera, Nueva Ecija, and rentals in arrears and interests thereon of promisees in agreements, to sell are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President: (Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.