MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 142

CONDONING BACK RENTALS DUE FROM TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE LIAN ESTATE IN LIAN, BATANGAS

WHEREAS, the Lian Estate was purchased by the Government in 1951 for subdivision and distribution to bona fide tenants, occupants and other qualified landless individuals of the country with the end in view of resolving the social unrest then prevailing in the Batangas due to the refusal of the tenants and occupants to recognize the title of the Colegio de San Jose over the estate;

WHEREAS, the tenants and occupants insistently claimed ownership of the areas actually occupied by them and refused to enter into any agreement to sell or contract to sell with the Government which expropriated the property in 1941, and it was only in 1951, or after the lapse of ten years from the date of expropriation, that they entered into agreements to sell and contracts to sell over their landholding with the Bureau of Lands;

WHEREAS, in the computation of the selling price of the farm lots and residential lots by the Bureau of Lands accumulated rentals and interests thereon were added, although the Government did not actually pay interest on the money used in buying the Lian Estate, as it was an appropriation provided for in Commonwealth Act No. 539;

WHEREAS, the imposition of said rentals on the tenants and occupants of the estate has resulted in the institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and Commonwealth Act No. 539; and

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay the land at cost and not for the use thereof, since the Lian Estate was purchased by the Government in their behalf,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and the best interest of the Government so requiring do hereby order:

That the outstanding rentals of lessees, bona fide tenants and occupants found qualified under the law, rules and regulations to acquire lands in the Lian Estate, Lian, Batangas, as well as rentals in arrears and interest thereon of promisees in agreements to sell, are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of November m the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.