MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 116

CLASSIFYING DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN THE PHILIPPINE FOREIGN SERVICE INTO THREE CATEGORIES AND PROVIDING REGULATIONS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF SECTION 1, PART C, TITLE II OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 708, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NO. 4112

WHEREAS, Section 1, Part C, Title II of Republic Act No. 708, as amended by Republic Act No. 4112, approved on June 20, 1964, provides that the President shall classify into three classes the posts to be occupied by Chiefs of Missions, on the basis of the importance of such posts and for salary purposes;

WHEREAS, there is need to provide regulations for the purpose of implementing the recently enacted statute afore­mentioned; and

WHEREAS, the Foreign Service of the Philippines is being gradually expanded to the extent that thirty-six (36) diplomatic missions are authorized in the General Appropriations Act for the Fiscal Year 1965 in comparison to only eleven (11) in 1952;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by law, do hereby classify the diplomatic posts in the Philippine Foreign Service as provided hereunder, and prescribe the following regulations in relation thereto:

(a) Diplomatic Missions, Class I:

(b) Diplomatic Missions, Class II:

(c) Diplomatic Missions, Class III:

2. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 hereof, Chiefs of Mission who are commissioned to perform the functions of a principal officer and head of a diplomatic mission shall be assigned to commensurate posts as follows:

Positions

Posts

3. For purposes of this Order, the Home Office of the Department of Foreign Affairs is hereby considered a diplomatic post and any Chief of Mission may be detailed or assigned thereto to occupy the position of Secretary of Foreign Affairs or Undersecretary of Foreign Affairs in the absence of permanently appointed incumbents of the said positions. Any Chief of Mission may also be detailed or assigned to the Home Office to head any of the principal Offices or Divisions therein of comparable importance.

4. For budgetary purposes, ail positions of Chief of Mission from Class I to Class III shall be grouped in a pool, and not distributed to the specific diplomatic missions as was done heretofore. Incumbents of positions of Chief of Mission shall be assigned by the Secretary of Foreign Affairs to the different diplomatic missions and to the Home Office as herein provided.

5. A Chief of Mission assuming the functions of a principal officer of a diplomatic mission of a lower category than his actual rank shall not thereby suffer any diminution in his basic salary, and to this end an excess of salary shall be provided for him while he remains in that assignment.

6. A Chief of Mission who may be assigned as principal officer of a diplomatic mission of a higher category than his present rank may, subject to the availability of funds and upon the express authority of the President on prior recommendation of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, be paid the difference in salary corresponding to the classification of the post, the said difference to be charged against any savings in appropriations for personnel service of the Department of Foreign Affairs. The differential pay shall begin to accrue from the date of his arrival at the post and shall cease upon his relief or recall therefrom.

7. The Secretary of Foreign Affairs is hereby authorized to promulgate such suppletory rules or instructions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order.

8. This Administrative Order shall take effect upon its promulgation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.