MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 86

AUTHORIZING THE MIDLAND INSURANCE CORPORATION, TO BECOME A SURETY UPON OFFICIAL RECOGNIZANCES, STIPULATIONS, BONDS, AND UNDERTAKINGS.

WHEREAS, Section 1 of Act No. 536, as amended by Act No. 2206, provides that whenever any recognizance, stipulation, bond, or undertaking conditioned for the faithful performance of any duty or of any contract made with any public authority, national, provincial, municipal, or otherwise, or of any undertaking, or for doing or refraining from doing anything in such recognizance, stipulation, bond, or undertaking specified is, by the laws of the Philippines, or by the regulations or resolutions of any public authority therein, required or permitted to be given with any surety or with two or more sureties, the execution of the same or the guaranteeing of the performance of the condition thereof shall be sufficient when executed or guaranteed solely by any corporation organized under the laws of the Philippines, having power to guarantee the fidelity of persons holding positions of public or private, trust and to execute and guarantee bonds or undertakings in judicial proceedings and to agree to the faithful performance of any contract or undertaking made with any public authority;

WHEREAS, said section further provides that no head of department, court, judge, officer, board, or body, whether executive, legislative, or judicial, shall approve or accept any corporation as surety on any recognizance, stipulation, bond, or undertaking unless such corporation has been authorized to do business in the Philippines in accordance with the provisions of said Act No. 536, as amended, nor unless such corporation has, by contract with the Government of the Philippines, been authorized to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds, and undertakings; and

WHEREAS, the MIDLAND INSURANCE CORPORATION, is a domestic corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines and fulfills the conditions prescribed by said Act No. 536, as amended.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the MIDLAND INSURANCE CORPORATION, to become a surety upon official recognizances, stipulations, bonds, and undertakings, in such manner and under such conditions as are provided by law, subject to the conditions that the amount constituting the contributed surplus fund shall not at any time be withdrawn and paid back in cash to the contributing stockholders without prior recommendation and justification by the Insurance Commissioner duly approved by the Secretary of Finance, and provided further, that the moment the Midland Insurance Corporation becomes indebted to any government instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, or to any government-owned or controlled corporation in the total amount of P50,000.00 accruing from the issuance of bonds, the same having become due and demandable, the insurance company must voluntarily desist from writing or issuing all kinds of government bonds until the outstanding liabilities in government bond shall have been fully paid or settled. Non-payment of liabilities shall be a cause for the immediate revocation of the Administrative Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.