MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 26

CREATING THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON FREEDOM FROM HUNGER CAMPAIGN

WHEREAS, fully one-half of the world’s, population are either ill-nourished or underfed;

WHEREAS, to fight this state of malnutrition and undernourishment, the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAQ) of the United Nations of which the Philippines is a member, launched on July 1, 1960, a Campaign for Freedom from Hunger through the world, and has invited Member Countries to join in this collective effort to remove the threat of hunger by the establishment of National Committees on Freedom from Hunger Campaign; and

WHEREAS, to give this campaign a wider base on which to operate, the FAO has suggested to Member Governments and Associate Members that the membership of the National Committees include governmental and non-governmental or civic organizations;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Philippine National Committee on Freedom from Hunger Campaign which shall (1) act as a counterpart of the FAO; (2) bring before the people the reality of hunger which confronts all developing countries including the Philippines; (3) stimulate and support nation-wide action programs for the purpose of bridging the gap between available and optimum food supplies through informational education, cooperative efforts and research; and (4) adopt such other measures as will achieve a better understanding of providing adequate food for the present and future population of the world.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

1. The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources 2. The President, Manila Rotary Club 3. The President, National Federation of Women’s Club 4. The President, Junior Chamber of Commerce 5. The President, Philippine Chamber of Agriculture and Natural Recources 6. The Commander, Philippine Veterans Legion 7. The Chairman, Operations Brotherhood 8. The President, Town Hall of the Philippines 9. The Executive Secretary, Nutrition Foundation of the Philippines 10. The Presidential Assistant on Community Development (PACD) 11. The President, Barrio Lieutenants Association 12. The President, National Press Club 13. The National Scout Executive, Boy Scouts of the Philippines

The Committee may from time to time recommend to the President of the Philippines the designation of additional members.

The Committee shall elect its own officers. Unless otherwise directed, it shall have function until June 30, 1965, when the campaign comes to a close.

The Committee shall have the power to raise funds by voluntary contributions according to law to meet its financial obligations.

The Committee shall render special and annual reports of its activities and achievements to the President of the Philippines, furnishing copies thereof to the Director-General of FAO.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 3rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1962). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.