MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 84

CREATING A COMMITTEE TO STUDY AND FORMULATE A NATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION POLICY.

WHEREAS, civil aviation has developed at an unprecedented pace, both in the international and domestic services;

WHEREAS, the operation of foreign air carriers in the Philippines involves consideration a of reciprocity, domestic and international commerce, as well as our national security and relations with the respective countries;

WHEREAS, in the domestic field, the Philippines being an archipelago, air service is the most speedy, efficient, and economical means of transportation between the different islands;

WHEREAS, to extend adequately the benefits of air transportation to the people, especially in the rural areas, a more intensive program for the development of domestic air services is necessary; and

WHEREAS, the Philippines having only one airline that offers scheduled services throughout the country and which is also our flag-carrier in the international air service, said airline’s ability to compete effectively with foreign air carriers and to render adequate domestic service should be enhanced:

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, pursuant to the authority vested in me by law, do hereby create a committee, to be known as the “Civil Aviation Policy Committee,” to study, review, update, and recommend a national civil aviation policy for both International and domestic services and to advise the President of the Philippines on how best to effectuate said national civil aviation policy.

The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee is hereby authorized to call upon officials of any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance as it may need in discharging its duties and functions.

To perform adequately its duties and functions, the Committee may conduct investigations and, for that purpose, it is hereby granted all the powers of an investigating committee under sections 71 and 580 of the Revised Administrative Code.

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman.

The Committee shall report directly to the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.