MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO.181

CONDONATION OF BACK RENTALS DUE THE TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE A. MABINI SUBDIVISION IN CALOOCAN CITY

WHEREAS, the A. Mabini Subdivision in Caloocan City was purchased by the Government with the end in view of affording the tenants, occupants and other qualified persons to own home lots of their own;

WHEREAS, the acquisition of said landed estate was in accordance with the Constitution and the provisions of Commonwealth Act No, 539 for subdivision into lots and resell at cost to qualified persons;

WHEREAS, in the sale of the lots by the Land Tenure Administration and its successor-office to qualified persons, rentals and interests therein were added to the actual cost of the land resulting in the institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and laws;

WHEREAS, the rentals and interests have accumulated to such extent beyond the capacity of the tenants to pay and their failure to pay has hampered the issuance of title to the land awarded to them; and

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay for the cost of the land and not for the use thereof since the estate was precisely purchased by the government in their behalf,

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, and the best interest of the government so requiring, do hereby order:

That the outstanding rentals of lessees, bona-fide tenants and occupants found qualified under the law, rules and regulations to acquire home lots in the A. Mabini Subdivision in Caloocan City, as well as rentals in arrears of the promises in agreement to sell, are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.