MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 72

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON REORGANIZATION OF AGENCIES FOR LAND REFORM.

WHEREAS, there is need to implement the Land Reform Program and thus attain its objectives;

WHEREAS, the machinery that will be established to carry out the Program will determine, to a large extent, its success;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that the agencies involved be reorganized as one integrated unit to avoid the proliferation of efforts and conflicting directions resulting from each individual agency undertaking its own reorganization; and

WHEREAS, because of the complex nature of the land reform machinery established, the reorganization of agencies should be made with the assistance and guidance of people who know the requirements of the Land Reform Program, the process involved in agricultural development, and the needs of farmers.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Special Committee on Reorganization of Agencies for Land Reform.

The Committee shall have the following functions:

1. To facilitate the transfer of powers, duties, responsibilities, assets, liabilities, supplies, equipment, personnel, files, records, and unexpended balances of agencies abolished to the new agencies.

2. To set up the organizational structure of the following agencies:

a. Land Authority b. Land Bank c. Agricultural Productivity Commission d. Agricultural Credit Administration e. Office of the Agrarian Council

3. To conduct the training and placement of personnel.

4. To establish policies and guidelines for land reform.

5. To standardize procedures for implementation and evaluation.

6. To reassess and revise land tax schedules according to the objectives of land reform.

7. To facilitate an aerial photography survey of the country according to the needs of various agencies.

The Committee shall organize itself into the following teams to undertake; the specific areas of work required:

1. Accounting Team 2. Legal Team 3. Management Team 4. Agriculture Team

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman and, for the purpose of discharging its functions, is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government for such information and assistance as it may require in the performance of its work.

The Committee shall submit to the President its report and recommendations as soon as possible.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-three.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1963). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.