MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 157

CONDONING BACK RENTALS DUE FROM TENANTS AND OCCUPANTS OF THE VALDEZ ESTATE IN THE PROVINCE OF TARLAC

WHEREAS, the Valdez Estate situated in the barrios of San Jose, San Manuel and Balintanaway, municipality of Tarlac, province of Tarlac, was purchased by the government for subdivision and distribution to bona fide tenants and occupants and other qualified landless individuals;

WHEREAS, the acquisition of subject estate was in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and Republic Act No. 1400 authorizing the acquisition by the government of big landed estates for subdivision into farm and residential lots for resale at cost to qualified persons;

WHEREAS, in the computation of the selling price of farm and residential lots, rentals and interests thereon from the date of the acquisition of the estate were added to the cost of the land;

WHEREAS, in view of the huge amount of accumulated rentals and interests, the tenants and other qualified persons became lukewarm to execute the corresponding agreements to sell over the lots occupied by them;

WHEREAS, the imposition of said rentals and interests on the tenants and occupants of the estate has resulted in the Institution of landlord-tenant relationship which is not in accordance with the intent and spirit of the Constitution and Republic Act No. 1400; and

WHEREAS, the failure of the tenants and occupants to pay the rentals and interests was due partly to their justified conviction that they were to pay for the land at cost and not for the use thereof, since the estate was purchased by the government in their behalf.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law and the best interests of the government so requiring, do hereby order:

That the outstanding rentals of bona fide tenants, occupants and other qualified persons under the law, rules and regulations to acquire farm and residential lots in the Valdez Estate and rentals in arrears and interests thereon of promisees in agreements to sell are hereby condoned and said persons relieved therefrom.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FROILAN R. MONTALBAN Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.