MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 126

ACCELERATING THE MORAL REGENERATION DRIVE IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

WHEREAS, during the past three years the Administration has engaged in an intensive moral regeneration campaign and gratifying results have been achieved, particularly in the upper echelon of the government where graft and corruption has been minimized, if not virtually eradicated;

WHEREAS, the drive against graft and corruption is a continuing concern of the government for the preservation and maintenance of an honest, efficient and dedicated public service;

WHEREAS, while big time graft and corruption has been arrested and official venalities have been reduced steadily at all levels, there are disturbing reports that some officials are not sufficiently cooperating in the moral regeneration campaign;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, and local subdivisions should carry on and intensify the drive against graft and corruption in their respective offices and jurisdictions, sparing neither time nor effort for the attainment of the overall objective of a clean and honest government.

2. At this stage of the rising momentum of the relentless moral regeneration drive, it is required that officials’ and employees adhere strictly to the anti-graft campaign and are hereby accordingly strongly cautioned against involving themselves or participating in any dubious matter or transaction or tolerating official venalities by subordinates.

3. Notice is hereby served that failure of any official at any level to head the strong caution expressed in the next preceding paragraph will be dealt with drastically irrespective of who is involved or any other consideration.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.