MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 186

IMPOSING A FINE EQUIVALENT TO ONE MONTH’S SALARY ON DR. PETRONILO G. MONSOD, HEALTH OFFICER OF QUEZON CITY

This is an administrative case against Dr. Petronilo G. Monsod, Quezon City Health Officer, for allowing, without the consent of the Secretary of Health, the enrollment and attendance at the College of Nursing, University of the Philippines, of Mrs. Josefina Jael-Santos, former Puericulture Center Nurse in the Office of the Quezon City Health Officer.

Respondent waived his right to a formal investigation and hearing and submitted his case for consideration and decision on the strength of his explanation.

The records show that in June 1953 respondent recommended for approval the application of one Mrs. Josefina Jael-Santos, then Puericulture Center Nurse in the Office of the Quezon City Health Officer, for advance training at the U.P. College of Nursing, said training to be undertaken during regular office hours. The then Director of Health favorably indorsed the application to the Secretary of Health, who denied the same under the Cabinet policy of January 3, 1950, when a similar request was denied on the ground that it would establish a dangerous precedent and would open the way for other applications which would adversely affect the regular services of the government. Notwithstanding this disapproval of the Department Head, respondent authorized Mrs. Santos to pursue advance training allowing only one-half of her regular working hours to be devoted to public service.

From the established facts, it is indisputable that the respondent is guilty of disobedience to superior orders, which is mitigated by the fact that this appears to be the first administrative case against him.

Wherefore, respondent is hereby fined in an amount equivalent to one (1) month’s salary, with a warning that repetition of the same or similar offense will be dealt with more severely. He is further adjudged subsidiarily liable for whatever amount Mrs. Josefina Jael-Santos may be required to refund corresponding to the salaries she received during the period of her training.

Dore in the City of Manila, this 29th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191] . Manila : Malacañang Records Office.