MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 148

MODIFYING ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 236 DATED MARCH 29, 1957, CONCERNING FORMER JUDGE PASCUAL SANTOS OF THE COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF MASBATE

Under Administrative Order No, 236 dated March 29, 1957, Judge Pascual Santos of the Court of First Instance of Masbate was required to resign for (1) falsely certifying, in the monthly statements submitted by him which were required for the collection of his salary, that cases of all kinds submitted to him for decision or determination for a period of 90 days or more had been disposed of and (2) approving and signing false monthly reports of his clerk of court that he had no caries pending decision for 90 days or more. He has sought reconsideration of the decision to enable bin to receive whatever benefits he might be entitled to under the law.

It appears that prior to his reparation respondent had rendered more than 37 years of service to the government; that except for the specific instances involved in the administrative case under consideration he had shown marked efficiency and was even commended by the press for being one of the ten judges with the greatest number of decisions affirmed by the appellate courts from 1951 to 1953; and that tut for said administrative case he could have been entitled to the benefits of automatic retirement under Republic Act No. 660 in May 1957 for being 65 years old.

In view of the above circumstances in respondent’s favor, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Justice, Administrative Order No. 236 dated March 29, 1957, is hereby modified in the sense that the resignation of Judge Pascual Santas is considered as without prejudice to his receiving whatever benefits he may be entitled to under the laws then in force.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.