MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 75

AUTHORIZING SALARY INCREASES FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, Item 1-l-IV-l, pages 2277-2279 of the General Appropriation Act (R. A. No. 3845), provides an appropriation from the General Fund for salary increases of all employees of the National Government paid from the General Fund, and Item I-l-VI-1, pages 2279-2280 of the same Act, appropriates such sums as may be necessary out of special, revolving, trust, and other funds except the General Fund, for salary increases of all employees of the National Government paid from said special, revolving, trust, and other funds except the General Fund, provided, in both cases, that the increase in salary therein authorized shall be uniform for positions with the same salary rate:

NOW, THEREFORE, I DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby authorize the use of the said appropriations provided for in Republic Act No. 3845 for salary increases of all employees of the National Government whether in the Executive, Legislative, or Judicial Department, except those whose current salary rates are over P8,400 per annum and those whose compensation cannot be increased under the Constitution, in accordance with the following schedule:

The salary increase herein authorized shall take effect as of July 1, 1963. It shall not apply to positions to be filled:

(1) by appointment thereto of new employees whose appointments took effect after June 30, 1963; or

(2) by transfer or promotion thereto of employees who had received in their former positions the pay increase herein authorized, provided the transfer or promotion involves an increase in basic pay by more than one salary step in case of positions covered by the WAPCO pay plan and more than one grade in case of non-WAPCO positions.

The Commissioner of the Budget is hereby authorized to issue such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the implementation of this Order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-three.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1963). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1-191]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.