MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 123

CREATING THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL PLANNING

WHEREAS, the emphasis on regional planning in the Five-Year Socio-Economic Development Program has led to the creation of development authorities in various regions of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the charters of such development authorities require or envisage participation by the Office of the President in their organization and operation, in the form of assistance or supervision;

WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide a coordinating arm by which such assistance or supervision may be carried out properly and effectively and an integrated, and systematic coordination of the plans and activities of the various authorities and their harmonious cooperation with the agencies of the Executive Department may be effected; and

WHEREAS, it is essential to achieve unity, consistency and effectiveness in the task of regional planning for the overall economic development of the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Committee on Regional Planning composed of a representative from each of the following offices and agencies:

1. The Program Implementation Agency, as Chairman 2. The National Economic Council, as Member; 3. The National Irrigation Administration, as Member; 4. The National Power Corporation, as Member: 5. The Department of Public Works and Communications, as Member; and 6. Such other agencies as the Committee may, with the approval of the President, include.

The Committee shall have the following functions and powers:

1. To act as the technical arm of the President in charge of regional planning;

2. To receive, screen and study all such matters as may be required by law to be submitted or referred by the various development authorities to the President;

3. To formulate such guidelines, policies, objectives, requirements or conditions for the effective exercise of Presidential supervision or assistance in regard to the various development authorities, with the end in view of effecting an integrated and systematic coordination of their plans and activities in furtherance of the government socio-economic development program;

4. To make recommendations to the President on any matter concerning regional planning or affecting the plans and activities of the various regional development authorities;

5. To act as liaison between the Office of the President and the various development authorities, or between the agencies of the Executive Department and such authorities, as to any aspect of regional planning;

6. To advise or assist the regional development authorities on phases of organization or operation or in any other matter referred to it by such authorities;

7. To enlist and accept such technical assistance or financial support as it may deem essential to the proper discharge of its task; and

8. To perform such other functions as may be directed by the President.

The Committee shall meet upon the call of any member or as its business calendar may require. It shall act on the basis of the majority vote of its members and in accordance with the rules and regulations that it may promulgate.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Administrative Order Nos. : 1 – 191 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.