MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 164

FACILITATING THE PREPAREDNESS OF PHILIPPINE GUN CLUB MEMBERS FOR WORLD COMPETITION EVENTS

WHEREAS, Action/Practical Shooting is one wholesome sport for which Filipinos have demonstrated a natural talent and great capacity to excel;

WHEREAS, one important venue for such sport is the “World Shoot 1999”, to be hosted by the Philippines in CEBU;

WHEREAS, it is imperative that to prepare our Philippine entries, our local talents be screened and chosen, and compete among themselves so that ultimately the best will represent and win top honors for the country at said international competition;

WHEREAS, regular practice is necessary to properly hone and fine-tune the participants’ shooting skills for them to ably compete at said world event;

WHEREAS, the standard calibers used in Action/Practical Shooting Event are .45, .40 and .38 Super for pistols and 38 Special /.357 Magnum / 44 Magnum for revolvers while the standard rifle used in CAMP PERRY MATCHES are of the 5.56 and 7.62 calibers;

WHEREAS, every participant must have well-maintained shooting units of his choice where he can practice at duly authorized shooting ranges;

WHEREAS, the shortage of duly authorized shooting ranges sometimes gives rise to improper and dangerous target practices;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Philippine National Police is hereby directed to spearhead and expedite the processing of applications for the establishment of gun clubs throughout the country.

SEC. 2. Subject to applicable laws and such rules and regulations as the Philippine National Police may issue, every bona fide gun club member, provided he or she possesses none of the disqualifications provided by law, may apply for the issuance of licenses to possess shooting units up to, but not to exceed, .45 caliber for side arms and 5.56 and 7.62 for Semi-auto Competition rifles; Provided that no such bona fide gun club member shall possess at any one time more than 15 units sidearms and 6 units rifles, and 5,000 rounds of ammunition therefor, and Provided further that fully automatic models shall not be so licensed.

SEC. 3. The Philippine National Police shall issue the necessary rules and regulations to implement this order.

SEC. 4. All preceding circulars, letters-directive, and memoranda on the subject inconsistent with this Executive Order are revoked and modified accordingly.

SEC. 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19 Th day of October in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.