MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 249

ESTABLISHING THE PRESIDENTIAL AWARDS FOR BEST PERFORMER LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AGAINST ILLEGAL DRUGS

WHEREAS , the proliferation and use of illegal drugs hamper overall efforts aimed at promoting productive family life, community peace and harmony and, ultimately, nation building and national development;

WHEREAS , demand for prohibited drugs continues unabated due to existing insufficiency in public information, awareness, education and treatment of drug dependents;

WHEREAS , LGUs as mandated by law must ensure the promotion of health and safety, improvement of public morals, maintenance of peace and order and the preservation of comfort and convenience of their inhabitants;

WHEREAS , the institutionalization of a system of providing incentives and rewards is designed to propel local officials and their constituents to perform better and achieve a tradition of work excellence for a drug-free society;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. Establishing the Awards . There is hereby established the annual Presidential Award for Best Performer Local Government Units against Illegal Drugs.

SEC. 2. Categories of Awards The following categories of Presidential Awards are hereby created:

a. Best Performer City of the Philippines b. Best Performer Municipality of the Philippines c. Best Performer Barangay of the Philippines

SEC. 3. Composition of the Awards Committees . The Peace and Order Council Awards Committees organized at the national and sub-national levels shall administer and implement this Presidential Award.

The National Drug Law Enforcement and Prevention Coordinating Center, the Department of the Interior and Local Government and the Regional and Local Anti-Drug Abuse Councils, as the case may be, shall provide secretariat support to the committees.

SEC. 4. Functions of the National Awards Committee The National Awards Committee shall have the following functions.

a. Initiate and coordinate necessary activities for the successful implementation of the Award;

b. Set guidelines/criteria as for the selection of a performer cities, municipalities, and barangays;

c. Select the national judges who shall come from the private business/industry sector, non-government organizations and the government, and set broad guidelines for the selection of provincial judges.

d. Secure funding from, and the counterpart prizes of, the private sector;

e. Determine the functions of sub-national awards committees; and

f. Report to the President and give appropriate recommendations on the implementation of the contest.

SEC. 5. Selection of Awardees . The parameters to be used in selecting the Presidential Awardees shall be determined by the National Awards Committee.

SEC. 6. Funding. For the initial year of the search, an initial amount of Ten Million Pesos (P10,000,000.00) shall be provided by the President’s Social Fund.

SEC. 7. Awards and Prizes . The Presidential Awards shall be conferred to each national awardee as indicated in Section 1 hereof, through the local chief executive concerned, in the form of a Trophy and a Cash prize of not less than One Million Pesos (1,000,000.00) for advocacy program, maintenance of rehabilitation/testing centers, mobility funds, intelligence, personal services of local officials and personnel involved in the campaign against illegal drugs, to be sourced from President’s Social Fund.

Likewise, each of the national finalists representing the regional winners for the four (4) categories shall be conferred a Presidential Plaque of Commendation.

SEC. 8. Design Specifications . The National Historical Institute shall prescribe design specifications of the Presidential Trophy and Presidential Plaque of Commendation.

SEC. 9. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 24th day of May in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.