MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 160

REORGANIZING AND DESIGNATING THE MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL PARKS DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE CREATED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 30 DATED JANUARY 14, 1963 AS AMENDED

WHEREAS, the National Parks Development Committee (NPDC), an attached agency to the Department of Tourism is the principal office tasked to develop, administer, and manage the Rizal Park in Ermita, Manila and other National Parks;

WHEREAS, in pursuit of the current administration’s program to develop tourist destinations with the assistance of all concerned sectors, the composition of the NPDC be further amended to include in its composition representatives from other government agencies;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

Section 1. The composition of the National Parks Development Committee (NPDC), created under Executive Order No. 30 s.1963, as amended is hereby further amended, to be composed of the following:

The Committee shall meet as frequently as necessary in order to review, revise, adopt and or approve policies and guidelines recommended by the Executive Director.

Section 2. The Executive Director of the NPDC shall have the following powers and duties:

(a) To execute and administer the policies and measures adopted by the Committee;

(b) To act as Chief Executive Officer and directly manage and supervise the day to day operations and internal administration of the NPDC, and sign all agreements and contracts entered into for and in its behalf;

(c) To prepare the agenda for the meetings of, and to submit for the consideration of the members of the Committee all policies and measures which he believes to be necessary to carry out its purpose;

(d) To prepare and submit an annual budget and necessary supplemental budgets for the consideration of the members of the Committee;

(e) To appoint, discipline and remove, and define the duties of the NPDC’s personnel subject to existing Civil Service Rules and Regulations; and

(f) To exercise and perform such other powers and duties as may be vested in him or assigned by the Committee.

Section 3. The NPDC may coordinate with and seek the assistance of other agencies of the government, and is further authorized to receive donations/grants from the private sector, subject to the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

Section 4. All other laws, rules and regulations and executive issuances inconsistent with this Executive Order are hereby deemed repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 13 Th day of October, 1999.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1-338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.