MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 117

RECONSTITUTING THE BIPARTISAN EXECUTIVE-LEGISLATIVE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON THE SABAH ISSUE

WHEREAS , the Bipartisan Executive-Legislative Advisory Council on the Sabah issue was constituted on January 11, 1993 by virtue of Executive Order No. 46;

WHEREAS , the council was composed of the duly designated representatives from the Executive Branch as well as members of the Senate and House of Representatives;

WHEREAS , the national elections held in May 1998 resulted in a change of membership in both the executive and legislative branches of the government;

WHEREAS , attendant complications and ramifications as well as other issues related to the Sabah claim need urgent consideration and action.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Council. There is hereby reconstituted the Bipartisan Executive-Legislative Advisory Council on the Sabah issue, hereinafter referred to as the Council, composed of the following: eight (8) representatives from the Executive Branch to be designated by the President, eight (8) members of the Senate which shall include a member of the minority party, to be designated by the Senate President and eight (8) members of the House of Representatives which shall include a member of the minority party, to be designated by the Speaker of the House.

The President shall designate the Chairman of the Council.

SEC. 2. Functions. The Council shall serve as an advisory body to the President with respect to the Philippine claim on Sabah. It shall have the following functions:

a. Formulate and recommend alternative modes of pursuing the Sabah claim in the appropriate international and regional fora;

b. Advise the President on the manner in which the Philippine claim on Sabah may be successfully pursued taking into consideration the requirements of regional harmony and cooperation; and

c. Advise the President on the attendant complications and ramifications as well as other issues related to the Sabah claim, including the request of the heirs of the Sultan of Sulu for an increase in cession monies.

SEC. 3. Meetings of the Council. The President shall call the initial meeting of the Council. Thereafter, the Council shall meet as often as agreed upon by the body or as may be convened by the President.

SEC. 4. Secretariat. The Council shall organize its Secretariat to be headed by an Executive Director who shall be the current Head of the Sabah Office of the Department of Foreign Affairs. The members of the Secretariat which shall be composed of persons designated by the Chairman and those detailed to the Council shall provide administrative staff support to the Committee.

SEC. 5. Office. The Council shall hold office in the Department of Foreign Affairs which shall provide the former with appropriate office space and facilities.

SEC. 6. Appropriations. Appropriations for the Council shall be incorporated in the budget proposals under the Department of Foreign Affairs.

SEC. 7. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 05th day of JULY in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.