MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 119

ADOPTION OF THE NATIONAL BOOK POLICY

WHEREAS , the Government, through the enactment of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 8047, otherwise known as the “Book Publishing Industry Development Act”, recognizes the significant role of the book publishing industry in national development;

WHEREAS , R.A. No. 8047 has lodged on the National Book Development Board (NBDB) the responsibility to formulate, adopt and implement a National Book Policy which will serve as the industry’s major source of direction and guidelines as well as the Government’s concrete response to its commitment to develop the book publishing in the country;

WHEREAS , the newly developed National Book Policy will be of optimum benefit to the Government and the Filipino people as it embodies the specific measures which will serve as the enduring basis for fostering the viability and progressive growth of the book publishing industry;

WHEREAS , pursuant to Section 5 of R.A. No. 8047, and in order to ensure effective, sustained and successful programs of the Government towards the growth and development of the book publishing industry, it is imperative that the policies embodied in the National Book Policy be institutionalized and implemented to provide the adequate supply of affordable quality-produced books not only for domestic but also for export market;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Promulgation and Adoption of the National Book Policy. The policy and provisions embraced in the National Book Policy, unless otherwise contrary to law, shall be the policy of the State pertaining to the book publishing industry. Hence, the NBDB, in coordination and cooperation with the other concerned agencies, shall adopt and implement the policies embodied therein, provided that, with regards to the procurement of textbooks, applicable laws and/or issuances on public bidding shall be observed.

SEC. 2. Access to Information/Data Given to the NBDB for the Establishment and Maintenance of Industry Databank. The NBDB shall be given access to information as in the conduct researches and to soliciting necessary data from the private and public sectors pertaining to the book industry, except those confidential which may prejudice the operations as well as the trade secrets of the entity/agency concerned. NBDB shall maintain and update the book industry databank which will make data accessible to the industry and to the public.

SEC. 3. Persons and Entities Covered by this Order. All government sectors, particularly the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Commission on Higher Education, the Technical Educational and Skills Development Agency, the Department of Interior and Local Government, the Department of Trade and Industry, the Board of Investments, the Department of Finance, the Bureau of Customs and private sector/stakeholders comprising of, but not limited to: book publishers, printers, book sellers, and book authors shall abide and comply with this order.

SEC. 4. Administrative Liability. Any violation of this Executive Order by any person, officer or entity mentioned in the next preceding section shall be held administratively accountable as provided in R.A. No. 8047 and other pertinent laws.

SEC. 5. Effectivity. This Executive Order shall take effect immediately after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation or the official gazette.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 4th day of JULY in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and ninety-nine.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1999). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.