MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 265

APPROVING AND ADOPTING THE GOVERNMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS PLAN (GISP) AS FRAMEWORK AND GUIDE FOR ALL COMPUTERIZATION EFFORTS IN GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, the government is committed to carry out, in pursuance of “Angat Pinoy 2004”, or the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan, 1999-2004, wide-ranging administrative reforms to enhance government efficiency and effectiveness in government operations and in the delivery of basic services to the public;

WHEREAS , these reforms are being pursued particularly in fiscal and financial management, procurement, education and manpower development, personnel welfare, organizational effectiveness, and service delivery;

WHEREAS, the wider use and application of information and communications technology offer tremendous opportunities for government to ensure the success of these reforms;

WHEREAS, the National Information Technology Council (NITC), the policy advisory body on information and communications technology in the country, has formulated, in close consultation with concerned government agencies, the private sector, local government units, academe, and members of Congress, and accordingly endorsed a government information systems plan that will serve as blueprint for the computerization of vital government operations and key front-line services for more effective governance;

WHEREAS , the NITC and the Electronic Commerce Promotion Council, created pursuant to Executive Order 468, dated 23 February 1998, have been merged into the Information Technology and Electronic Commerce Council (ITECC);

NOW, THEREFORE, I, JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order as follows:

Section 1. Approval of the GISP . The Government Information System Plan (GISP), also to be known as “Philippine Government Online”, hereto attached, is hereby approved and adopted as framework and guide for the computerization of key frontline and common services and operations of the government to enhance overall governance and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the bureaucracy.

Section 2. GISP Implementation . To ensure the full and effective implementation of the GISP, all government agencies and instrumentalities, including local government units, shall align their respective computerization projects with the priorities identified in the GISP. The ITECC shall prepare a consolidated annual program of expenditures for government computerization, which shall become part of the President’s Annual Expenditure Program for submission to Congress.

Section 3. Implementing Rules and Regulations . ITECC shall issue such guidelines as may be necessary to implement this Executive Order.

Section 4. Repealing Clause . All orders, directives, issuances, resolutions, rules and regulations or parts thereof that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Executive Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 5. Effectivity . This Executive Order shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 12th day of July, in the year of our Lord Two Thousand.

(Sgd.) JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RONALDO B. ZAMORA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff

Office of the President of the Philippines. (2000). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 338]. Manila : Presidential Management Staff.