VIDEO: [youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sYmCfZ2aBpk&[/youtube] FULL TRANSCRIPT:

Thank you very much. Please, let us all be seated.

Senate President Juan Ponce Enrile; Speaker Feliciano Belmonte; Vice President Jejomar Binay; former Presidents Fidel Valdez Ramos and Joseph Ejercito Estrada; our esteemed justices of the Supreme Court; our esteemed members of the diplomatic corps; our esteemed members of the House of Representatives and the Senate; leaders of local government; members of our Cabinet; uniformed members of the military and police; my fellow public servants; and, of course, to my bosses, good afternoon to all of you.

This is my third SONA, and it feels like only yesterday that we began to dream. It feels like only yesterday that we simultaneously decided to take the straight path. It feels like only yesterday that we began to cast aside the 'wang-wang,' not only on the roads but in the social system.

Two years have passed since you said, “We are tired of corruption; we are tired of poverty.” It is time to restore a government that is truly an ally of the people.

Like many of you, I grew up under the oppression of the powerful. I was twelve years old when Martial Law was declared. Our world turned upside down: my father was imprisoned for seven years and seven months; my family was forced to live abroad for three years; I witnessed the suffering of many due to the dictatorship. This forged my principle: If someone is oppressed and robbed of their rights, I will side with them. If there is an abusive oppressor, I will fight them. If I see something wrong with the system, it is my duty to correct it.

Martial Law has long ended. We were asked then, “If not us, who else?” and “If not now, when?” Our unified response: us and now. The democracy stolen through oppression and violence, we recovered it peacefully; we successfully ignited the light from the darkest chapter of our history.

But let us not forget the root of Martial Law: the dictator used the Constitution to remain in power. And until now, the clash continues between those who want the same system and those who want to continue taking advantage.

From the first day of our term, we were met with nothing but the nightmares of a lost decade.

There was the case of the North Rail. It was already very expensive, but after renegotiations, it became even more so. Despite this, the benefits were reduced. The nineteen train sets became three, and the stations, from five, became two. What's even more tragic is that we are now being made to pay for its debt, now.

There was the reckless bonus given to some GOCCs [government-owned and -controlled corporation], despite the losses of their agencies. There was the 1 billion pesos evaporated by PAGCOR [Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation] for coffee. There was the management system in the PNP [Philippine National Police] that set aside the need for weapons for 45 percent of the police, just to profit from an old helicopter bought at a brand new price.

There was almost no money left to spend, and there were layers upon layers of debts that needed to be paid immediately. We inherited a long list of duties that we must fulfill: the 66,800 backlog in classrooms, worth an estimated 53.44 billion pesos; the 2,573,212 backlog in chairs, worth 2.31 billion pesos. When we arrived, almost 36 million Filipinos were not yet members of PhilHealth. The amount needed to include them: could reach 42 billion pesos. Let's add to all of that the 103 billion pesos needed for the modernization of the Armed Forces. In the face of all this, the funds left to us that we can freely use: 6.5 percent of the total budget for the remaining six months of 2010. We are like a boxer thrown into the ring with his hands and feet tied, his eyes blindfolded, and with the referee and the judges siding with the opponent.

That is why in the first three months of our term, we looked forward to Sunday to entrust to the Lord the nightmares we faced. We expected it would take at least two years before there would be significant change. Will the people give us sufficient understanding?

But if there is one thing ingrained in our race, and which we have proven time and again to the whole world: Nothing is impossible for united Filipinos. We dreamed of change; we achieved change; and now, it is commonplace.

The road funded by you is straight, flat, and without bumps; the only 'tongpats' (kickback) is asphalt or cement. It is now commonplace.

The situation when a typhoon is approaching: relief is already on standby, and it is not the people who are waiting for relief. Rescue services are also ready to assist the people, and it is not just us helping each other. It is now commonplace.

The sirens on the streets now come only from the police, ambulances, or fire trucks—not from government officials. This has become commonplace. The government that was once abusive is now a true ally of the Filipino people.

We implemented reforms: we eliminated unnecessary expenses, pursued the corrupt, and showed the world that the Philippines is open for business under new management.

The former sick man of Asia is now full of vitality. When we received a positive credit rating action, some said it was just luck. Now that there have been eight, is it still luck? On the Philippine Stock Exchange index, when we first exceeded the 4,000 index, there were doubters. Now, with the number of all-time highs, even the economic managers are having trouble counting, and I was also surprised: we’ve reached 44, and the index rarely falls below 5,000. In the first quarter of 2012, our GDP growth was 6.4 percent; that’s miles away from the predictions, and the highest in the entire Southeast Asian region; we are second in Asia, next only to China. If before we were always the ones borrowing, now, it’s no joke that we are the ones lending. Before we were begging for investments; now, they are the ones flocking here. Japanese companies, in a meeting with us, said, “You might want to check us out. We’re not the cheapest, but we’re first in technology.” Even the head of a large bank in England recently spoke with us, and said they would like to be included in our financial consultations.

In every corner of the world, commentators are showing admiration. According to Bloomberg Businessweek, and I quote: “Keep an eye on the Philippines.” Foreign Policy magazine, and one of the leaders of ASEAN 100, said that we could become, and I quote, “Asia’s Next Tiger.” Ruchir Sharma, head of Emerging Market Equities and Global Macro at Morgan Stanley, I quote: “The Philippines is no longer a joke.” And he doesn’t seem to be flattering us, because his company is estimated to have invested 1 billion dollars in our country. I hope that the admiration from abroad will also be followed by local reporters.

We ensure that development reaches more people. Let us remember: When we started, the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program had 760,357 beneficiary households. We targeted to increase this to 3.1 million within two years. As of February of this year, the 3 millionth beneficiary household of Pantawid Pamilya has already been registered. Next year, we will further expand its coverage to 3.8 million households; that is five times the number we inherited.

The impact of this project is long-term. The studies are not yet complete, but even now, the numbers show good results. Based on the list of the DSWD [Department of Social Welfare and Development]: there are 1,672,977 mothers who regularly have check-ups. In addition, 1,672,814 children have been vaccinated against diarrhea, polio, measles, and others; 4.57 million students are no longer forced to be absent due to poverty.

In terms of health: When we came in, only 62 percent of Filipinos were enrolled in PhilHealth. What is worse is that it was not certain if all of them were among those who truly needed state assistance, or were just lucky to be close to politicians. Now, 85 percent of all citizens are members. This means that 23.31 million Filipinos have been added to those covered by PhilHealth since we were given a mandate.

What is even better is this: The 5.2 million poorest households identified by the National Household Targeting System will fully and freely benefit from the benefits of PhilHealth. Because of the No Balance Billing policy of the Department of Health, treatment for dengue, pneumonia, asthma, cataracts, as well as treatment for catastrophic diseases such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, and acute leukemia, can now be obtained for free by our poorest compatriots.

This is the process for their treatment: You go to any government hospital. You present your PhilHealth card. You receive treatment. And you go home feeling well without spending a single centavo.

As stated in one of the briefings we attended, 4 out of 10 Filipinos do not even see a health professional throughout their lives. For others, the number is even higher: Some say 6 out of every 10 Filipinos pass away far from the care of a health professional. Whatever our basis, it cannot be denied: The number of Filipinos who do not access government health services is alarming. We are addressing this. From 10,000 when we came into office, we have now deployed 30,801 nurses and midwives under the RNHeals Program. Let us also add to them the more than 11,000 Community Health Teams that serve as a bridge to further strengthen the connection between doctors and nurses in the community.

And if before, nurses would only be assigned where their superiors decided, now, due to proper targeting, they are sent where they are needed: to areas that have long been left behind in society. We have sent our health professionals to 1,021 areas covered by the Pantawid Pamilya program, and to 609 of the poorest cities and municipalities, according to a study by the National Anti-Poverty Commission.

This addresses two problems: Aside from providing employment and work experience to thousands of nurses and midwives who previously had no outlet for their knowledge, quality care is also becoming accessible to millions of our countrymen.

However, we cannot yet be content with this, because our goal is universal health. It starts not in hospitals, but within our own homes. Greater knowledge, vaccines, and checkups are needed to keep us away from illness. Furthermore, we need to strive to avoid diseases that can be prevented.

For example: I mentioned mosquito traps against dengue last year. As you know, scientists are strict in their investigations. So it is still too early to say for sure that we are safe, but the initial results of this program are encouraging.

We tested the effectiveness of mosquito traps in areas where the highest incidence of dengue was recorded. Throughout the province of Bukidnon in 2010, there were 1,216 cases. When the mosquito traps were placed in 2011: it seemed to help because it decreased to 37; it is said that there was a 97 percent reduction. In the towns of Ballesteros and Claveria in Cagayan, there were 228 cases of dengue in 2010. By 2011, only eight were recorded. In Catarman, Northern Samar: 434 cases of dengue in 2010, became only four in 2011.

This is just an initial study. But even now, we should probably thank Secretary Ike Ona of the DOH [Department of Health] and Secretary Mario Montejo of the DOST [Department of Science and Technology]. We don't have much of an increase [in funding], perhaps your applause will encourage them to do more research and collaborate.

We still have many solutions to work on. The country's maternal mortality ratio remains alarming. That is why we are taking steps to address the health needs of women. We also want to achieve Universal Health Care, and ensure that our health institutions have sufficient equipment, facilities, and personnel.

In addressing these issues, the Sin Tax Bill can contribute significantly. We hope it will be passed as soon as possible. This will reduce vices and increase funds for health.

What awaits the youth when they enter school? Will they still first learn the alphabet under the shade of a tree? Will they still be sitting on the floor, scrambling for textbooks with their classmates?

We have strong faith in Secretary Luistro: Before the end of next year, we will have eliminated the 66,800 classroom shortage we inherited. I repeat, next year; only 40,000 this year. We will also completely address the 2,573,212 chair backlog we inherited before the end of 2012. This year, we will also eliminate the 61.7 million textbook backlog to finally achieve a one-is-to-one book-to-student ratio. Hopefully, now that the backlog in education is being eliminated, we will strive not to create another backlog due to the number of students. I think Responsible Parenthood is the answer here.

And so that our state universities and colleges (SUCs) are not left behind, we have a proposed 43.61 percent increase in their budget for the coming year. Just a reminder: Everything we do has a direction; this additional budget comes with conditions. The agreed-upon SUC Reform Roadmap of CHED [Commission on Higher Education] and the respective state universities and colleges must be implemented, to ensure the quality of the products of state-funded universities. If your grade is high in this assignment, you can expect us to work twice as hard to meet your remaining needs.

There is only addition happening in our education budget. Think about it: The DepEd budget inherited by us in 2010 was 177 billion pesos. Our proposal for 2013: 292.7 billion pesos. In 2010, the budget for SUCs was 21.03 billion pesos. It was increased annually to reach our 2013 proposal of 37.13 billion pesos. But despite this, even now, some are planning to skip classes to picket in Mendiola. It’s this simple: 292.7 is bigger than 177, and 37.13 is bigger than 21.03. So if anyone says or continues to say that we reduced the education budget, we will just convince your schools to offer a remedial math class for them. [ Laughter and applause ] And we hope that in these classes, we ask that you actually attend these remedial classes.

When we took office and began meaningful reforms, some belittled the government's achievements. They said that if not lucky, it was just a flash in the pan that would eventually fizzle out. There are still some who refuse to retire from sowing negativity; those who are silent on good news, and have made criticism an industry.

If you have a problem that before the year ends, every child has their own chair and book, look them in the eye, and tell them, “I don’t want you to study.”

If you are angered that 5.2 million of the poorest Filipino households can now enter a hospital without worrying about the cost of treatment, look at them again, eye to eye, and tell them, “I don’t want you to get well.”

If you are enraged that 3 million Filipino families are moving towards the fulfillment of their dreams because of Pantawid Pamilya, look at them, eye to eye, and tell them, “I will return you to hopelessness.”

The time when only the choices of the powerful mattered is over. For example, the former head of TESDA [Technical Education and Skills Development Authority] distributed scholarship vouchers; the problem was, there was no allocated fund for it. Naturally, the voucher would bounce. The result: 1,000+ schools charged the government 2.4 billion pesos. Someone and an administration were trying to look good; now the Filipino people are paying for it.

Secretary Joel Villanueva entered; he did not succumb to the seemingly impossible changes that needed to be implemented in his agency. Despite the large debt inherited by TESDA, they still honed 434,676 individuals under the Training for Work Scholarship Program. The TESDA Specialista Technopreneurship Program also delivers concrete success (more difficult to pronounce than the result). Believe it or not, each of the 5,240 certified Specialistas now earns 562 pesos per day or 11,240 pesos per month. This is even higher than the minimum wage.

From infancy to adulthood, the system is already working for the citizen. We ensure that economic growth will generate employment.

Let us remember, just to break even, we need to create 1 million new jobs annually for new entrants. What we have created in the past two years: almost 3.1 million new jobs.

This is the reason why the unemployment rate in the country is continuously decreasing. When we came into office, the unemployment rate was 8 percent. It became 7.2 in April of 2011, and further decreased to 6.9 this year, also in the month of April. Isn't it reasonable to dream that one day, every Filipino willing to work hard will have a job?

Let us just look at the BPO [business process outsourcing] sector. In the year 2000, only 5,000 people were employed in this industry. Fast forward to today: 638,000 people are now employed by BPOs, and it generated 11 billion dollars in revenue for our economy in 2011. The industry's projection is that by 2016, when I will be saying goodbye to you, it will generate 25 billion dollars and employ 1.3 million Filipinos. This does not yet include the estimated 3.2 million taxi drivers, baristas, sari-sari stores, eateries, and many others who will benefit from the indirect jobs created by the BPO industry.

A large part of our job-generation strategy is also the construction of sufficient infrastructure. Those who have vacationed in Boracay have already seen our newly inaugurated terminal in Caticlan. Plans are also laid out to expand its runway.

There will be more like it. Before the end of my term, the New Bohol Airport in Panglao, New Legaspi Airport in Daraga, and Laguindingan Airport in Misamis Oriental will be built. We will also upgrade our international airports in Mactan, Puerto Princesa, and Tacloban. In addition to that, we will improve the airports in Butuan, Cotabato, Dipolog, Pagadian, Tawi-Tawi, Southern Leyte, and San Vicente in Palawan. We in Tarlac will just wait.

I am the fourth President to inherit the problem of NAIA 3. Not only airplanes take off and land here; even problems and anomalies have landed as well. Secretary Mar Roxas has already given his word: Before we meet at the next SONA, the structural defects we inherited in NAIA 3 will be fixed.

This June, the process for the LRT Line 1 Cavite Extension project, which will ease traffic in Las Piñas, Parañaque, and Cavite, also began to move forward. In addition, to further ease traffic in Metro Manila and speed up travel from North Luzon to South Luzon Expressway, there will be two elevated NLEX-SLEX connectors. These will be completed in 2015. The trip from Clark to Calamba will only take 1 hour and 40 minutes once these are completed. Before we step down from office, quality terminals will also be built in Taguig, Quezon City, and Parañaque to park buses traveling to the provinces, so they no longer have to squeeze onto EDSA.

The conversation regarding the agency that was once considered a hotbed of failures has changed. I remember before: During the rainy season, when the Tarlac River overflowed, MacArthur Highway would be flooded. It would melt the asphalt; the road would become bumpy until it eventually disappeared. As the representative of my district at that time, I complained about this. The response from the DPWH [Department of Public Works and Highways]: We know the problem, we know the solution, but we don't have the money. I had to plead with my barangays, and I told them, “If we don't prioritize this, no one will do it, and we will be the ones to suffer.” Before, it was all “hey, wake up!” directed at the government, complaining about why nothing was being done. Now the complaint is, “The traffic is terrible, there's so much being done.” [ Laughter and applause ] Just a reminder: We are fixing these roads without raising taxes.

We will build roads, not based on kickbacks or whims, but based on a clear system. Because we are no longer haphazardly allocating funds for projects, they will no longer fall apart in the plan; Filipinos will truly benefit from real roads. When we took office, 7,239 kilometers of our national road network had not yet been fixed. One thousand five hundred and sixty-nine kilometers of this have been repaired under the administration of Secretary Babes Singson; in 2012, another 2,275 kilometers were added and completed. Even the roads and dangerous curves are being identified and repaired using the latest technology. We will continue to work on this every year, so that before the end of my term, every inch of our national road network will be fixed. Of course, don't just add to the national road network.

It's not just the roads, but also the system, that is being fixed at the DPWH. Due to compliance with the correct bidding and procurement processes, their agency has saved 10.6 billion pesos from 2011 to this June. Even the contractors recognize the positive results of the DPWH reforms. They say, “The top 40 contractors are fully booked.”

I hope the construction of our other infrastructure will not be delayed so that the growth of other industries will not be hampered.

The development of infrastructure is linked to the growth of tourism. Think about this: In 2001, tourist arrivals in our country were 1.8 million. When we arrived in 2010, it was around 3.1 million. Imagine: In the length of their administration, the tourist arrivals they added were only 1.3 million; we contributed to that even for just half a year. As of June 2012, we already have 2.1 million tourists. Many more will arrive during the peak season before the year ends, so I have no doubt that we will reach the quota of 4.6 million tourists for 2012. This means we will add 1.5 million tourists. Therefore, in two years, the growth of our tourist arrivals will be greater compared to what our predecessors added in nine and a half years. We are not boasting; we are just stating the truth.

But Secretary Mon Jimenez was not content with this. He said that if Malaysia had 24.7 million tourists visit in 2011, and if Thailand was estimated to have 17 million, with the abundance of beautiful scenery in our country, it wouldn't be far-fetched to dream that by 2016, 10 million tourists will visit the Philippines every year. If the Filipino people continue to unite, as we demonstrated when we elected the Puerto Princesa Underground River as one of the New Seven Wonders of Nature, there is no doubt that we can achieve this. Our message to the world is: “It’s more fun in the Philippines.” Even before Secretary Mon Jimenez has been in office for a year, we are already reaping the positive results of the reforms we have implemented. We can say that when it comes to tourism, “It’s really fun—to have Secretary Mon Jimenez as our Secretary.”

If we are talking about growth, agriculture is at the top of the list. Secretary Alcala is working tirelessly to deliver good news. He visited all the provinces not to campaign for himself but to campaign for the program of the Department of Agriculture. Before, it seemed that what the leaders of the Department of Agriculture were growing was the debt of the NFA [National Food Authority]. They inherited 12 billion pesos in debt; they left us with 177 billion pesos.

Didn't they make us believe that there was a 1.3 million metric ton rice shortage, and to address this, they imported at least 2 million metric tons in 2010? They ordered rice as if it were unlimited, but because there was too much, it just rotted in the warehouses. We reduced the 1.3 million metric tons to 860,000 metric tons in the first year. This year, it's only 500,000, including a buffer in case we are hit by a typhoon. Let's just hope the weather doesn't scold us, and hopefully next year we can export rice.

Secretary Alcala said: The key here is a realistic irrigation program and vigorous implementation of the certified seeds program. What's painful is that this isn't new knowledge; it's just not being implemented. If they had worked properly a long time ago, where would we be now?

Let's also look at the coconut industry and the cocowater that used to be thrown away, but is now benefiting farmers. In 2009, we exported 483,862 liters of cocowater. This increased to 1,807,583 liters in 2010. Don't be surprised, in 2011, 16,756,498 liters —can I repeat that?—16,756,498 liters of cocowater were exported by the Philippines. Coco coir, which used to be ignored, now has a shortage because exporters are buying it all up. We will not waste this opportunity. We will buy new machines to process the husk to obtain the fibers used for coco coir. Next year, we will further benefit from the coconut industry. We have allocated 1.75 billion pesos to invest and grow it.

My mother started the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP). It is only right that this program be completed during my term.

The system is being streamlined to speed up the implementation of agrarian reform. The government is taking all steps to distribute the lands irrigated and enriched by their sweat to our farmers. But there are still those who refuse to stop putting up obstacles. My response to them: We will follow the law. The mandate of the law, the mandate of the people, and my mandate: Before I step down from office, all lands covered by CARP must be distributed.

Let's clarify what's happening in the energy sector. Imagine this: Before, if the electricity wire reached the barangay hall, they would claim that the entire barangay was “energized.” That's why they proudly say that 99.98 percent of barangays in the country have electricity. Is there even competition in a service that Filipinos should have been enjoying for a long time? That's why, to test the capabilities of the DOE [Department of Energy] and NEA [National Electrification Administration], we allocated 1.3 billion pesos to light up the first target of 1,300 sitios, at a price of 1 million pesos each. When they finished, they lit up 1,520 sitios with the funds we allocated, and they only spent 814 million pesos. They did this in just three months, and they will do more this year until all 36,000 sitios without electricity are covered. To Secretary Rene Almendras, I am truly impressed with you; you seem to have endless energy. In delivering service, you are not just ever-ready, you are like the Energizer bunny—you keep on going, and going, and going.

The light is now shining brightly in our country—a light that reveals the crimes happening in the dark corners of society. The hard-earned money of Filipinos will no longer be stolen. The crime volume across the country continues to decline. The more than 500,000 crimes recorded in 2009 were reduced by more than half: there were only 246,958 in 2011. In addition, the former 2,200 cases of carnapping in 2010 were also reduced by more than half; there were only 966 in 2011.

This is what our headlines should be reporting. We are not saying that there is no more crime happening, but I think, no one should be angry that it has been halved. Raymond Dominguez, who was in and out of jail for a long time, wasn't it within just over a year that he was sentenced and imprisoned? Cases have also been filed against his two siblings and they are currently imprisoned as well. There are two suspects in the bus bombing in Makati last year, one has passed away; the other is already behind bars. He is with the more than 10,000 individuals involved in illegal drugs who were arrested by the PDEA [Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency] in 2011.

We know that Pacman doesn't fight every day, and we can't rely on him to reduce crime. That's why we are strengthening the police force. Wasn't it when we came in that 45 percent of our police force had no guns and relied on amulets while chasing criminals? There is a winner in the bidding, we are just ensuring that their products are of good quality. After the process, which we expect this year, 74,600 guns will be provided for them to use to defend and protect the country, society, and themselves.

Now, let us move on to the matter of national defense. Some have said that our Air Force is “all air, and no force.” Instead of being taken care of by the state, it seems our soldiers are deliberately being put in a precarious situation. We will not allow this to remain as it is.

After only one year and seven months, we have already allocated more than 28 billion pesos for the AFP [Armed Forces of the Philippines] Modernization Program. This will exceed the 33 billion pesos in funds allocated to the said program in the past 15 years. We are just starting to catch up in that situation. Once our AFP modernization bill is passed in Congress, we will be able to allocate 75 billion pesos for the next five years.

Thirty million US dollars in funding from the United States for the Defense Capability Upgrade and Sustainment of Equipment Program of the AFP is also finalized. This is in addition to their assistance to improve monitoring of our coastlines under the Coast Watch Center of the Philippines to be established.

The Armed Forces has also canvassed for equipment such as cannons, armored personnel carriers, and frigates. It won't be long before the relief of BRP Gregorio del Pilar arrives on our shores. In January, BRP Ramon Alcaraz, our second Hamilton class cutter, will dock in the Philippines. We will no longer deploy paper boats; now, high-tech and quality ships will guard our 36,000 kilometers of coastline.

It would be good if our Armed Forces would start cleaning up the hangars, because the equipment that will further strengthen our defense is arriving. Finally, our lone C-130, which has been patrolling the skies for 36 years, will have a partner. Two more C-130s will become operational again this year. Before the end of this year, we expect the delivery of the 21 refurbished UH-1H Helicopters we purchased, 4 combat utility helicopters, radios and other communication equipment, rifles, mortars, mobile diagnostic laboratories, including a bullet station assembly for the arsenal. By 2013, 10 attack helicopters, 2 naval helicopters, 2 light lift aircraft, 1 frigate, and force protection equipment will arrive.

And we are not only showing care for our police and soldiers through arms. Their burdens in life have also been lessened because more than 22,000 houses have been built under the AFP–PNP housing program.

This is not about antagonism or stubbornness. This is not about showing off. This is about achieving peace. This is about our ability to defend ourselves—something we have long thought impossible. This is about the life of a soldier who faces danger every day; this is about his family waiting for him to return safely, no matter what he faces. Let some of the beneficiaries tell about the change in their lives:

[Video starts]

“We give thanks to the Almighty God. We were given this opportunity—we were given this blessing. Secondly, having a kind president. This project, he does not neglect us—the police and the soldiers—the armed forces of our Philippines.”

— SPO1 Domingo Medalla, PNP Housing Beneficiary

“We can manage, ma’am. But I really make a way for them to get [into school]. That’s really it, ma’am, my mission in life is to get them educated, to give them the right education, so that my child won’t be pitiful, won’t be pitied by people, a parent should provide. And I am thankful for the Pantawid [Pamilya Program], ma’am, because I learned a lot here.”

— Eva Neri, CCT beneficiary

“It’s a big help that we are – as far as I know, the first to benefit and are still benefiting from this package, the Category Z Package of PhilHealth. We are very grateful, and while it’s not good that my child got sick, PhilHealth is there to help and is ready to help with our expenses.”

— Kristine Tatualla, PhilHealth beneficiary

“On the day I was involved in the Oakwood Mutiny – what we were fighting for, this is what we were waiting for for change, and this is our opportunity to have our own house, especially with the program of our president, Benigno Aquino III.”

— PFC Rolly Bernal, AFP Housing Beneficiary

And now that they are being cared for by the people, our soldiers are even more motivated to achieve peace. The surrender and return to the fold of 203 rebels, and the end of violence by 1,772 bandits, can be considered a success. For example, the dreaded terrorist Doctor Abu, who will no longer be able to sow terror. We also salute the restoration of peace in areas long deafened by gunfire. The result of bayanihan (community spirit): 365 barangays (villages) were reclaimed from the enemy, 270 buildings and schools were repaired, and 74 health centers were built.

If we are talking only about peace, let us move on to a place that has long been the face of unattainable aspirations. Before our reforms in the ARMM [Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao] began, and as you know, there were ghost students there, walking on a ghost road, to a ghost school, to be taught by a ghost teacher. The apparitions that shocked OIC Governor Mujiv Hataman: Four schools were found to have ghost students; teachers whose names do not appear on the records of the Professional Regulation Commission, as well as government personnel not listed on the plantilla (official personnel list), are also being investigated. Fifty-five ghost entries were removed from the payroll. The old practice of repeatedly scattering gravel on the road just to earn money is now prohibited. There will be no more cash advances to agencies, to avoid exploitation. The ghosts on the voters list will finally be silenced. So, to OIC Gov. Mujiv Hataman, we can say: you are truly a certified ghost buster.

What has replaced it, and is being replaced: housing, bridges, and learning centers for the Badjao people in Basilan. Community-based hatcheries, nets, materials for cultivating seaweed, and seedlings that have benefited 2,588 fishermen. Certified seeds, seedlings of taro, cassava, rubber, and fruit-bearing trees for 145,121 farmers. That is just the beginning; 183 million pesos are allocated for municipal fishing port projects in the ARMM; 310.4 million pesos for fire stations; 515 million pesos for clean drinking water; 551.9 million pesos for health equipment; 691.9 million pesos for day care centers; and 2.85 billion pesos for roads and bridges that will traverse the region. These are just some of the destinations of the total 8.59 billion pesos granted by the national government to implement the reforms in the ARMM. Let me clarify, this does not include the annual support they receive, which in 2012 reached 11.7 billion pesos.

Even those who previously wanted to secede are seeing the effect of the reforms. We recognize this as an indication of their trust, as evidenced by the past seven months, during which there have been no clashes between the military and the MILF [Moro Islamic Liberation Front]. In the peace process, the discussions are open and transparent. Both sides are showing trust in each other. Sometimes, the process may be complex; this is just a sign that we are close to achieving our only aspiration: peace.

We also advanced the principle of peaceful dialogue in order to create our Executive Order regarding mining. The idea behind the consensus reached: to utilize our natural resources to improve the lives of Filipinos, not just now but also for future generations. We will not pluck the golden fruit of this industry if the price to pay is the destruction of the environment.

But this is only the first step. Consider this: in 2010, 145 billion pesos was the total value obtained from mining, but only 13.4 billion pesos or 9 percent went to the national treasury. The natural resources belong to you; we will not allow Filipinos to receive only scraps. We hope for the cooperation of Congress to pass a law that ensures the protection of the environment and guarantees a just share of benefits for both the public and private sectors from the blessings we obtain from this industry.

Let us discuss the situation in Disaster Risk Reduction and Management. Before, the government, which should be helping, was also asking for help. Now, when a storm is still in the Pacific Ocean, we already know where the aid will be destined, and there is a clear plan to avoid danger.

Every time we talk about disasters, I always remember what happened to us in Tarlac when a storm once hit. Due to the heavy rain, a dike collapsed. When our barangay captain woke up, the flood had already swept away his house and farming equipment. Luckily, the whole family was saved. They were just unlucky that their carabao, which was left tied to a tree, was strangled by the strong current.

Many were defenseless against the typhoons Ondoy, Pepeng, and Sendong. So many perished from the onslaught of these deluges. Under the newly launched Project NOAH, we have put disaster risk reduction initiatives under one umbrella, and we no longer leave the evacuation of families to chance. Using technology, Filipinos are now given proper warnings so they can prepare and avoid disaster.

Real-time and direct benefits are now being derived from our 86 automated rain gauges and 28 water level monitoring sensors in various regions. Before the end of 2013, our target is: 600 automated rain gauges and 422 water level sensors. We will install these in 18 major river basins throughout the country.

Another change: Before, agencies competed with each other for numbers, each with their own agenda, each trying to outdo the others. Now, the culture in government is *bayanihan* (communal unity) for the benefit of the people. We call this convergence.

Previously, tree planting programs were rampant. But after planting, they were simply neglected. When communities looking for a livelihood saw them, they would cut them down to make charcoal.

There is a solution to this. We have already planted 128,558 hectares of forests throughout the country; this is just part of the total 1.5 million hectares that will be planted before we leave office. This includes communities under the National Convergence Initiative. The process: after planting the trees, the DSWD will coordinate with the communities. In exchange for conditional cash transfers, the trees will be cared for; there are also those who will grow new seedlings in the nursery. Three hundred thirty-five thousand and seventy-eight Filipinos are already earning a livelihood from this.

In one program, the private sector also contributed, providing special coffee and cacao seeds to the community, and teaching them how to care for them and ensure high yields. Coffee is planted under the trees, which, while standing, will ensure flood absorption and help us avoid damage. The company that provided the seeds is also a sure buyer of the harvest. The communities win with additional income, the private sector wins, and future generations who will benefit from the tall trees win as well.

Illegal logging has been a long-standing problem. Since EO 23 was implemented, Mayor Jun Amante has seized more than 6 million pesos worth of lumber. We thank him for that. This is just in Butuan; what if all LGUs [local government unit] show this kind of political will?

The lumber confiscated by the DENR [Department of Environment and Natural Resources] will be delivered to communities that have been trained by TESDA in carpentry. The result: chairs for public schools, which are then handled by DepEd. Imagine, what was once a source of damage is now a bridge to a better future. It was impossible before; impossible if the government turned a blind eye to illegal activities.

So, you who are without conscience; you who repeatedly gamble with the lives of fellow Filipinos: prepare yourselves. Your good days are over. We have already set an example with 34 personnel from the DENR, 1 PNP provincial director, and 7 chiefs of police. We are also seeking explanations from a regional director of the PNP who turned a deaf ear to my orders and turned a blind eye to the huge logs that passed through their area of responsibility. If you do not shape up, we will come after you. Even if you hide under your patrons, we will find you. We will include your patrons as well. So, before our paths cross, I once again implore you, it would be better if you would come to your senses.

From the womb, through education, and in employment, a change is coming for the Filipino. And should he choose to serve in government, the state’s care will continue until his retirement. The government will recognize his contribution as a public servant, and will not begrudge him the pension that he himself invested in.

Think about this, and I was surprised to learn this: we have pensioners who receive only 500 pesos per month. How can he make that suffice for water, electricity, and food every day? Our response: With the arrival of the new year, the monthly pension of our old-age and disability pensioners will not be less than 5,000 pesos. We are happy that we can meet their needs now, without jeopardizing the welfare of pensioners tomorrow.

The face of the government is truly different now. Our salaries are now keeping pace with the private sector for entry-level positions. But when you and your classmate who chose to work in the private sector are promoted at the same time, you are left behind.

We will catch up on that; but for now, the good news for those working in the government: Performance-Based Incentives. Previously, even if an agency's operations were failing, the lowest employee rating was still very satisfactory. Because of camaraderie, supervisors found it difficult to give fair ratings to their personnel. It's a pity for those who work hard. They lose the reason to excel because the incentive is the same for the lazy and the diligent.

Here is just one of the steps we are taking to address this. Starting this year, we will implement a system where the bonus is based on the agencies' achievement of their targets for the year. The key to your advancement is now in the employee's hands. The incentive can reach 35,000 pesos, depending on your performance in your job. This is in addition to the across-the-board Christmas bonus you will receive.

We are doing this, not only to raise confidence and show our trust in our public servants. Above all, this is for the Filipino who hopes for honest and efficient service from public servants, and hopes that they and they alone are considered the boss of their government.

You know, from the very beginning there were already those questioning what we said, “If there is no corruption, there is no poverty.” Until now, there are still a few who ask: Can you eat good governance? The simple answer is, “Of course.”

Let us reflect on where we came from: Previously, investment in the Philippines was like the “Wild West.” Business was already risky, but the risk was exacerbated by uncertain and secretive policies. You would be given something with the right hand, then taken away with the left.

Now, because the playing field is level, and there are clear and stable policies, confidence in our economy continues to rise. Investment continues to flow in; employment continues to grow; and the positive cycle of consumption, business growth, and increased employment continues.

Because the government spends responsibly, there are no leaks in the system. Because tax collection is efficient, the national treasury grows. Every peso collected has a designated purpose: a peso directly for roads, a peso for vaccines, a peso for classrooms and chairs, a peso for our future.

Because bridges, roads, and buildings are constructed properly, they are built where they are needed. Roads are well-maintained, products, services, and people move faster.

Because of sound agricultural management, food production is increasing, and its price is not soaring. Wages are stable, and the national economy is stronger.

Indeed, a stable and strong economy forged by good governance is the most effective shield against the challenges facing the world. For two years, we have dismantled the obstacles to progress, and now, only we can prevent our own advancement.

We did all of this while every country in every corner of the world grapples with their own problems and trials.

We are not alone in the world, so while we address our own problems, it is only right to monitor events that may affect us.

The events in Bajo de Masinloc have been resounding. Chinese fishermen entered our territory. Our ship intercepted them and found endangered species on board their vessels. As leader, I must enforce the laws prevailing in our country. In pursuing this, the Nine-Dash Line Theory of the Chinese, which claims almost the entire West Philippine Sea, clashed with our rights and those of many other countries, including China, which was affirmed by the United Nations Convention on the Laws of the Sea.

We demonstrated utmost restraint. As a sign of our good intentions, we immediately replaced our naval vessel with a civilian ship. We did not engage in verbal exchanges with the attacks from their media. It is not an overstatement to ask the other side to respect our rights, just as they respect their rights as fellow nations in a single world that we must share.

There are those who say we should just let go of Bajo de Masinloc; that we should just avoid confrontation. But if someone enters your yard and says that where they are standing now belongs to them, would you allow it? It is not right for us to simply give away what rightfully belongs to us.

Therefore, I ask for the cooperation of the people on this issue. We should have one unified stance. Help me convey the justness of our positions to the other side.

The situation is not simple, and the solution will not be simple. Please trust us, we are consulting with experts, and with all the leaders of our country, as well as our allies—as well as those on the other side of this issue—to find a solution that is acceptable to everyone.

With every step on the straight and narrow path, we have sown change. But there are still a few who are trying to uproot it. As I speak now, there are those whispering in a room and dissecting my words; looking for loopholes to criticize tomorrow. They will say, “It’s just talk, and the straight path is not true.” They will also say to let it go, to unite; just forgive and forget so we can move forward.

I cannot accept this. Just forgive and forget the 10 years that were lost to us? Just forgive and forget for the farmer who is buried in debt because of our continued rice imports, when we could have enriched our own land?

Just forgive and forget for the family of a police officer who died defenseless, because he only had a baton while chasing armed criminals?

Should we simply forgive and forget for the families of the 57 victims of the Maguindanao massacre? Can “forgive and forget” bring them back? Forgive and forget all the offenses of those who plunged us into this rotten state? Forgive and forget to restore the old status quo? My response is, “To forgive, one can; to forget, one cannot.” If the guilty are not held accountable, you guarantee the suffering of the people once more.

True unity and reconciliation will only come from true and complete justice. Justice is what is sought in the plunder case filed against the former president. Justice is giving him the opportunity to face the accusations and defend himself. Justice is what we witnessed on May 29th. On that day, we proved that justice is possible even when your opponent holds a high position. On that day, a Delsa Flores in Panabo, Davao del Norte, said, “It turns out that only one law needs to be followed by a court interpreter like me, and the Chief Justice.” It is possible for the scales to be balanced; even the rich and powerful can be prosecuted and held accountable.

Therefore, when you become Chief Justice, the people have great expectations of you. We have proven that the impossible is possible; our job now is to ensure that the change towards true justice continues, even after our term. There are many flaws in the system that you need to fix, and I know it won't be easy. I know how heavy the burden of a clear mandate is; but this is the mandate given to us by the people; this is the duty we have sworn to; this is what we need to fulfill.

Our desire is simple: If you are innocent, you will wholeheartedly face the court, because you are confident that you will be acquitted. If you are the perpetrator, regardless of your surname, or how many titles are attached to your name, you can be certain that you will be held accountable for the wrong you have committed.

Thank you also to Ombudsman Conchita Carpio-Morales, for accepting the challenge of being a true guardian of the people. Honestly, she could have declined the responsibility and said, “I am already retired, can’t someone else do it?” But her concern for the country prevailed. Despite this, someone still gave her a grenade at her home. Ma’am, more trials are coming; perhaps in time, you will be like me, being called – even called simultaneously – a greedy capitalist collaborator or even a communist heading towards dictatorship because of the vigorous reforms we are implementing.

I admire your performance and thank you very much for being an instrument of justice, especially during the height of the impeachment trial. Thank you also to the two institutions that make up Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives, which the people weighed and found to be more than sufficient.

To all those who helped in the functioning of the judicial processes: You went through intense trials, criticisms, and doubts; including the fear that if you lost, you would be the first to be targeted by the enemy. But you did not waver. The Filipino people relied on you, and you proved their trust in you was justified. You did not disappoint the nation; you further clarified our future.

Just a reminder: The fight does not end with a corrupt official removed from office, a flawed contract prevented from being implemented, or an office with its administration corrected. That is why we are appealing to Congress to pass our proposal to amend the Anti-Money Laundering Act, so that we can further strengthen accountability for the corrupt.

What we are enjoying now: every lit and to-be-lit sitio; every road, bridge, airport, train, and port; every contract without irregularities; safety and peace from city to village; the return of integrity to the justice system; every classroom, chair, and book that has reached the youth; every Filipino given a new future—all of this, we have achieved in just two years.

Let us compare these two years to the past nine and a half years that we suffered through. Isn't the agenda of change progressing? Those who share our aspirations are likely with us in this agenda. And if you are against us, you are probably also against what we are doing. If they oppose the agenda of change, can they say they are on your side?

Elections are coming again. You, our bosses, are the only ones we will follow. My question to you is, “Boss, which path will we take? Will we continue our journey on the straight path, or will we maneuver backwards, returning to a crooked and aimless road?”

I still remember when we started. I was very aware of the weight of the burden that awaited us. I was among those who thought: Can we still straighten such a crooked system?

Here is what I have learned in 25 months of leadership: Nothing is impossible. Nothing is impossible because if the citizenry sees themselves as the sole boss of their government, they will lift you up, guide you, and they themselves will lead towards meaningful change. It is not impossible for the Philippines to be the first country in Southeast Asia to provide and is providing free vaccines against rotavirus. It is not impossible for the Philippines to stand up and say, “The Philippines belongs to Filipinos—and we are ready to defend it.” It is not impossible for the Filipino who for so long bowed their heads whenever they encountered a foreigner—now, the Filipino, is looked up to with pride by the whole world. Truly, it is wonderful to be Filipino in these times.

Last year, I asked the citizenry to give thanks to those who contribute to positive change in society. The trials we went through were no joke, so it is only right to thank those who shared the burden, in repairing the wrongs caused by bad governance.

To all members of my Cabinet: Thank you very much. The people are fortunate to have people like you who are willing to sacrifice their private and peaceful lives to deliver public service, even knowing that the compensation for it is a smaller salary, danger, and criticism. So thank you very much again.

Please do not take it amiss if I personally name them: To Father Catalino Arevalo and Sister Agnes Guillen, who nurture and grow my spiritual life, especially in times of extreme trials, thank you very much as well.

This is my third SONA, and only three remain. We are now entering the midpoint of our leadership. Last year, my challenge to you was: Cast aside the culture of negativity; in every instance, uplift your fellow Filipino.

I know that what we are enjoying now: You did not fail. The change came from you. You said: It is possible.

I stand before you as the face of a government where you are the boss and you are still the strength. I am merely reporting on the changes you have made possible.

That is why to all nurses, midwives, or doctors who chose to serve in the barrios; to every new graduate who chose to work in the government; to every Filipino athlete who carries the flag wherever in the world; to every government employee who faithfully serves: You made the change happen.

Whenever I face a mother who says, “Thank you that my baby has been vaccinated,” my response is: “You made this happen.”

Whenever I face a child who says, “Thank you for the paper and pencil, for the opportunity to study,” my response is: “You made this happen.”

Whenever I face an OFW who says, “Thank you that I can now dream again of growing old in the Philippines,” my response is: “You made this happen.”

Whenever I face a Filipino who says, “Thank you, I thought our sitio would never have electricity again. I thought I would not live to see light like this,” my response is: “You made this happen.”

Every time I face a farmer, teacher, pilot, engineer, driver, call center agent, the common Filipino; every Juan and Juana dela Cruz who says “Thank you for the change,” my response to you is: “You made this happen.”

I repeat, what was once impossible is now possible. I stand before you today, and say, “This is not my SONA. You made this happen. This is the SONA of the Filipino people.” Thank you very much, and good afternoon to all.

[ Read this in English ] [ Read the 2012 SONA Technical Report (PDF file)]