[ Read this in English ]

Vice President Jejomar Binay; former President Fidel Valdez Ramos; Senate President Franklin M. Drilon and members of the Senate; Speaker Feliciano Belmonte Jr. and members of the House of Representatives; Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno and our magistrates of the Supreme Court; distinguished members of the diplomatic corps; members of the Cabinet; local government officials; members of the military, police, and other personnel from our uniformed ranks; my colleagues serving the people; and to my Bosses, my beloved countrymen:

Good afternoon to all of you.

This is my fifth SONA, only one remains. We have a saying: He who does not look back at where he came from, will not reach his destination. So it is perhaps right that we look back:

Before, in our situation: It seemed like madness to dream. There was a bureaucracy that was meaningless, layers of kickbacks, and corruption was swelling in the system. We were considered the “Sick Man of Asia.” Our economy was sluggish; our industry, thin. There was no confidence to invest in our country. The result: very few jobs were created. We found the Filipino people thirsty for hope. Many of us gave up and were forced to seek their fortune abroad. We simply accepted: We really could not expect anything from our government and society.

The Philippines was indeed mired in excessive politics. Trust in each other disappeared, the world's confidence in us weakened, and the most painful: We lost faith in ourselves.

At this point we began to tread the straight path.

As father of the nation, the burdens on my shoulders are not only the problems we inherited and those that arise in the present—it is also my obligation to prepare for the future. At every moment, I must consider the interest and point of view of everyone. Just imagine: It's like watching 200 channels on television at the same time. You need to know, not only what is currently happening, but the origin and destination of the content of each channel. You must not be confused, and you must have a response to any question, suggestion, and criticism—and you must answer it, before it is presented to you. This job is not easy, and I am only human, and sometimes I have doubts.

But I am filled with resolve because my primary objective is clear: to return the government to its proper focus—to serve the people at all times. [Applause]

Don’t we have a saying: Give a man a fish, and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish, and you feed him for a lifetime. An example of this is TESDA. Through the Training-for-Work Scholarship Program, the DAP contributed 1.6 billion pesos. This enabled 223,615 beneficiaries to graduate. 66 percent of these—or the equivalent of 146,731 graduates—are now employed. The remaining 34 percent are also being assisted by TESDA in finding jobs. Look at this: The names and other data of all TESDA scholars are listed, which you can verify. [Applause]

If we divide the amount of funds provided by the number of graduates, the government has invested 7,155 pesos for the training of each scholar. In the BPO sector, an income of 18,000 pesos per month is already low. Each year, he will earn 234,000 pesos. Even if the maximum tax deduction is given, his income tax per year will be: 7,900 pesos. This means that the state’s investment of 7,155 pesos, in the first year alone, has been recovered, with more to spare. This, and all the taxes our scholar will pay until he retires, will provide his fellow citizens with the same opportunity. This is good governance [Applause]: with the right intention, method, and result. Everyone wins.

Let us listen to the stories of two TESDA graduates:

‘Once you reach your dream—success isn’t stable, you know. You need to work hard for it.’

“My name is Marc Joseph Escora. I am a high school graduate. And through TESDA’s help, I have my career in the BPO [business process outsourcing] industry right now.”

“I stayed in Libertad public market for seven years. I worked as a barker. My family couldn’t afford to send us all to school at the same time, so I needed to find another way to graduate.”

“The most important thing I learned is the confidence to interact with other people. When people see that you have a disability, they no longer look forward to your ability. We just need to have self-confidence.”

“If TESDA wasn't there to help, maybe I wouldn't be where I am today. Our way of living, I can say, is better compared to before.”

– Marc Joseph Escora, TESDA beneficiary [ watch the video ]

“Because of TESDA, my studies, my job search, and my ability to help my family were accelerated.”

“I am Jonnalyn Navarossa, Technical Trainer at Toyota Motor Philippines. I was the overall topnotcher of batch 1 in automotive servicing at TESDA Region 8. I chose automotive servicing because my dream is to become a mechanical engineer. So, to be able to work and save money, I took TESDA.”

“We have become accustomed to the idea that being an auto mechanic is a job only for men. But I proved that if you are hardworking and determined, we can produce quality products. Because of TESDA, the importance of quality and good workmanship has been ingrained in me. My confidence has increased, and it feels better to dream big.”

– Jonnalyn Navarossa, TESDA beneficiary [ watch the video ]

[Applause]

We also started the Expanded Conditional Cash Transfer Program this June 2014, with a fund of 12.3 billion pesos. Now, the state also supports the beneficiary until they reach 18 years of age. Some may ask, “Why?” Because according to a study by the Philippine Institute for Development Studies, high school graduates earn 40 percent more than those who only finished grade school.

We are investing in the most important asset of the country: our people. This is proven by the data from NEDA. According to them, our poverty incidence of 27.9 percent in the first semester of 2012 decreased to 24.9 percent in the same period in 2013. These three percentage points equate to almost 2.5 million Filipinos who have risen above the poverty line. [Applause] It is true that the poorest in society should be given careful attention. But we will not stop there: Now that our capabilities have increased, we are striving to ensure that everyone who has escaped poverty does not fall back below the poverty line. [Applause]

We arrived at a society like a broken house that we cannot leave. What's worse is that we had almost no tools and materials to fix it. In recent years, with the contribution of every compassionate Filipino, we are building these tools and materials—such as the budget that is solely focused on the needs of the people, and we have been passing it on time for four consecutive years. This includes laws that speed up the benefits reaching our Bosses.

It was here—in a fair system—that the revitalization of our economy began. We saved money due to sound fund management. We are expanding the scope of services without raising taxes, except for the Sin Tax Reform, which aims to reduce vices in society. [Applause]

We worked to have the capacity to fund the projects we have implemented, are implementing, and will continue to implement. We intensified tax collection: from a collection of 1.094 trillion pesos in 2010, we have increased it to 1.536 trillion in 2013. [Applause] We streamlined the management of our debts. The result: Our debt to GDP ratio has decreased; the money that used to be paid for interest is now going to social services. Even the obligations that most were inherited, we were able to address them. For example: it was set in 1993 or during the time of President Ramos to recapitalize the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas in the amount of 50 billion pesos so that it could fulfill its functions. President Ramos funded 10 billion pesos, and it was not increased after that. We were left with a shortfall of 40 billion; we have already paid it. [Applause]

We worked hard for the funds we have now, so we cannot simply squander it. If our Bosses choose the right leader, the next one will surpass our achievements, because we have already reduced the problems, and they will have a higher foundation to build upon.

Why higher? In 2013, for the first time, we obtained an investment grade status from Moody’s, Fitch, and Standard and Poor’s—the three most renowned credit ratings agencies in the world. In their assessment of our macroeconomic fundamentals and governance, the risk was reduced, so investor confidence increased. Standard and Poor’s was not even content: just this May, they gave us another upgrade. This means: Because we are now investment grade, the government can borrow funds for programs and projects at a cheaper rate, more investors are attracted to our country, and Filipinos enjoy the benefits faster. [Applause]

If we sum up all the capital that has entered the Philippine Economic Zone Authority since its establishment in 1995, we will see that 42 percent entered during the four years of our term. The remaining 58 percent took other administrations 15 years to build. We are confident: before we step down from office, we will equal or exceed this amount. To Director General Lilia de Lima: Thank you for what you have done and will continue to do in achieving this success. [Applause]

Our economy and country are truly taking off, and we are reaching even higher aspirations. We inherited a seemingly grounded aviation industry: we were imposed with significant safety concerns by the International Civil Aviation Organization, or ICAO, we were given a downgrade by the United States Federal Aviation Administration, and our local carriers were placed with restrictions by the European Union.

In 2013, the ICAO already removed the significant safety concerns regarding the Philippines. In the same year, this was followed by the European Union's approval for Philippine Airlines to fly again to Europe, so Filipinos can now travel directly [Applause] from Manila to London. Cebu Pacific will likely follow, as they have also received permission from the EU this 2014. This year, the United States Federal Aviation Administration also upgraded the Philippines back to Category 1. Because of this, more routes to the United States can be added. In the field of tourism and trade, the increase in flights of our airlines to countries that are members of the EU and the United States has been a great help.

Reports are reaching us that, due to the number of businessmen and tourists wanting to visit our country, there are times when there are not enough flights to accommodate them. These upgrades are good news: there will be more flights, so this problem will be addressed. And with the continued cooperation of the CAAP and our local carriers, we are sure to attract more tourists and businessmen in the coming years. It's a win for those who depend on the tourism sector, a win for the Filipino people. Good governance is the root of these successes. We thank Director General William Hotchkiss, the CAAP, and our local carriers for your efforts. [Applause]

The Philippines is truly at the center of the global stage. Just last May, we showcased our success in hosting the World Economic Forum on East Asia in our country. We will announce the progress we are achieving and the opportunities it brings to everyone at the APEC Summit to be held here next year. There is no doubt: the Philippines is now more open for business. [Applause]

Aside from a conducive business environment, we are also promoting good relations between our workers and companies.

Just imagine: Since 2010, the number of strikes per year has remained below ten, according to the National Conciliation and Mediation Board. This is a positive result of the Single Entry Approach, or SEnA, of DOLE, which we are promoting, where labor cases go through a 30-day conciliation-mediation process. What's good is that, of the 115 notices of strike and lockout in 2013, only one strike actually happened. This is the lowest in the history of DOLE. Thank you very much to Secretary Linda Baldoz, the DOLE family [applause] and of course to the labor and management sectors. Secretary Baldoz and I once joked that there were two strikes in 2012, only one in 2013, so it was halved, halved. I said: Linda, in 2014, having half a strike isn't a success. Maybe we can have no strikes? [Laughter and applause]

We also know that: To continue the economic growth and open up opportunities, infrastructure is needed. This will attract businessmen, speed up the flow of products and services, and ensure that we can compete with other markets in the world.

The change is really huge: The budget for infrastructure has more than doubled, from 200.3 billion pesos in 2011, to 404.3 billion pesos this 2014. [Applause] Let me just remind you: We have not added any taxes except for the Sin Tax Reform which addressed health concerns, while maintaining our allowable deficit, and our debt-to-GDP ratio continues to decline. This has a big impact, because not only has the fund increased: we have also reduced the leaks in the system, so we can be sure that every peso spent by the state is worth it.

Under the leadership of Secretary Babes Singson of the DPWH: No kickbacks, no bumps. The holes in the old system have been patched, and the process in the agency has been streamlined. A simple example of this is the removal of the Letter of Intent in the bidding process. Before, this was used as an instrument for collusion—when it was known who the bidders for the project were, it gave room for collusion. Another thing: The documents requested from bidders: only five now, from the previous 20. The process is faster, and there are fewer opportunities to ask for grease money or bribes. The result: Almost 28 billion pesos in funds have been saved, and the implementation of future projects is accelerated. [Applause] So to Sec. Babes and the DPWH: again, thank you very much to all of you. [Applause]

Truly remarkable: Along with the savings of the DPWH, the roads they have laid, repaired, expanded, or built since we took office have reached 12,184 kilometers. [Applause] When I saw this number, I also thought: How can I explain twelve thousand? We were told: this is equivalent to four roads connecting Laoag to Zamboanga City. These are national roads only; local farm-to-market roads or tourism roads are not included here. [Applause]

In the Public-Private Partnership program: From December 2011 to this June, your government has awarded and signed seven PPP projects with an estimated value of 62.6 billion pesos. In our four years on the straight and narrow path, we have surpassed the combined six approved solicited PPP projects from the previous three administrations. [Applause]

The difference between then and now is really huge. As Secretary Cesar Purisima said: Before, the Philippines could not attract investors. Before, the government itself offered various incentives, such as granting commercial development rights, subsidies, and other guarantees. Now, the situation is reversed. There is intense competition among companies eager to bid; they are willing to pay to obtain the privilege of building the infrastructure we need. For example: In the Mactan-Cebu International Airport Passenger Terminal Building, the government has a premium of over 14 billion pesos; in the NAIA Expressway Project Phase 2, the government received a premium of 11 billion pesos. Again: Good governance is the root of all this. [Applause]

Let's look at TPLEX. Because of this road, travel from Tarlac to Rosales in Pangasinan is now convenient. They say that the portion up to Urdaneta will be completed before the end of 2014. Next year, they say this road will reach its end in Rosario, La Union. [Applause]

The infrastructure that has long been promised is now also being concretized. The Aluling Bridge, whose concept was developed as early as 1978, is now open to the public. The Metro Manila Skyway Stage 3, which is part of the Metro Manila Expressway project dating back to the seventies, was launched in January. Those passing through Osmeña Highway can see how quickly the pillars for this are being built. The Ternate-Nasugbu Road, whose plan was started as early as 1994—is now 100 percent complete. [Applause] The Basilan Circumferential Road, which has been under construction since the year 2000, is also nearing completion. I won't say the exact date for fear of jinxing it. But if it is not fulfilled, I will accompany Governor Hataman every day until it is finished.

These are just some of the infrastructure projects that we do not plan to leave as a problem; instead, now, our Bosses are beginning to benefit from them.

Again, because of good governance, we are more capable of addressing even problems that are yet to come. For example: water. We know that as the population grows and the economy improves, more water will be needed in the coming years. According to studies, there may be a water shortage in Metro Manila by 2021. We will not wait for a drought: Solutions that have been thoroughly studied by experts have been approved—the Kaliwa Dam Project in Quezon, and the repair of the Angat Dam lines. This is a good solution compared to getting water from underground aquifers, which are more easily contaminated or allow saltwater intrusion. Moreover, if we rely solely on aquifers, the sinking of the land will be accelerated—which causes flooding.

Along with the dams for Metro Manila and neighboring towns is our support for those in the provinces. The Water District Development Sector Project, under the LWUA or Local Water Utilities Administration, has also been approved. [Applause]

Perhaps you have already heard about our biggest PPP project—the Laguna Lakeshore Expressway Dike—the bidding for which will also be opened before the end of 2014. [Applause] It will bring many benefits. First, it will reduce flooding. Now, if the water level in the lake reaches 12.5 meters, communities around it will surely be flooded. The solution: a dike with a height of more than 15 meters. The second benefit: Laguna Lake’s water will be cleaned. The third benefit: reduced traffic. On top of the dike, there will be an expressway, which will run from Los Baños to Taguig. Once the C-6 road connecting to San Jose del Monte is completed, we will have another way to cross Metro Manila without having to go through EDSA. [Applause] With the cooperation of the private sector, our obligation here is only right of way; a percentage of the land to be reclaimed will be paid to the winning bidder. Because of this, we will get what we need, while also reducing our expenses.

These are just a few examples of projects in the pipeline to bring benefits to our Bosses. There are many more: The NEDA Board has also approved the Laoag City Bypass Link Road Project; the Cebu Bus Rapid Transit Project; and the LRT Line 1 South Extension and Line 2 East Extension. For those from Palawan: Aside from the projects in Puerto Princesa Airport, also watch out for the Busuanga Airport. The construction of phase one of the modern Clark Green City in Capas, Tarlac has also been given the go signal, it will surely serve as a center of commerce and industry, not only in Central Luzon, but throughout the country. [Applause] Ultimately, our ambition for Clark Green City—to be a much larger Bonifacio Global City. What was once remote will become full of opportunities.

With good governance, trust in the market, the world, and our people in our government is being restored. This triggers a cycle: Because they see the results of the reform agenda, everyone contributes, our Bosses. The government is truly not alone in promoting widespread and meaningful reform. It is true: You are our strength. [Applause]

So, Bosses: Thank you for your trust and cooperation, which is becoming even more important in these times when we have been met with a series of tragedies.

In September 2013, lawless elements attacked Zamboanga: They used our peaceful countrymen as human shields, and even burned their homes. The skills of our uniformed personnel were tested. The most complex in the field of combat is what is called urban combat—but we were able to rescue 195 people, out of 197 people trapped in the firefight. We salute our brothers and sisters in uniform: The people triumphed because of your sacrifice. [Applause]

We instructed Secretary Singson to oversee the rehabilitation of the infrastructure damaged in Zamboanga. The primary needs: to provide housing for our countrymen who were burned. This is exactly what we are doing under the Zamboanga City Roadmap to Recovery and Reconstruction. By the beginning of August, affected families will begin to move into permanent homes in the Martha Drive Subdivision. A total of 7,176 homes in various locations are our target to be completed by June of next year. We ask for your understanding. Many problems had to be solved first regarding the acquisition of land for relocation. We are also ensuring that these homes are in accordance with their religious and cultural needs, so they are not ordinary. For the 1,661 families who want to repair their own homes, Home Materials Assistance worth 30,000 pesos is already being distributed.

3.5 billion pesos is available for the repair of infrastructure, the purchase of lots, the construction of permanent homes, and other support for Zamboanga. 2.57 billion pesos of this has been released to the NHA and DPWH.

Just a few weeks after the crisis in Zamboanga, an earthquake struck Central Visayas; the most damage was in Bohol. Here we saw what the people united can achieve in responding to a disaster. One week after the earthquake, there was electricity in Tagbilaran and in all the municipalities of Bohol. [Applause]

Now, each of the 25 critical bridges and roads damaged by the earthquake are passable. A total of 3.583 billion pesos has been released for the rehabilitation of Bohol and Cebu. [Applause] This includes 2.49 billion pesos allocated by the DILG to local governments, for the construction of markets, civic centers, bridges, water systems, municipalities, and other government infrastructure.

Before 2013 ended, Yolanda arrived— the strongest typhoon in history. 1.47 million families were truly affected, and 44 of our 81 provinces were hit. In Eastern Visayas, where the damage was most severe, a great deal of immediate assistance was needed.

Due to the typhoon’s extreme strength, many LGUs were paralyzed because they themselves were affected. Our prepositioned relief goods were even swept away, so help truly had to come from elsewhere. The delivery of aid was made even more difficult because the infrastructure was down: There was no electricity, roads were impassable, and almost all of the trucks and heavy equipment needed by our first responders were damaged in the most affected areas. There was also no gasoline, and no communication.

A remarkable display of unity was truly needed to deliver aid to the affected families, care for the orphaned and wounded, ensure that no disease outbreaks occurred, and fulfill many other duties. For example: Regarding food, it wasn’t just rice and canned goods that needed to be addressed. We also needed repacking centers, many trucks, and ships to transport aid to the affected provinces. Upon arrival of the relief goods, the roads to be traversed needed to be cleared, and the trucks needed to be refueled so they could return to their origin, in order to reload our food packs.

The government did not hesitate to respond. We quickly cleared, first of all, the airport, so within 24 hours after the typhoon, three of our C130s with aid on board had already arrived. On the same day, we established a communications hub to speed up the flow of information. On the second day, the DOH’s Rapid Health Assessment teams arrived; additional soldiers, police, and BFP personnel from other provinces; as well as DSWD personnel who led the relief operations— whether in distribution centers in Eastern Visayas, or in the many repacking centers that immediately opened across the country.

Within just two days, the Leyte water district was operational; on the third day, the first gas station opened. The main roads were immediately cleared. By November 22nd, or two weeks after the typhoon, one million food packs had been distributed to the victims; 35,162 cubic meters of debris had been cleared from the roads for these relief efforts; and 3,426 kilometers of National Roads had been cleaned and made passable again— we are currently repairing 108.8 kilometers of damaged roads, bridges, approaches, and landslide-prone areas. By Christmas that year, 2013, electricity had been restored in all municipalities affected by the disaster. [Applause]

Just like in an Emergency Room, the state poured all of its power into immediately stabilizing the patient. We thank the members of our Cabinet, who truly led the response to the affected communities. Sec. Cesar Purisima and Sec. Joel Villanueva of TESDA, who led logistics and organized the repacking centers, were like two warehouse operators. [Applause] Sec. Greg Domingo of DTI became the country’s head purchasing agent, while Sec. Linda Baldoz of DOLE chose to be a call center operator for everyone who wanted or offered help. [Applause] Thank you also to Sec. Jun Abaya of DOTC, who became the dispatcher of our transportation; to Sec. Dinky Soliman who truly proved her worth as the country’s chief relief worker; and to Sec. Mar Roxas of DILG and Sec. Volts Gazmin of DND, who gave marching orders to our uniformed personnel from the frontline of the disaster. [Applause] Again, thank you to our Cabinet.

To our friends and neighbors around the world: Your outpouring of solidarity will never be forgotten by a grateful Filipino people. Again, on their behalf, we thank you. [Applause]

Perhaps, it is because of our willingness to contribute as much as we can, which is demonstrated by our OFWs, peacekeepers, and other Filipinos abroad, that when we ourselves were in need, the world saw that we too were worthy of help. Thank you to you, and to all Filipinos who offered prayers and support, here and around the world. [Applause]

Our work did not stop. We implemented livelihood interventions, to speed up the recovery of our affected countrymen. This July, 221,897 jobs have already been created after we provided boats, fishing and farming equipment, seeds, and livestock. This also includes those of our countrymen who were part of the cash for work program and were paid for their participation.

Everyone will probably agree that Yolanda brought a huge problem. But according to international standards, when a disaster like this happens, it takes a year to complete relief efforts and begin the rehabilitation of a country. But in just eight months, the United Nations itself declared that we are already in the rehabilitation phase. Mr. Yuri Afanasiev of the United Nations Development Programme himself said: “We have never seen a recovery happen so quickly. And many of us have been in many different disasters.” [Applause]

A long period of time will be needed to fully recover from these severe disasters. In Haiti, two years have passed since the earthquake, and many are still in evacuation centers. Our brothers and sisters in Indonesia took eight years to recover from the tsunami in Aceh. Even in America, it is said that it took eight years to return to normal after Hurricane Katrina hit.

Our work is not yet finished. Many more houses need to be built; many more of our countrymen need to be lifted up; the effort to build back better for those affected by Yolanda continues.

That is why: This July, the LGU Rehabilitation and Recovery Plan for Cebu, Iloilo, Samar, Eastern Samar, Leyte, and Tacloban City was submitted to us and we have already signed it. [Applause] It passed the thorough review of the Cabinet clusters; it contains the needs of our countrymen, according to the extensive post-disaster needs assessment being conducted. This plan was formed through the diligent efforts of Secretary Ping Lacson, whom we tasked to focus on the challenges left by Yolanda. [Applause] I hope for the cooperation of Congress, because a large amount of funds is needed, to fully lift up our countrymen.

Let us remember: God provides mercy; man provides the action. This is also the same idea behind our efforts for disaster preparedness. We have strengthened the LGUs, which are the frontliners during typhoons and other disasters, using modern and extensive forecasting systems.

In the DREAM-LiDAR project under Project NOAH, for example, it is easier to identify areas that are most prone to flooding. We have already mapped 19 of our target 20 river systems to identify which areas are immediately affected whenever it rains heavily.

Because we have a more precise understanding of when and where the effects of a storm will hit, preparations and warnings from our LGUs are now being made earlier. Citizens are also being evacuated earlier. If we combine accurate forecasting with efficient LGUs, we will truly save many lives. In Albay, which was recently hit by Typhoon Glenda, no deaths were recorded due to the storm, thanks to the good governance of Governor Joey Salceda. [Applause] And if one province, which is practically a highway for storms, can do this, why should we doubt that other provinces not on the 'storm highway' can do it too?

Let's talk about security. We are aware of the challenges facing the country, and we also know how expensive the equipment we need is. Now, I am pleased to report to you: the modernization of the AFP is ongoing. We have acquired 8 brand new Sokol Combat Utility Helicopters, three AgustaWestland-109 helicopters, and the first landing craft utility ship made right here in our country, the BRP Tagbanua. Four refurbished UH-1 helicopters and 2 navy cutters have also arrived. Last May, we also inaugurated the state-of-the-art Command Center of Naval Forces West in Palawan.

Next year, 2 of the 12 FA-50 lead-in fighter trainer jets we purchased will arrive. [Applause] The remaining jets are expected to be delivered before the end of 2017. We are also targeting to acquire an additional 8 brand new Bell combat utility helicopters, 2 anti-submarine helicopters, 10 more AgustaWestland-109 helicopters, 2 light-lift aircraft, 3 medium-lift aircraft, radar systems and other equipment that will enhance the capabilities of our Armed Forces. [Applause] Meanwhile, in September of this year, we expect the arrival of an additional 17 refurbished UH-1 helicopters.

The initial M4 assault rifles we purchased for the military have also arrived. In the coming months, the total number of rifles that will be in the hands of our soldiers: 50,629 units of M4. The bonus: due to the efficient procurement process and honest management of funds, we have savings of over 1.2 billion pesos; these savings are now being used to buy even more rifles. [Applause]

Let me emphasize: All of these rifles are brand new and of high quality, coming from a manufacturer that has been making weapons for over a hundred years. Wasn't it the case before: the funds were exhausted, and it wasn't in accordance with the specifications we needed, like the Kevlar Helmets that were purchased. The specification said it should be from the U.S., but when it was purchased, it was from another country. Someone was convicted because of this. Even a judge allegedly involved in this, the investigation ordered by the Supreme Court is finished, and we are waiting for their decision.

We continue to pursue enemies of the state and criminal elements for the crimes they have committed. For example: The Chairman and Secretary General of the NPA were arrested this March. Normalcy and order are also returning to 31 provinces previously disturbed by the NPA.

The face of our police force is also changing. Proof of this is the 30 police officers, led by Inspector Charity Galvez, who repelled approximately 250 NPA who attacked their precinct in 2011. [Applause] This March, 4 rookie police officers bravely fought against the Martilyo Gang at the Mall of Asia. It’s good that we have reached a 1:1 police to pistol ratio, so our rookie policewomen have also been issued new guns. Before, the police were overlooked; now, they are being cared for by the state, and they are truly reciprocating with dedicated and zealous service. [Applause]

Let us listen to the voices of our brave police officers:

PO1 Juliet Macababbad: We heard, um, something break glass. My buddy and I became alert.

PO1 Marcelina Bantiyag: Ah, the first thing that came to my mind was that I drew my gun because I knew they—that they were ready to shoot at us; we were in uniform.

PO1 Maricel Rueco: My buddy, PO1 Bantiyag, said, “I’ll cover you, you call our PCP [Police Community Precinct]!”

PO1 Marcelina Bantiyag: We were able to arrest one of their members.

PO1 Delia Langpawen: It was our fourth day on duty there—right there at that post. Then, suddenly that’s what happened.

PO1 Juliet Macababbad: It is really necessary for every police officer to have a gun. It was good that we were issued a Glock 17 Generation 4.

PO1 Marcelina Bantiyag: The gun is a big help to us because when you are patrolling you have confidence that even if something happens you can engage.

PO1 Juliet Macababbad: It feels good to be able to help your fellow citizens. Whatever the men can do, we women can do too. [Applause]

PO1 Delia Langpawen: Even though we were nervous because it was our first encounter, what we thought about was the welfare of the people who were there.”

– PO1 Juliet Macababbad, PO1 Marcelina Bantiyag, PO1 Maricel Rueco, and PO1 Delia Langpawen—policewomen who arrested a member of the Martilyo Gang [ watch the video ]

This June, high-profile killings became frequent. Some of those involved in the killings of Mayor Ernesto Balolong, businessman Richard King, have been arrested, and our police are also following a good lead in the killing of race car driver Ferdinand Pastor. Don't worry: we will pursue justice completely, not just partially. That's why, in addition to the arrests we've made, we continue to gather evidence against other suspects. We will hold all those who are guilty accountable. [Applause]

We are further strengthening the security of the people. Since June 16th of this year, we have been implementing Operation Lambat in the National Capital Region. After tripling the number of checkpoints and conducting various operations, the result: 862 vehicles and 29 firearms were confiscated. We served 587 warrants of arrest, which resulted in the arrest of 410 suspects. We also reinstated Oplan Katok to ensure that only those who are qualified possess licensed firearms. 28,714 homes in the NCR were visited by police for this operation.

Before we implemented Oplan Lambat, from January to the second week of June, murder and homicide in the National Capital Region reached 31 cases per week. In just five weeks of operation, the murder and homicide rate: decreased to only 22 cases per week. A 29 percent decrease was recorded—equivalent to 9 murders prevented each week. And this is only in the NCR. If we can legislate pension reform, and if we can raise sufficient funds for additional police and to continue the plan to purchase equipment, Sec. Mar Roxas will further expand Operation Lambat, to make the entire country safer. [Applause] The funds for equipment were supposed to be under DAP, but because it was not obligated before the Supreme Court's decision came down, we need to find sources of additional funds.

Truly: Trust is the foundation of good governance. Trust that everyone affected or will be affected by the typhoon will be taken care of; trust that every day of work, you will safely return home to your family. Trust that you will not be taken advantage of by your leaders; trust that your government is there, your ally, especially if you are at a disadvantage. Trust that those who abuse will be held accountable, and that the processes and institutions used to steal from you will be corrected. Trust that if you follow what is right, you will get what is due to you. The restoration of your trust: That is what reform means. [Applause]

For example: In Customs, which really tested our patience in recent years. It became clear to us: a reset button was the solution. We created new offices to review and make Customs policies effective. We appointed a new commissioner, six new deputy commissioners, along with 40 other trustworthy individuals to implement our reforms in Customs. We also returned employees to their proper positions. We genuinely prohibited guards acting as cashiers, or warehousemen acting as examiners.

Many are sacrificing to fix Customs. This includes personnel from other government departments and agencies, whom we asked to transfer to Customs because we trust their integrity. Think about it: Who would look for a headache, especially when there is no guarantee of success? Some have postponed their promotion. Some have also expressed apprehension for fear of retaliation from syndicates. But in the end, they responded to our call to serve. It is only right that I personally thank all these personnel, led by Commissioner Sunny Sevilla. [Applause]

We affirm this: With resolve and unity, we can cleanse even an institution long tainted by corruption. Proof of this is the good news we received: From January to April 2014, cash collections of Customs increased by 22 percent compared to the same period last year. Their total collection in the first four months of the year: 117 billion pesos. [Applause]

To those who continue to engage in illicit activities: I know that you are no longer affected by fear and shame. It is up to you if your conscience bothers you—or if you feel pity for those addicted to drugs that you allow to enter, or for the farmers who are deprived of just income. My only point is: When enough evidence is gathered against you, Bilibid will be your next destination. [Applause]

If we talk about the reforms that are beginning to drive widespread development, I would also like to report to you the events regarding agrarian reform.

We all know, and it is clear in the law: we must first identify the lands that can and cannot be distributed. But the bitter truth is, we inherited flawed data. Why is that? The Cadastral Survey of our country began in 1913, which will determine the boundaries of the lands covered by each city, municipality, and province in the Philippines.

Another problem: Previous administrations prioritized the distribution of lands that were easy to distribute, such as government-owned land, and land that had already been agreed upon by the owner and the farmer. What was left to us are lands with many complications, and the root of long debates and lawsuits.

Another problem is the complex situation in ARMM. The land in ARMM is estimated at 1.5 million hectares. But the land recorded when we came into office is now at 2.9 million hectares due to overlapping land claims. Governor Mujiv Hataman of ARMM was even surprised and once asked me, “Boss, how can land give birth?”

We have no intention of passing these problems on to those who will come after us, only to be the root of new problems and further delay of agrarian reform.

In 2015, after 102 years, the Cadastral Survey will finally be completed. [Applause] This year, we will also re-file with Congress the proposed law to extend the filing of Notice of Coverage, which was not fully completed due to the problems we first needed to solve. [Applause] Once the proposed law is filed, we hope it will be passed as soon as possible.

If we are talking about trust, we must also include the Bangsamoro. After a long period of conflict and protracted negotiations, we have restored trust. Proof of this: Last March, the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed. [Applause]

But this is just the beginning of our progress on the path of broad development in Mindanao. No one can deny that the ARMM has been left behind. We want to give all Filipinos equal opportunities, that's why there should be a boost, so that our fellow countrymen on the margins can catch up. For example, in the budget we are proposing for 2015, 5.17 billion pesos from the DPWH budget is allocated for ARMM infrastructure. [Applause]

We are currently forging the proposed Bangsamoro Basic Law. We are asking for understanding from our Congress regarding this. It is important that we carefully examine each provision to be laid down. To the best of our ability, we will push for a law that is reasonable, just, and acceptable to all. [Applause]

If the Bangsamoro Basic Law is enacted before the end of the year and the necessary plebiscite is held, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority will be given a year and a half to demonstrate positive change. If this is delayed, the time to prove that the path of peace we are taking is correct will naturally be shortened.

We have already achieved so much because of trust—and we have no intention of breaking this trust. Your government now: has its word. I will not enumerate the promises we have fulfilled on the straight path; we might just be accused of self-promotion. But it is also difficult not to mention, because those who say we have done nothing are likely waiting. So, let me just give a few examples: Jobs and opportunities for many Filipinos, created and continue to be created. In fact, from April 2013 to April 2014: 1.65 million were added to the number of Filipinos employed. [Applause] Shortage of books, chairs, and classrooms inherited, have been filled; while new needs due to K to 12 are also being addressed. 1:1 police-to-pistol ratio, we now have that too. Modernization of the Armed Forces, is happening. Long-term peace in Mindanao, is progressing. Improvement of our economy, continues. [Applause]

Together we are fulfilling our dreams: universal health care, classrooms, jobs, ports, roads, airports, safety, peace. The national dignity we have regained is accompanied by the world's recognition of the new face of the Philippines. The national treasury from the sweat of the people, is spent only for their welfare.

Let us listen again to one of our Bosses:

"I am Gina Lastrado, 47 years old. I am from Isla 1 Barangay 180, Maricaban, Pasay City.

My job at our origin in Pasay, I was a businesswoman. Now, I continued my vending, ma’am. Patience is needed here. We were relocated because our area was said to be a “danger zone.” Most of us were near the river.

Ondoy was really terrible. I said, you wouldn’t think we would still be alive.

“Compared to our life there in Pasay and here, even if it rains or there’s a storm, you can sleep soundly. You don’t have the worry that the flood is coming, you can’t sleep, unlike where we came from. That’s why I told my companions, those who were still there, move now because you have no more worries, we have no more floods.”

“When we arrived here, we were given groceries, and we were given the key. We were brought here to our house, and that eighteen thousand, that was the start of our life here. He gave us dignity, all of us from the squatter area there in our place. Life is very good here too, ma’am. You can say that this place truly belongs to us.” [Applause]

– Gina Lastrado, relocated member of an informal-settler family (ISF) [ watch the video ]

Now: The problems we found were solved. The problems that exist are being addressed. And the problems that are coming, we are preparing for them as well. I believe: If you continue to trust us, we can solve these.

Let’s look at the situation with energy. We are doing everything to ensure that we are meeting the growing needs of the country. Despite this, there are events that we really don’t expect, which may cause problems next year. For example: We need to make up for the deficiencies due to outages for the maintenance of old plants, sudden shutdowns due to breakdowns, and delays in the implementation or construction of new plants.

Let’s not forget, there is also the threat of El Niño which will affect the capacity of hydropower plants, and will further increase the demand for electricity. If in our homes, we will increase our use of electric fans or air conditioners due to the heat, even more so in industries and businesses. This is not as simple as going to the store and saying, “Can I buy a 600 megawatt generator, and have it installed tomorrow.”

Our goal is complete preparedness so we are not paralyzed should the worst-case scenario happen. We should already have planned solutions for problems that may arise even next year. That is why I have instructed Secretary Icot Petilla of the DOE: Coordinate with the Joint Congressional Power Commission, the Energy Regulatory Commission, the industry, and most importantly, with consumers, to increase our ability to address the energy problem.

I am also aware that our Bosses are affected by the fluctuating increase in the price of rice. Reports seem to be true: There are some unscrupulous hoarders hiding rice, so that when the price goes up, they can sell their stock for unreasonable profit.

This cannot be allowed. If they think they are clever, the strategy of your government is better. The immediate solution: import more rice, supply the market, lower the price, and keep it at a reasonable level, so that those exploiting Filipinos will lose money. [Applause]

Last November, we began importing 500,000 metric tons to serve as aid for the thinning supply due to past typhoons. It all arrived this March. Also this February, the NFA Council approved our import of an additional 800,000 metric tons to replenish our buffer stock requirement, and 360,750 metric tons of it have arrived this July; by September, the total will arrive. Also approved this July is the immediate importation of 500,000 metric tons of rice through open bidding. The NFA also has standby authority to import an additional 500,000 metric tons, as preparation for the effects of disasters on harvest and rice prices.

When our additional imports arrive, the hoarders of rice hidden in their warehouses will be forced to sell. To these hoarders: If you want to be stubborn, that’s okay, try the state. Just remember: only six months will pass before the stock in your warehouses rots. You are sure to lose money when the market is flooded with additional rice. You are acting against Filipinos; we, on the other hand, are promoting the interest of every Filipino. Let's see who wins. [Applause]

In addition to investigating those allegedly hiding NFA rice, we are also investigating all those who may have colluded with agencies. Employees suspected of involvement are being investigated to be prosecuted and imprisoned as soon as possible.

Along with pursuing the abusive, our projects to care for those in the agricultural sector are also ongoing. We are making rice farming an attractive livelihood. We all know that our farmers are aging, so it will greatly help food security if we can encourage young people to enter this profession.

We are providing modern farming equipment for efficient planting and harvesting. From 2011 to May 2014, we have distributed a total of 4,628 production machineries, 11,362 post-production machineries, and 105 rice mills to various farmer’s associations. With this help, the waste in the harvest of our farmers has been reduced. In addition, we are improving irrigation, building farm-to-market roads, and promoting training programs to maximize their income.

Let's now talk about the budget. The Executive proposes projects and programs; Congress approves them. We just need to stop some, to ensure we comply with the Supreme Court's decision regarding the Disbursement Acceleration Program or DAP. I know that you all here believe that benefits should not be denied to our citizens, and that these should reach them as soon as possible.

That is why: We propose the passage of a supplemental budget for 2014, so that our programs and projects are not delayed. [Applause] At the same time, we appeal for the cooperation of Congress, to pass a Joint Resolution that will clarify the definitions and concepts that are still being debated—and other issues that only you in the legislature, as lawmakers, can clarify. [Applause]

On the first day of work after the SONA, we will submit to Congress the proposed 2.606 trillion peso 2015 National Budget. As always, it was built with the people, using a strategy that allocates funds only where it will truly deliver benefits. We hope for the cooperation of our legislators to approve it, as the main instrument in creating opportunities for the Filipino people.

Let us now listen to a beneficiary of the DepEd's Alternative Learning System program.

“My name is Maria Cecilla Fruelda.”

“I heard from my colleagues from Zambales, who are also here in Rosario, that there is good livelihood here in Puting Kahoy, so we transferred here.”

“It is our tribes’ priority to look for food rather than focus on studying. Education is very important to me, especially since I passed the ALS [Alternative Learning System] because that was the start of fulfilling my dream of becoming a teacher.”

“I think the lives of the Aeta youth in our area will improve if they can study. I wouldn't have entered the ALS where I wouldn't have known our rights as indigenous people and we also wouldn't be able to fight for what we call ancestral lands, which, by the grace of God, the NCIP is now processing for titling and awarding to us.”

“If I finish my Education course, I want to teach in our community and I also want to share whatever knowledge I have and the further knowledge that should be given to the native Aeta people.”

“ALS has been a great help because, aside from being a student at Luansing now, our community has become more well-known. Many more have helped, especially our youth, who seem to have followed in my footsteps. There are now many more students than before.” [Applause]

– Maria Cecilla Fruelda, Aeta tribal leader, ALS learner, and college student [ watch the video ]

Fellow citizens, she, and many other beneficiaries like her, are overshadowed whenever the orchestra of negativity makes noise in the news. These noisy ones deliberately close minds and live in their own world and reality. While we see change in society, what we expect is happening: their attacks on us are becoming more frequent, hotter, and more intense. As the benefits of reform become clearer, it becomes more and more difficult for their deception to succeed, so they sow doubt. They are already desperate.

Why are they so angry? Let's look at their motivation. For those who have made their position a business: if we fix the systems, they lose the opportunity to exploit. It is natural for them to oppose us. And for those who have no purpose other than to topple the government: they can only increase their ranks if many suffer and lose faith in the system. Now that the system is being repaired and suffering is being addressed, the number they can recruit is decreasing, so their numbers are dwindling. It is also natural for them to oppose us. The loudest opponents are those who do not want transformation, because they exploited and benefited from the old ways.

This is how I think of our situation: We are like citizens who have been trapped on an island for a long time where there is only one store. Because there is no choice, they raise prices whenever they want, and they really abuse us. You tasked me to steer the ship of state towards another island, where there are more stores, more choices, a better life, and wider opportunities. Of course, the operator of the store on our island we left does not want us to sail, because they will lose those they abuse. They will do everything to prevent us from crossing to the other shore. They will say: It's the same there; there is no real change there. They will tie us to the port, puncture our boat, and conspire to mislead our journey.

The truth is, they are not opposing me, but the people who benefit from the straight path. They are against the farmers in Iloilo, who have dreamed of a good irrigation system for more than fifty years, and now they see the Jalaur Multi-purpose River Project being built. [Applause] They are against the many students who no longer have to cram into classrooms. They are against those who have found work through TESDA; against those who are evacuated early during storms thanks to the improved PAGASA; against the informal settlers who have been moved away from danger through the housing program; against the poor who can now receive free treatment in public hospitals; against the soldiers who have modern equipment so they can more confidently defend the country; against the Moro and indigenous peoples who are now within reach of peace. Bosses, they are against you. [Applause]

The truth is, even before we took office, we were already being attacked. We are used to being greeted with negative commentators at breakfast, insults at lunch, insults at dinner, and intrigues as a midnight snack. [Laughter] Now that I am President, the opposition to change continues. I think, even when I step down from office, they will not stop.

I remember an old woman I spoke with during the campaign. She told me, “Noy, be careful. You will encounter many obstacles.” Her warning proved true. But I was determined to face these obstacles, because I knew: they are few, and we are many. [Applause] We are stronger, those of us who are ready to row together towards change. We will succeed in this fight, because we are on the right side. We dreamed, we started, we worked hard, we positioned ourselves, and now, the Filipino is truly moving forward. [Applause] Our fatigue and sacrifice will be even more worthwhile if you continue what we have started.

You will face the crossroads; you will decide whether the change will continue. Let us remember, this is my fifth SONA; only one remains. In 2016, you will choose a new leader for our country. My only request is: To continue and even accelerate the change that our society is now enjoying, there is only one basis for choosing my successor: Who has absolutely no doubt about continuing the transformation we have achieved? [Applause]

You are the Boss, you are the strength, you are the ones making the change—so you are also the ones who will continue it. It is up to you how these times will be written in history. It could be remembered as the peak of our success, as a good beginning that was wasted. But it would be far better if our achievements are remembered as just the beginning of our long journey towards the fulfillment of even higher dreams.

When several groups suggested that I run, they told me, we don’t expect you to solve all the problems of our country in six years. But please start. You have seen where we came from, and you have seen that what we are enjoying now far exceeds our dreams at the beginning.

We are forging a system where the playing field is truly level; where those who follow the rules reach their desired destination; where genuine competition sparks opportunity and widespread progress; where everyone has the ability to control their own destiny. [Applause]

Within reach is a society that can support and care for those on the margins; where everyone recognizes their responsibility to their fellow human beings and to the nation; where contribution and collective upliftment of the people are continuous and endless.

We are truly getting closer to the future we desire, where justice reigns, and truly no one is left behind.

This is the result of reform, and this is what we are fighting for, and will continue to fight for: Not the preservation of the status quo, but the change of the system so that everyone benefits. [Applause]

Bosses: You gave me the opportunity to lead transformation. If I had declined the challenge you presented to me, it would be like saying I would help prolong your suffering, and my conscience would not allow that. If I had turned away from the opportunity, it would be as if I had turned my back on my parents, and everything they sacrificed for us; that will not happen. By stepping onto the straight path, you chose what is good and right; you were true to me—and I, in turn, am true to you. [Applause]

The transformation we are enjoying today, we can make permanent with the guidance of the Lord. As long as our faith and trust remain strong, and as long as we serve as each other’s strength, we will continue to prove that, “the Filipino is worth dying for” [Applause], “the Filipino is worth living for,” and I would add: “The Filipino is definitely worth fighting for.” [Applause]

Vice President knows that we were together in 1987. There was a coup, we were ambushed there, and after that, this is already my second life. We cannot avoid thinking about those we confront—will there be a day when you go on stage, it’s also a working day—will someone succeed in planting a bomb? Will the dark plans of our opponents who want to return us to a wrong system succeed? And if that time comes, and our second life is over, can I say it’s okay? And I will tell you, eye to eye, for everything we have achieved, I can say that I am content. [Applause]

I am content because my mind is at peace, that if I am gone from here, many will continue what we have started. Perhaps that is really my role—to start it.

There are people like Cardinal Chito Tagle, Ka Eduardo Manalo, and Brother Eddie Villanueva, Father Catalino Arevalo, and Father Jett Villarin, and Bishop Jonel Milan, and Sister Agnes Guillen, and Mae Salvatierra. They, in the religious sector, will continue what we have started. [Applause]

There is Aris Alip of CARD who will continue his contribution through microfinance. There is also Alice Murphy and her colleagues at urban poor associates who will truly continue the care for our informal settlers. [Applause]

There are also our soldiers and police—they really strive to do what is right every day, like our new Chief of Staff, our Service Commanders, soldiers of the Light Reaction Battalion, and the JSOG.

And there are also, of course, your ranks of politicians from which I came. Is there any doubt that Senate President Franklin Drilon and Speaker Belmonte will lead us on the right path? [Applause]

It has also been my privilege to work with and interact with a governor, Alfredo Marañon of Negros Occidental [applause]. We are not from the same political party, but I think I’ve already joined his fan club due to his proper governance in Negros.

We also have emerging new or younger politicians. I don’t want to say that I am an old politician when identifying those who are younger.

People like Mayor Jed Mabilog and Mayor Len Alonte [applause].

There are also people in the sector, let’s say in culture, like Noel Cabangon and Ogie Alcasid who don’t only think of themselves. [Applause]

Every night, before I sleep, thank you for allowing me to survive another day. As they used to say when we were young, “finish or not finish, pass your paper,” well, it has come to me, I think you have felt the change that is the right of every Filipino to happen. And it’s up to you to continue it. [Applause]

Bosses, you made the transformation we are enjoying happen. You are the key to continuing all the positive changes we have achieved. I have full confidence that, whether I am on the scene or not, the Filipino will go to the right place.

So, that’s all from me. Good afternoon to everyone. Thank you very much. [Applause]

_________________________

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Mga Boss, kayo ang gumawa ng transpormasyong ating tinatamasa. Kayo ang susi ng pagpapatuloy ng lahat ng positibong pagbabagong naabot natin. Buong-buo ang tiwala ko, nasa eksena man ako o wala, tutungo ang Pilipino sa tama niyang kalalagyan.