Transcript:

Many thanks. Please, let us all be seated.

Vice President Jejomar Binay; Senate President Franklin M. Drilon; Speaker Feliciano Belmonte Jr.; Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno and our honorable justices of the Supreme Court; former Presidents Fidel Valdez Ramos and Joseph Ejercito Estrada; the honorable members of the diplomatic corps; members of the Senate and House of Representatives; local government officials; members of the Cabinet; uniformed members of the military and police; my colleagues in public service; and to my Bosses, my beloved countrymen:

Good afternoon to you all.

This is my fourth State of the Nation Address; only two remain. Almost four years have passed since I was first approached by several groups to convince me to run for president. They said: We know that the country's problems cannot be solved overnight, in one year, or even in the six-year term of a President. But just start, and surely, we will help you take care of it.

Even before, I was aware of the severity of the problems I would face. From being a candidate, or as President, or even after leaving office, the danger that comes with this job is no joke. I aspire to a broad transformation of society, and I am aware that I will have to overcome many obstacles to achieve it. But my parents did not raise me to simply fold in the face of challenges. I could not face myself if I rejected the opportunity to reduce the suffering that Filipinos should not have to endure.

We responded to the call, and our companions from the beginning have even increased. I believe that if I am doing the right thing, our allies will continue to grow. Last May, I asked you, “Boss, are we on the right track?” Your response: “Yes, and speed up the transformation of society.” I asked for allies who would row in the same direction, and you gave it to me. In fact, not just a majority, not just nine out of twelve, but nine out of ten of the highest senatorial positions are people I presented to you. In my opinion, the message of the last election is clear: Yes, let's continue, let's increase the 8,581 sitios that have been lit up; let's add to the 28,398 families who were formerly informal settlers, but now have or will have decent housing; let's grow the at least 40 billion pesos per year increase in funds going to education, health, social services, and many others, due to correct and more vigorous tax collection; we feel many other proofs that society is really changing. I was even more encouraged by the message you conveyed; it is clear that I am not alone in carrying these responsibilities. How could my courage not be strengthened, if even people like Mr. Niño Aguirre are helping to shape our future? Imagine, he can no longer walk due to a disability, yet he still climbed the precinct on the fourth floor of the building, just to vote and contribute to the real change in society. Thank you, Mr. Aguirre.

There is no shortage of Filipinos willing to contribute, which is the root of the change we are experiencing now. The strategy: Maximize opportunities for everyone, especially for those who need it most. We will not wait for trickle-down; it is not possible that they will only be reached by the benefits of development by chance. This is what we call inclusive growth—this broad development—is the very principle behind every initiative, every action, every decision of your government. Those who will be left behind are only those who do not join, because they did not take advantage of the opportunity.

Our basic principle: Broad opportunity is the key to widespread and lasting development. Let us not forget that opportunity is just a seed. It needs to be watered with diligence, nurtured with determination, and enriched with dedication. Just look at our TESDA-DOLE [Technical Education and Skills Development Authority-Department of Labor and Employment] scholars. Of the 503,521 who have graduated, an estimated six out of ten are now employed. In the past, according to a DBM [Department of Budget and Management] study from 2006 to 2008, only 28.5 percent of TESDA graduates found jobs. Last year, in the IT-BPO [information technology-business process outsourcing] program, the employment rate of our TESDA graduates was 70.9 percent. In the electronics and semiconductor program, 85 percent of those who graduated in 2012 were employed. It is clear: You yourselves will shape, you yourselves will dictate whether the collective fruit we harvest will be ripe and sweet, or whether the outcome of the opportunities that open in this chapter of our history will be rotten and insignificant.

Let us enumerate. The objective of expanding the coverage of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program: accomplished. The more than 700,000 households benefiting from the program that we inherited in 2010 has reached almost 4 million households under our administration.

There is more: According to a study by the Philippine Institute for Development Studies, those who graduate from high school earn approximately 40 percent more than those who only completed elementary school. Isn't it reasonable that we maximize the assistance we provide to families, so that the young beneficiaries can complete high school, and thus maximize the benefit of this program? That is why, next year, the program will cover families with youth up to 18 years old, so that they can finish high school.

In education: our goal of raising the quality of knowledge that young people learn, so that when they finish studying, they can grasp the opportunities that open up in our society: accomplished. We have eliminated the shortage of books and chairs that we inherited, and if Secretary Brother Armin Luistro continues to excel, the shortage of classrooms will also be eliminated this year. The good news is: We are now able to prepare for future needs thanks to the K to 12 program.

It was no joke the problems Brother Armin encountered at the DepEd [Department of Education]. Imagine, each textbook used to be priced at 58 pesos; when he took the lead, the price of the exact same book went down to 30 pesos. What if we had paid the correct price for these books earlier? If we saved the difference of 28 pesos, and each of the approximately 20.7 million students in our public school system has five textbooks, that equates to almost 2.9 billion pesos. This could potentially fund our plan to repair and rehabilitate the 9,502 classrooms.

If Brother Armin lacked the courage, he could have simply passed on the culture of indifference to his agency to his successor. He could also have passed on the backlogs; left the growing deficits due to the increasing number of enrollees each year to the next person. But Brother Armin, instead of being content, instead of saying, “That’s enough, my job is done,” he continued to build more seats and classrooms, and buy more books, to ensure that even for the coming years, the needs are met.

The strengthening of the agricultural sector was also achieved. Imagine, according to the NFA [National Food Authority]: In 2010, the country imported more than two million metric tons of rice. In 2011, this decreased to 855,000 metric tons. In 2012: only 500,000 metric tons. And now in 2013: The most we will import, including the private sector, is the minimum access volume of 350,000 metric tons. This already includes 187,000 metric tons in the reserve buffer stock in case of successive typhoons; likely, because we are still on target for rice self-sufficiency, the private sector will no longer need to import. Furthermore, we have already begun exporting high-quality rice. We have come a long way from the time when it was said that we could not feed ourselves.

Data also serves as proof: This sector grew by 3.3 percent in the first three months of 2013. This is triple the 1.1 percent growth during the same period in 2012. Therefore, we continue to plant initiatives that will yield greater progress for our farmers.

For example, with coconut. According to an analysis in 2009, coconut farmers are one of the most difficult sectors in the country. The process of farming it: After planting, you wait seven years for the coconut to bear fruit, but after that, two generations will have nothing to do but harvest. We have the potential to increase the income of this sector if we establish a culture that encourages diligence and productivity. The response: intercropping.

The government will help strengthen your coconut plantation, in exchange for the obligation to plant various seeds between the rows of coconut trees. The farmer will have more frequent harvests, and depending on what they plant, their income will increase. If it's just coconuts, per hectare, the farmer earns 20,000 pesos per year. If you add coffee, income can reach 172,400 pesos; if bananas, you can earn up to 102,325 pesos, while 89,000 pesos for cacao. What a big difference, right?

We have already begun to lay the foundations for this: In 2012, we already used 5,500 hectares of land for intercropping in 90 locations across the country. This covers 10,000 of our farmers. Our target for 2013: an additional 434 sites for coconut intercropping.

We are also steering our fishermen towards more productive shores. Think about this: The contribution of the fishing industry to our economy reached 193.65 billion pesos in 2012, but despite this, 41 percent of our fishermen are still poor as of the last measurement in 2009. They are the ones catching the fish, but what remains for their families is just a thorn.

So, there are many government initiatives to help our fishermen escape the clutches of poverty. For example, there's one for Bataraza in the province of Palawan. The waters around it are abundant. But because the fish cannot reach the markets fresh, it is simply dried. It's a pity, because for every three kilos of grouper, only one kilo of dried fish is produced. What if the freshness of the fish could be extended due to a cold storage facility? You would go to the market and still get a good price for your catch. The same effort in fishing, but you get the right value. That's why the cold storage facility for Bataraza is almost complete. At the same time, we are also building new ports in strategic locations to further increase production and income. We are repairing roads, bridges, and other infrastructure, as well as services for our fishermen.

The DILG [Department of the Interior and Local Government], BFAR [Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources], and Coast Guard are also closely monitoring illegal fishing; my request to our fishermen is: Let's give our seas a rest. I encourage you to join in protecting your livelihood; you can see it yourselves: The state is bringing opportunities closer to you, but the results, of course, are in your hands.

If there is one topic that people like to associate with my name, it is Hacienda Luisita. I would just like to report that in February, in accordance with the order of the Supreme Court, the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) completed the list of qualified beneficiaries who will be awarded land in Luisita. According to Secretary Gil de los Reyes, the identification of each lot that beneficiaries will receive began last week, and the awarding of titles will begin in September of this year.

For other large tracts of land: We have long tasked the DAR, DENR [Department of Environment and Natural Resources], LRA [Land Registration Authority], and Land Bank to develop a framework on how to expedite the processing of land distribution. Let me just reiterate: Accurate data is the first step in the proper implementation of CARPER. But we inherited a defective land records system. So from the start, the DOJ [Department of Justice], LRA, DENR, and DAR have been working to fix this system, and we are now at a point where we can ensure: Next year, all notices of coverage for lands covered by the comprehensive agrarian reform have been filed.

Clearly: The state, established to serve you. If there is a health problem, the government should provide care; in times of disaster, it should also be there to show compassion. What are we doing in these areas?

In health, our goal of covering more of our countrymen with PhilHealth has been achieved. We reached 62 percent of Filipinos enrolled in the program; now, it is at 81 percent. Those remaining not on the list are those we are still looking for, including the informal sector and indigenous peoples. We expect the cooperation of local governments to include all our citizens in the system.

Not only are the PhilHealth enrollees expanding, but also the benefits that can be obtained from it. Last year, we launched the Z Benefit Package. And this February, it was further expanded with the Expanded Z Benefit Package. The list of illnesses that poor Filipinos can have treated for free in public hospitals is now longer. Last year, breast cancer, prostate cancer, and acute leukemia were already included; now, other diseases such as coronary bypass, and correction of holes and incorrect positions of heart vessels are also included.

These benefits will be wasted if our hospitals are in a dying state, and if those in rural areas cannot access them. That is why we are pouring the budget into health infrastructure: In the past three years, we have allocated 33 billion pesos for the construction, improvement, and rehabilitation of 4,518 hospitals, rural health units, and barangay health stations across the country. An example of this is the Region I Medical Center in Dagupan, which has already performed five kidney transplants this year; the Bicol Regional Teaching and Training Hospital in Legazpi, Vicente Sotto Medical Center in Cebu, and Northern Mindanao Medical Center in Cagayan de Oro, which, according to Secretary Ike Ona, are now capable of performing open heart surgery due to new facilities and equipment. There is also the Davao Regional Hospital in Tagum City—our first cancer center outside of Metro Manila.

For disaster preparedness: Our goal of forging mechanisms to keep Filipinos safe from danger has also been achieved. There is the effective service resulting from the collaboration of the Geohazard Mapping and Assessment Program and Project NOAH [Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards] of the DOST [Department of Science and Technology]. Last year, we completed the multihazard mapping of the twenty-eight most dangerous areas in the country. Next will be for the Greater Metro Manila Area, which we aim to complete by 2014. Geohazard maps are also ready for 496 cities and municipalities. The remaining 1,138, which will cover every corner of the country, will be completed before the end of 2015. Furthermore, the maps are more precise and detailed, so dangerous areas are now identified more accurately.

Since the launch of Project NOAH last year, we have deployed 525 automated water level monitoring stations and automated rain gauges in 18 major river basins in our country. We are also continuously distributing modern equipment such as Doppler radars, tsunami detectors, and alerting sirens.

However, simply providing modern equipment and technology is not enough. We are also training those who will receive it on how to understand, use, and disseminate information. When the weather is bad, they no longer base their assessments solely on wind speed; they also know how much water will fall, and they can provide accurate and timely warnings to the community so they can prepare.

We are also addressing the problem of frequent flooding in Metro Manila. Imagine this: During Ondoy, an estimated 3,600 cubic meters per second of water flowed from the Sierra Madre. But the capacity of the channel for this water is only about 1,000 cubic meters per second. Where will the difference of 2,600 cubic meters per second go? This is the surge of water that causes low-lying areas to overflow and become flooded.

Isn't it already widely known: “Waterways are inalienable.” This means: Waterways are for water alone. The problem, however, is that there is already a shortage of waterways, buildings are obstructing the esteros (drainage canals), and these are even being blocked by garbage from those living nearby. To solve this, we are coordinating with the LGUs [local government unit] to properly relocate the informal settlers. The legal team, led by Secretary Leila de Lima, is also preparing cases against those who built structures that closed or blocked waterways.

We will not be satisfied with simply passing the blame. Our action: 6.2 billion pesos to prevent flooding in Metro Manila. This includes the construction of the Blumentritt Interceptor Catchment area; the entire project is 3.3 kilometers long, and once completed, it will be able to hold water equivalent to approximately 14 Olympic-size swimming pools. So, if a lot of water falls, it will have a place to go, and it won't need to be on the streets. This project started in March; we aim to complete it next year.

The government is fulfilling its obligation. We should also ask ourselves: What am I contributing to the solution? If someone throws garbage in the river, please reprimand them; if someone builds a building in the estero, report it. We will sink deeper into the problem if we just shrug it off.

Even after the typhoon has left, our efforts to restore the lives of families affected by past disasters do not diminish. Through the cooperation of the government and the private sector, 9,377 houses have already been built for those affected by Typhoon Sendong. The government will build an additional 4,374 homes before the end of next year. We ask for your understanding if this took a little longer, due to the complex process of land acquisition; in fact, if the issues with other lands are resolved, we can build an additional 2,719 houses.

We are also aiming to provide a total of 53,106 housing units for our countrymen affected by Typhoon Pablo. We began the distribution of new houses this May. We will complete 17,609 housing units before the end of the year, and once the remaining 35,447 are completed in 2014, families struck by the fury of nature will once again have shelter under their own roofs.

Regarding housing as well, for our uniformed personnel: The 21,800 housing units for the police and military—were completed last year. In Phase II of the project, almost 26,050 have also been built out of the target of 31,200, which will be completed next month for Phase II.

Aside from housing, we are also developing livelihood programs for our soldiers. Several thousand hectares of land in three military camps—specifically in Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija, in Camp Kibaritan in Bukidnon, and in Camp Peralta in Capiz—will be the launching pad for additional income for soldiers, such as bamboo plantations, coffee, cacao, and palm oil. If before, soldiers were only focused on defense, now even retirees have the opportunity to be part of the growth of our economy.

However, this is not where the search for solutions to the problems we inherited in national defense ends. Consider this: in 1986, we had 250,000 police and soldiers for more than 55 million Filipinos. Now, we still have an estimated 250,000 police and soldiers, guarding 95 million Filipinos. Our population has almost doubled, but the number of those guarding us has not changed.

Certainly, there are those who say: “Is this a problem? Then just add more police and soldiers. You can even create jobs.” I wish it were that easy and simple a solution. Let's look at this first: In a typical pension scheme, the member and the employer contribute. This is the capital that will grow, and this is where the pension will come from when the member retires. But what is the situation with the pension of the AFP [Armed Forces of the Philippines] and PNP [Philippine National Police]? No one contributes, but there is something that needs to be paid. Furthermore, the pension of retirees is indexed to the salary of active soldiers and police. This means that when the salary of those in service increases, the pension of retirees or their families who are still receiving it will also increase. Every year, the number of those retiring increases, so naturally, the obligation also increases. The tragic part is that the national budget absorbs this: In 2012, 54.48 billion pesos were allocated for the pension of soldiers and police. This year, 61.29 billion, and it will reach 80.64 billion in 2016. It will continue to swell, so the funds for other social services will shrink. How can we add more police and soldiers in this context?

We need a system that responds to the obligation of society to our soldiers and police; most likely, we will ask the GSIS [Government Service Insurance System] for help with this. We are also studying the possibility of using reclaimed areas to raise funds to be put into the solution being developed. We also cannot suddenly address our needs in their entirety, so we will conduct a more thorough analysis to create a fair, long-term, and clear mechanism for the pensions of police and soldiers. I appeal to Congress: Let us re-examine PD 1638 and RA 8551 to adapt the pension and benefits of our police and military to the times and national needs.

We see the same stance as the solution to the looming problem with pensions in the SSS [Social Security System]. Think about it: since 1980, there have been 21 across-the-board pension increases—let me repeat that, 21 times—but the tragic part is that the contribution rate has only increased twice. The result: It is estimated that the unfunded liability of the SSS is 1.1 trillion pesos based on a study conducted in 2011. It is expected to increase by 8 percent per year, and the funds will run out 28 years from now. If this happens, the only ones who will lose out are the next generations of Filipinos.

We believe that the time has come to amend the SSS Pension Scheme. We need to combine the initiative to save enough with our spending. If we only add 0.6 percent to the contribution rate, 141 billion pesos will immediately be deducted from the unfunded liability of the SSS. If we start investing in the future now, there will be no problems to pass on to those who come after us.

For the police, we have also achieved our goal of strengthening their ability to perform their duties. Starting this 2013, 30,000 police officers will return to police work, as we will hire civilian personnel to handle administrative tasks. It would be a waste of the skills and abilities of our soldiers and police officers if we were to confine them to the four walls of an office.

This month also marked the start of the distribution of new 9mm Glock 17 pistols to our police officers. This is just the beginning; the distribution of a total of 74,879 firearms to our law enforcement officers is also underway, towards the realization of our goal of a one-to-one police-to-pistol ratio.

This investment in our national police is truly worthwhile, especially since it leads to orderly and reliable service. Haven't we gotten used to incidents of violence left and right during elections? We addressed this, such as with Oplan Katok. The program's objective: to locate firearms with expired licenses, and to ensure that only authorized citizens hold those with valid licenses. To do this, our police knocked on 491,929 doors for license renewals. This helped make our campaign for Secure and Fair Elections more effective, where the 112 private armed groups during the 2010 elections were reduced to just 41. This represents a 63 percent decrease. Also, from 189 incidents of violence during the 2010 elections, only 77 incidents were confirmed to have occurred in the last election.

Let's take the ARMM [Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao] as an example. As Governor Mujiv Hataman said, he cannot recall a time in his life when there was no failure of elections in Lanao del Sur. Let us remember, this was the first time that national and regional elections were held simultaneously in the ARMM. This means that at the time, the entire force of the state was focused on a single region, but there was still a failure of elections. In 2013, because the entire country needed to be focused on, and their responsibilities expanded, some thought the situation in the ARMM elections would worsen. But we can see how much it has improved: The election in the ARMM was clean and honest; the counting of votes continued, and the proclamation of those with a new mandate from the people was carried out. Thanks to the diligence of our police and soldiers, and also the cooperation of the people, the 2013 elections were truly more peaceful and quiet.

However, there are still incidents that stain the honor of our police force. We have probably heard about what happened to members of the Ozamiz Gang, Ricky Cadavero and Wilfredo Panogalinga: they were arrested, but were still killed. Like the investigation we conducted on what happened in Atimonan, we will ensure that anyone—police or anyone involved—is held accountable, no matter how high their rank. To those who initiated this: just prepare yourselves. I will soon identify all of you.

Despite these stories, my hope for the police force is very much alive. They are not lacking in good examples like PO3 Edlyn Arbo, who bravely faced and pursued a holdupper on the jeep she was riding, even while off-duty and without a gun. She was there and confronted the holdupper, who made the mistake of targeting her. There is also PO3 Felipe Moncatar who has received various praises for the long list of criminals he has arrested, and I heard that you have arrested another skilled car thief in Bacolod—you are really excellent. Some of those he has arrested include the most wanted individuals in Bacolod and members of large syndicates. You may have also heard the story of PO2 Dondon Sultan. Someone had a car breakdown along Quezon Boulevard; Mr. Sultan stopped to help. He didn't just change the tire; he even drove the person home. As a thank you for his service, PO2 Sultan was offered 1,000 pesos. He refused it. His response: “It is our job to help the citizens.” We salute public servants like you. You are proof that honest and capable police officers are not an endangered species. I have instructed Secretary Mar Roxas of the DILG [Department of the Interior and Local Government], as well as Secretary Voltaire Gazmin of the DND [Department of National Defense], to ensure that those like you in our uniformed ranks receive the appropriate rewards and recognition. Thank you again.

I would also like to add our disaster relief workers from many branches of the government, as well as volunteers from the private sector. I know it is not easy to wade through floods, dig through mud, and face the devastation. I will not tire of recognizing your contribution to society; I salute your dedication to reducing the suffering of our countrymen.

Peace is also within reach in a region long torn by conflict. Last October, the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro was signed. In fact, only nine days have passed since the second annex of the agreement was signed. We are confident that this will be followed by more good news in the near future.

I am certain everyone is aware: The process of building consensus is no joke; it is truly fortunate that both sides are willing to listen, compromise, and meet each other halfway. We all know the possible result if we allow impatience to prevail. What is clear to me: The words we utter should yield actions that positively affect everyone. Every line in the agreement we are crafting should be set in stone, and not merely listed in water to be washed away by history once more. My father raised me to be a man of my word, so I say to our Bangsamoro brothers and sisters: Whatever we agree upon will be implemented by the national government.

Trust is needed in the peace talks. Trust does not come automatically, due to the long journey we have taken. And now, we truly feel that both sides want to reach an agreement, and we are showing that we are worthy of trust. And to those who are hindering the building of trust and sowing doubt: Can you say you are a Filipino who cares for your fellow Filipino?

I hope for the contribution of every Filipino to our goal for the Bangsamoro. Let us show them that they did not err in choosing the path of peace; let us demonstrate the strength of the entire nation to uplift the provinces in Muslim Mindanao, which are among our poorest provinces. Our aspiration is the success of all; we will not allow any of our countrymen to be left behind while others prosper. I appeal to our Congress: The Transition Commission, which will draft the Bangsamoro Basic Law, has been formed. This will be completed in accordance with the principles of the comprehensive peace agreement; I hope you will pass it before the end of 2014. In this way, we will have enough time to prepare for the election of the new Bangsamoro government in 2016.

Whatever improvements we are enjoying today were achieved because we were not content to simply follow the existing status quo of governance. May I ask: How many of you have used what is called the Barangay Telephone? I would not be surprised if none of you have. Consider this: according to the DOTC [Department of Transportation and Communications]: more than 5 billion pesos were spent on a program to bring telephones to rural areas. Wasn't that a waste, because shortly after implementation, even before the implementation was truly finished, the number of Filipino cellphone users increased and increased? Who would notice the more than 6,000 landlines they installed or had installed, when there are 100 million cellphones in the Philippines?

Here's another example of thinking within the government that we needed to change: We bought eight combat utility helicopters, supposedly for the quick transport of our soldiers. The problem: The gun mount is located right by the door, and needs to be removed if someone needs to pass through. If you land during a firefight, what's the use of a machine gun beside you that can't be fired? Didn't anyone think of this before the contract was signed? Why was this allowed to happen?

We need to become better buyers. We can't always rely on the sales talk of suppliers when choosing our equipment. We have tasked the DOST to form a group of experts who can't be easily fooled by suppliers, especially when it comes to big-ticket items. Our policy: Correctly identify the root of the problem; conduct proper studies to identify the right solution, which can be achieved through the right methodology.

That is the thinking that originated our response to the issue of informal settlers in Metro Manila. That's why we are now fulfilling our goal of moving those crammed into dangerous parts of the city to safety. No one should object to the fact that their current condition is not right. According to Article 2, Section 5, or the general welfare clause of our Constitution: “The State shall guarantee and promote the right of the people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature.”

Here we have proven: The Filipino listens to reason; when you show that caring is your basic principle, we are ready to cooperate. Before dismantling roofs and demolishing walls, we explained the reason for our decision: The relocation site is orderly, near transportation, and if you work hard, your livelihood will not be lacking. We also clarified: Our aim is to provide assistance to those in danger—not to syndicates. We know that whenever some abuse the state's compassion, they also put the lives and livelihoods of many Filipinos at risk.

After a team traveled to the relocation site, they themselves encouraged their former neighbors: Come with us. It is safer here. This year, our priority is to relocate more than 19,400 families crowded along major waterways in Metro Manila. With the combined efforts of the DILG, NHA [National Housing Authority], DSWD, MMDA [Metropolitan Manila Development Authority], and DPWH, the solution to this problem is becoming clearer.

Another example of transformation in governance: Wasn't it long delayed in Congress, important laws? Last year, the Sin Tax Reform Law and the Responsible Parenthood Law were finally enacted. We thank those who supported us in promoting these in the House and Senate. You did not mind the long process of debate and consultation; you did not succumb to those who sowed doubt to obstruct our good agenda. You weigh what is beneficial to the majority, and promote true service for the Filipino.

I will also submit to our Congress several laws that will help continue the change we have begun. Hopefully, the Cabotage Law will be amended to strengthen competition and lower transportation costs for our farms and industries. Hopefully, the Fiscal Incentives Rationalization Bill will also be promoted, to make the incentives we give to businessmen more honest, clear, and accountable. Time should also be allocated for the Land Administration Reform Bill, to align the personnel focused on our lands in one direction, and thus ensure they perform their work diligently and effectively.

Very soon, we will submit the proposed 2.268 trillion peso national budget to Congress. I am confident in your support and shared responsibility to strengthen this fund, which has been carefully considered. This will help not only to continue the agenda of positive change, but also to accelerate our progress towards broad development.

Some say that we need to strengthen the Armed Forces. I agree with this. But it seems that what they want is to allocate every centavo of the national treasury for fighter jets, tanks, and other war materials. They don't seem to realize that a fighter jet costing 1.58 billion pesos is equivalent to 6,580 houses for police and soldiers, or almost 2,000 classrooms for the youth. And what can one jet do? To be effective, what is needed are squadrons—and one of these consists of 24 fighter jets. At 1.58 billion pesos per piece, 37.92 billion pesos will be drawn from the national treasury to build one squadron. What about the missiles, including practice missiles? Jet fuel, radar systems, ground bases, and ground intercept controls are also not free. The cost of a minimum credible defense posture is truly no joke; should we imitate others, who are willing to forget everything just to get the nuclear option? Surely no one would agree with this. Let's balance our needs. Let's take good care of what needs to be addressed in our society, while continuing to be a good and peaceful member of the international community.

We all know that in the past, decisions were based purely on politics. Everything would be done to cling to power, at the expense of the suffering of the current and future generations of Filipinos. Let's look at what happened when the increase in LRT and MRT fares was suppressed. The estimated cost of each LRT passenger trip is 40 pesos. The passenger pays 15 pesos. This means the government covers the remaining 25 pesos. In the MRT, the actual cost is 60 pesos: 15 pesos from the passenger, 45 pesos from the government—in the end, every Filipino contributes. Whether you are in Mindanao or Visayas, and have never even set foot on the LRT or MRT, you are part of shouldering this burden.

What's even worse is this: Because past leaders gave away our commercial development rights here, every peso that could be collected from posters and billboards posted in the station or on the train goes to a private company instead of the government. The potential source of funding for maintenance and operations has been lost.

Perhaps it is reasonable to at least bring the LRT and MRT fares closer to what is paid on aircon buses, so that the subsidy can be focused on other social services.

You have seen it yourselves: We have no intention of leaving problems for those who come after us. In truth, projects that were previously languishing are now being enjoyed by the citizenry. Let's look at the Ternate-Nasugbu Road. To be honest, this road, which connects Cavite, Batangas, and Metro Manila, is only six kilometers long, but it took almost 20 years to complete those six kilometers. We have already opened a portion of it, and once the remaining slope protection is completed, the road will be fully beneficial to motorists.

There is also the Aluling Bridge in Ilocos Sur. Its construction was planned as early as 1978. We made sure that those who come after us will not inherit just paper plans: This March, it was finally completed, and last month we also began operations at the Laguindingan Airport, which took a generation from conception to realization.

For decades, the semiconductor industry waited for a laboratory capable of competing with facilities abroad. We no longer prolonged their wait. Last May, under the leadership of the DOST, we inaugurated the Advanced Device and Materials Testing Laboratory. Previously, products had to be sent abroad for testing. We were not maximizing profits; nor were we maximizing the industry's potential to attract investment. Because of this facility, dubbed ADMATEL, products will now be tested here, and the advantages of Filipino workers in the field of electronics will be fully utilized. We expect the industry, which contributed almost 44 percent of our exports in 2012, to grow even stronger.

With the help of our Big Man in the Senate, Manong Frank Drilon, the more than 50-year wait of the Ilonggos has ended; the Jalaur River Multipurpose Project II in Iloilo has begun. What are its benefits?

Approximately 24,000 farmers in the Iloilo region will be provided with year-round irrigation. This could double the yield of rice farmers. Let's clarify: With this 31,840 hectares of irrigable land, there will be an additional 146,013 metric tons of rice. This is equivalent to almost 80 percent of the rice buffer stock we will import for 2013.

This is in addition to other benefits of the project such as preventing widespread flooding in Iloilo, and the additional 6.6 megawatts of hydropower. It also contributes to the water supply for some parts of the province, and to the ecotourism industry there. Furthermore, the project will create 17,000 jobs; once it becomes fully operational, an estimated 32,000 Filipinos will benefit from sufficient income. This project was first conceived in 1960. We arrived in this world around the same time.

We are also aware that many of our countrymen are eager to see the results of our Public-Private Partnership (PPP) projects. We also know that some are getting impatient waiting for them.

Let's put this in context. In 2010, when we assumed office, only 6.5 percent of the programmable budget for the year, or 100 billion pesos, was left to us. The 93.5 percent was already allocated to various projects by our predecessors. That's why we approached the private sector. We said: We lack funds, let's contribute together to build the necessary infrastructure.

We also faced obstacles when the PPP began. The studies that served as the basis for the projects were outdated; the bureaucracy lacked the knowledge to implement them. Let's add to that the public, who grew tired of trusting the contracts entered into by the government.

However, in any situation, our principle is: If we are going to do it, let's do it right. We have no intention of entering into questionable contracts now, just to pass the problem on to the next administration. Each project must go through the proper process, to ensure that the money you work hard for goes where it should.

Even now, we are seeing the effect of a well-planned, honest, and transparent approach to PPP projects. Before, if even one airport was built, it was big news. Let's compare that to now: Aside from the Laguindingan Airport already being utilized, the process of rehabilitation and modernization of the Tacloban Airport, Bicol International Airport, New Bohol Airport, Mactan Airport, and Puerto Princesa Airport are happening simultaneously. The Daang Hari-SLEX link road was the fastest PPP project awarded in any administration, without taking any shortcuts in the process. These, and many other infrastructure projects being built and to be built, will give rise to a society full of opportunities.

The list of inherited problems is long, and we are addressing them. For example: The frequent brownouts in Mindanao. From the very beginning, we have been laying down solutions for this, but we know that a problem ignored for a decade cannot be solved overnight. For now, we continue to take steps to address the deficiencies and immediate needs. We are helping electric cooperatives to acquire generator sets that will reduce brownouts. This will continue until the plants that will supply electricity to the region are completed.

But there will really be no end to the opposition. They say the price of electricity will increase if there are gensets because they use diesel. There is hydropower now because it's the rainy season, so complaints against gensets are starting up again. But when the summer comes, surely many will complain again about the eight hours of brownouts.

In other parts of the Philippines, we want to build plants. As the economy develops, our electricity consumption also increases, and we need to increase its supply. Do we want to build plants only when the resources are already exhausted? Building these takes two to three years per plant. It's not good for them to just suddenly appear.

If the suggestion is good, we are ready to listen, but I hope those observing get the full context of the situation. For example, the plant in Redondo, Zambales. It was issued a TRO [temporary restraining order] because renewable is supposedly better. Did they also say that it is more expensive to build, and that the price of energy will also be more expensive? Did they say that it cannot address the baseload, or the capacity that needs to be there all the time to prevent brownouts? You build wind; what if there is no wind? If solar, what if it's cloudy? Let me clarify: I also believe in renewable energy and we support it, but there should also be baseload plants to ensure a continuous flow of electricity to our homes and industries. Will the objectors still make noise, if they are already busy fanning themselves because of a brownout? My point is: let's contribute to finding a solution.

Anyway, we are being transparent: let's talk about the rehabilitation of NAIA 3. This is a complicated issue. It has gone through two arbitrations; we were about to win both, but the decision in one was reversed due to a technicality. That's why now, we are preparing for its re-hearing. Another complication is the issue of the warranty for the completion of NAIA 3—you can't just say 'if a defect arises, too bad,' and add more expenses. That's why when we were explained that the original contractor would give us a proper warranty, we agreed. But we want to be sure; we want to complete the process correctly and completely, and I ask for your understanding regarding this issue.

It is now clear: Every square meter of cement we pour as the foundation of a more developed nation has a single focus: benefit for everyone—not politics. If before, roads were built only where favored, and bridges were constructed where the Mayor was friends with Madam, now, we are following a national plan. There are no favorites, no transactionalism, no sponsors; every peso is focused on accelerating our progress towards widespread development.

What we can expect in the coming years: airports and ports for goods and tourists; roads that will ensure everyone benefits from these large projects; power plants that will provide sufficient electricity and operate industries. This will serve as the framework that will branch out into other initiatives that will provide opportunities for Juan and Juana dela Cruz—from farmers with sufficient irrigation and fast sales of their crops, to construction workers building new buildings; from the continued growth of call centers, to the increase in entrepreneurs willing to invest capital in the country. We have promoted the right projects at the right cost; we did it with the right quality; and they are or will be completed on time, because the people implementing them are right and deserving.

Let's talk about traffic: Isn't it estimated that 2.4 billion pesos are lost to our economy every day due to the congested traffic in Metro Manila? Among the projects we are undertaking that will surely alleviate this is the Integrated Transport System. We are building terminals in areas that are not as congested for buses crowding the already full roads. The terminal in Parañaque is already benefiting people, and those in Quezon City and Muntinlupa are also in the pipeline. Provincial buses will only go as far as these terminals so they won't add to the congestion on EDSA.

And there are also two connector roads that will connect the North and South Luzon Expressways. In truth, as early as the seventies, they planned to build what they called the Metro Manila Highway. This was supposed to connect the two expressways, so that the hours-long journey traversing the length of EDSA would no longer be necessary. The problem: Mr. Marcos issued laws favoring his cronies. We were bound to comply with these laws: Anyone who builds infrastructure in that area must partner with his friend's corporation. It's tragic: they extended their franchise by 30 years every time they added even an inch of road to the original. To add to that: when the company made a profit, they did not complete the expansion or improvement of the infrastructure and roads. Remember that the roads mentioned and the Metro Manila Highway or Expressway should have reached Carmen, Rosales, in Pangasinan and Lucena in Quezon, but until now, they haven't. When they incurred losses, they even passed the debt on to the government. I will bring this to our Congress: Let's revisit Presidential Decrees 1113 and 1894.

Despite this, our projects continue. We have an eight-kilometer, four-lane elevated expressway that will connect C3 Road in Caloocan across España, all the way to PUP [Polytechnic University of the Philippines] in Sta. Mesa. There is also a more than 14-kilometer, six-lane elevated tollway that will traverse from Balintawak to Buendia in Makati. The Common Alignment of these two roads is a five-and-a-half-kilometer, six-lane elevated expressway from PUP in Sta. Mesa, across the middle of Osmeña and Quirino Avenue, to Buendia in Makati. Once the road is opened, the trip from SLEX to NLEX, which used to take two hours, can now be done in 15 minutes. The trip from Clark to Calamba, which used to take three hours, will be almost halved to 1 hour and 40 minutes. An estimated 55,000 motorists will benefit from these every day. Savings in time, savings in fuel, less pollution, and growth in commerce and tourism. It’s truly a win-win situation, isn't it?

Within the past three years, we have proven that agencies that were once havens of corruption can become examples of honest and effective service. Some of the simple but effective changes implemented by Secretary Babes Singson of the DPWH: No more letter of intent, which was used by bidders to collude; the bidding process has been simplified, so more are competing for the project, and the government gets a more worthwhile price. The government also pays on time, so more capable contractors are encouraged to contribute to the construction of national infrastructure. Due to honest management, the DPWH has saved 18.4 billion pesos, which is allocated for other meaningful projects.

As an example of the results of good governance, let's look at the Tagumbao Bridge in Gerona, Tarlac. To be honest, even when I was still a congressman, I proposed this. We have constituents who still need to go around two towns to cross the overflowing river during the rainy season. I told the previous administrations: You can have my entire PDAF [Priority Development Assistance Fund], just to get this done. If possible, an installment plan. But nothing happened. The length of the bridge to be constructed only expanded because of the eroding riverbank.

We are currently building the Tagumbao Bridge. And here is the story now that we are implementing it: The approved fund is 334 million pesos; but due to proper management and honest spending, it was lowered to 226 million pesos. In total, we saved more than 108 million pesos without sacrificing the quality of the bridge being built. And even better, this saved fund can be used to construct a dike and river training works for Phase II of the project.

Let's move on to tourism. According to the foreign newspaper Oriental Morning Post, we were the “Best Tourist Destination of 2012.” The Shanghai Morning Post seemed to fall in love with our country when they named us “Most Romantic Destination of 2012.” Hopefully they will love us more. According to Scuba Diving Magazine, the Philippines is the “Best Diving Destination.” Travel + Leisure Magazine also says that Palawan is the “Best Island.” We are almost being called paradise.

It is not surprising that with such resounding praise, we recorded 4.3 million tourist arrivals in our country in 2012—a new record high; this number has grown by 21.4 percent since 2010, when there were only an estimated 3.1 million tourists visiting us. Regarding our domestic travelers, our previous target for 2016 was 35.5 million tourists. But as early as 2011, we already surpassed this with 37.5 million domestic tourists. Now, with this momentum, we are confident that we will reach the new target of 56—I repeat—56.1 million before the end of 2016.

A stronger tourism sector will generate more jobs. The DOT [Department of Tourism] estimates that tourism contributed 3.8 million jobs in 2011. In truth, it is not only the areas with beautiful scenery that benefit from the arrival of tourists, but also the neighboring towns that can be considered tourism support communities: the areas where the food prepared in resorts comes from, where souvenirs are sold, and where other products and services serve as a source of progress for the provinces.

You have probably also heard the good news that recently arrived in the country. In March, the International Civil Aviation Organization lifted the significant safety concerns imposed on the Philippines. This was a result of reforms in the aviation industry to ensure that aviation safety in the Philippines meets international standards. Because of this, finally, on July 10th, the European Union once again allowed our flag carrier to fly directly to Europe.

Imagine, what if our aviation industry had been fixed and strengthened earlier? Wouldn't it be a waste that the visit of tourists who lost their desire to visit the Philippines was lost because of this? Lost jobs, funds, and opportunities—this is the result of the old system of governance.

That is why, from the very beginning, we have fought corruption at all levels of government and promoted transformation in our institutions. The result: true public service.

Let's look at the depth of the transformation that has happened in the GOCCs [government-owned and -controlled corporation]. The companies of the nation that you used to contribute to because of losses are now delivering dividends. Let's take the Philippine Reclamation Authority (PRA) as an example. In the 13 years before we came, the total dividends of the PRA: 676.82 million pesos. On the straight path, for 2012 alone, their dividend: 1 billion pesos. A huge transformation, isn't it?

A good example is also the Local Water Utilities Administration. In 2011, the recorded net loss of the said GOCC: 950 million pesos. But because of proper management, they were not only able to balance their books; according to their report, their total income reached 870 million pesos in 2012. Because of this, they were able to remit 365 million pesos to the government for that year.

Another example: In my first SONA, we exposed the questionable practices in the MWSS [Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System]: Hefty bonuses and allowances were given to themselves, despite their failure to address the needs of our countrymen. The agency itself reported: MWSS incurred a loss of 34 million pesos in 2010. This is unacceptable. That's why in 2011, we signed the GOCC Governance Act, which serves as the basis for integrity, credibility, and accountability in the management of our GOCCs. The result: In 2011, MWSS earned 333 million pesos from a loss of 34 million pesos. In 2012, their earnings were: almost 2 billion pesos. Along with this, their dividends also grew: from 150 million pesos in 2011, it increased to 345 million pesos for 2012. It is sad that the depth of the change planted by the leaders of MWSS is the same dirt and mud thrown at them by those who still want to cling to the old system.

Along with the increase in confidence in our good governance, comes the continued rise of our economy. The result: Two consecutive 10-place jumps in the Global Competitiveness Index of the World Economic Forum. For the first time, we obtained an investment grade status from two of the three most prestigious credit ratings agencies in the world, and the third is not far behind. Price stability of goods was maintained, and the share of our budget for debt payment continues to decline, while the fund allocated to social services grows. During a time of sluggish global economy, we demonstrated an impressive 6.8 percent GDP [gross domestic product] growth in 2012. We even surpassed this in the first quarter of 2013, when a growth of 7.8 percent was recorded—the highest recorded GDP in Southeast Asia, as well as in East Asia. Special mention should be given to the 28.5 percent contribution of manufacturing to the growth of our economy. We expect manufacturing to accelerate in the coming times.

We are now called a “rising tiger,” according to the World Bank; a “brightest spark,” according to the statement of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, and other nicknames that refer to the transformation happening in our country. From the proper spending of funds, to the effective collection of taxes; from infrastructure development to a more transparent business environment that creates jobs, our statement to the world is truly clear: The Philippines can now keep pace with the flow of progress.

The transformation of our society is not only seen in the economy or statistics. Now, every Filipino knows: Whether rich or poor, whether you have connections in power or not, if you do wrong, you will be held accountable. Justice is truly blindfolded. The mandate of our Bosses is unwavering: Hold the corrupt accountable, and correct the wrongs in a system that has long plagued our nation.

We are holding the former head of TESDA accountable because he is involved in massive overpricing within the agency. For example: An incubator jar costs 149 pesos. But with Mr. Syjuco, according to the data, it cost 15,375 pesos. The normal price of a dough cutter is 120 pesos. The price with Mr. Syjuco: 48,507 pesos. Let's clarify, this is a dough cutter, and not a Hamilton Class Cutter. Perhaps when he faces the case filed by the Ombudsman, Mr. Syjuco will learn to count.

Former officials of PAGCOR [Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation] are facing charges for squandering 26.7 million pesos just to make a movie; burning 186 million pesos for a party-list; and even using rice donations, which were intended for disaster victims, to enhance their campaign.

The former leaders of the PNP are also facing allegations regarding 131.6 million pesos wasted on 75 defective rubber boats, and 104.99 million pesos for the anomalous purchase of second-hand helicopters from 2009 to 2010. It would be better if they answer the questions about this correctly, so we can determine if there are others who should be held accountable.

Regarding the Cadavero case, PDAF, MRT 3, and others: Because some critics do not know what we are doing, they assume we are not doing anything about these issues. If the government doesn't yet have data and we shout, “We will investigate you,” wouldn’t that be like telling those who will be charged, “Please hide all the evidence well?” Therefore, we will follow where the truth leads us; evidence will dictate our actions.

When we declared “no sirens,” we didn’t just dismantle the sirens of those who lorded over the roads; we also unearthed the culture of corruption that was then seemingly rooted in public institutions.

But let’s be honest: Until now, there are still some government agencies that seemingly don’t want to improve. The depth and branching out of their tentacles in our bureaucracy is discouraging; as soon as we look away, they will surely abuse and victimize again. Let’s name names: in the Bureau of Immigration, we have repeatedly told them to fix the monitoring of our ports and airports. But how did the brothers Joel and Mario Reyes, the prime suspects in the murder of Gerry Ortega, leave the country? Why did it still happen that the escape of Korean Park Sungjun was clearly seen on the CCTV itself? He is wanted in Korea, and his government requested assistance to arrest him. What face can we show when it was our own government personnel who escorted him and allowed him to escape?

The culture of “it’s good enough” in the National Irrigation Administration is also draining our patience. Instead of laying out a plan for new irrigation, they are content with the repeated rehabilitation of irrigation systems. They are happy as long as they can say they have done something, even if it’s just patchwork, they are happy. During their anniversary, I asked why their target was only 60 percent again in 2012, when they reached 87 percent in 2011. The next day, I met their brilliant administrator at the NEDA [National Economic and Development Authority] Board meeting. He told me, “Sir, the reason it’s only 60 percent is because 40 percent of their target is for Mindanao, typhoon Pablo hit and struck, so they were delayed by 40 percent.” When did Pablo hit? During the first week of December. This means he planned to finish 40 percent of his work for the year within just three weeks. We don’t need this kind of management within the bureaucracy.

This Bureau of Customs is like competing in incompetence. Instead of collecting the right taxes and stopping smuggling, they seem to allow the smuggling of goods, including illegal drugs, weapons, and others into our territory without restraint. The Department of Finance estimates that more than 200 billion pesos in revenue is just slipping through and not going to the national treasury. Where do the employees of this agency get the audacity? Many nights before I sleep, I really think, they are almost saying, “I don’t care if the weapons fall into the hands of criminals; I don’t care how many lives are destroyed by drugs; I don’t care if farms are parched for life. What’s important is that I get rich; you’re on your own.” This cannot be the practice in government. If you can’t do your job, you don’t deserve to stay in office.

If you are a decent employee of the Bureau of Immigration, of the National Irrigation Administration, of Customs, or of any other government agency, I hope you will contribute even more. It is not enough to simply keep your head down in your cubicle; part of your job is to prevent wrongdoing. You are on the right side, so please do not hide; make it easier for me to find you; I will promote you and promote you again to showcase your good example, and to change the wrong culture in your respective agencies.

For those employees who have no intention of turning away from the 'wangwang' culture: The appeals are over. You had three years to show that you are ready to reform; now, you will be sought out, if you haven't been found yet, but those I haven't found yet, we will include all of you; now, bear with us.

Let us also include in this change the corrupt members of the Civil Service. Even during my mother's time, I already heard the excuse, “What does it matter if it's an order from Malacañang? You are only there for six years.” This kind of thinking needs to be corrected. I am appealing to Congress: Let us review our Civil Service Code and PD 1, so that it can be amended as soon as possible. I support the creation of a mechanism that will restore the dignity of public service; that only honest, competent, and principled public servants can enter and remain in government.

Now, let us allow our fellow citizens to express the transformation that is happening in society:

“I am Violeta S. Abuque. Our life before Pantawid Pamilya, because of the hardship, you had no one to turn to, no money to use. Where would you go, no one could lend you money because they were also struggling in life.”

“We were very happy when the DSWD suddenly had a program that reached us in the mountains. It will be my partner in ensuring the children can study properly.”

“We really realized that we need to support the children’s education, so they won’t end up like our ancestors who couldn’t even write their names.”

“I am truly grateful, first of all, to Pantawid Pamilya, and to those who supported it.”

— Violeta S. Abuque, CCT beneficiary

“Before, they would go to school with barely any allowance. But when we had it, they had allowance, they could have breakfast.”

“You really need to fulfill what is stipulated in the agreement. Of course, you also need to nurture the help you receive, and find ways to increase it. So my child and I, we work together, we sell peanut butter every week.”

“I am grateful to be a part of this Pantawid program, because it is a big help to our family.”

— Dulce Panaligan, CCT beneficiary

“To finance my job search, I went back to being a balut vendor. I heard TESDA offered free training. I read the information about it, and eventually registered. I am happy with the help of the TESDA program, because, now, I have learned what it is, the job I want. And also, I am now able to use it for my further development and learning, while I am doing my job.”

— Emerson Paguia, TESDA scholar

“On April 2nd, at 6:45 in the morning, I was on my way to the PCCR review center. I had a robber ride the jeep with me. At the top of the Nagtahan flyover, he declared a hold-up. He pointed a knife at me. I fought back, he stabbed me in the thigh, I managed to take the knife from him, and before he got off the jeep, I stabbed him in the back. When he got off the jeep, I chased after him, we were both covered in blood. That, I think, caught the attention of the people and led to the arrest of the robber.”

“I also thought about my sworn service to the people. To my fellow police officers: Let us just do what is right, and what is good for the welfare of our country—and at the same time, what we do will be a reflection of our actions in the PNP.”

— PO3 Edlyn Arbo

“I was assigned here at Police Station 4, from 2006 to 2012. I was given a spot meritorious promotion by our President, perhaps because of my apprehension of the most wanted criminals here in Bacolod City. Last Saturday, the gun given to me by our President was used in the arrest of a notorious car thief here in Bacolod City.”

“We work, even if it’s difficult, even if we risk our lives, just to be able to serve our fellow citizens and our country.”

— Police Officer 3rd Class Felipe Moncatar

“When I broke down here on Quezon Avenue, before the tunnel, after 15 minutes someone arrived, I think he’s a policeman. But this policeman really helped me. He even tried to lift the car with his bare hands. So I was thinking that maybe, eventually, he would ask for money. Then the wrecker arrived, they were already wrecking my car, towing it immediately. The policeman said: No, help first before towing.”

“Out of my gratitude, I was giving him 1,000 because he helped me. But he didn’t accept it. His reply to me was: ‘Our job is to help the citizens’.”

“There is a change in our police force. For PO Sultan: I salute you.”

— Armin Punzalan, businessman

“Right now, what we call the Navy’s modernization program isn’t just about equipment. It’s also connected to the welfare of our people. And we see—not just me, but all of my colleagues in the Philippine Navy: We are happy with the changes we are seeing. The straight and narrow path of our President, we really feel it. We are happy now; we have nothing more to ask for. So I told my colleagues, the government is giving us everything. Let’s do our job, and give it back to the country, to the people.”

— Lt. Commander Desuasido, Philippine Navy

Never has our country lacked people willing to stand firm and fight, no matter how great the trials before them. There was the courage shown by Commodore Ramon Alcaraz during World War II. Aboard a Q-Boat made of wood, he engaged nine Japanese Zero fighters, which were then considered one of the most modern airplanes; he shot down three of them. In truth, he would have continued to fight, if not for his own superiors ordering him to surrender. This bravery is also shown every day by our soldiers guarding the most remote mountains, and our farthest islands; soldiers who endure being away from their families, and stand tall against anyone who tries to challenge our sovereignty. It is also not an exaggeration to think that our successes on the straight and narrow path might still be a dream today if not for the members of our Cabinet. When I offered them to be part of our government, they knew their job would not be easy. But it is a blessing that they accepted the challenge, swore to help with the transformation, and from the beginning, sacrifice every day so as not to waste the privilege of serving you.

There are those like Secretary Albert del Rosario. Based on tradition, the first official trip abroad of a secretary is to countries with which we have strong and peaceful relations. But after he took his oath as Foreign Affairs Secretary, he immediately flew to Libya, taking only a few belongings; he passed through more than 20 checkpoints in the midst of gunfire, and led the evacuation of more than 20,000 Filipinos stranded in the turmoil in Libya. You might be surprised to hear which country the foreigners who hitched a ride on our evacuation were from. The Philippines is different now: Instead of us always being the ones being helped, we can now also help foreigners. To be honest, Secretary Albert could have refused to work in the government. He is a respected and successful businessman, and he would certainly be more comfortable in private life. He had previously contributed as our ambassador to America. He could have simply been dismayed when he was removed from his position, because he opposed the declaration of a State of Emergency by the previous administration in 2006. But we called on him to return, and he responded. Now, he is making an even greater contribution as secretary. He is willing to put himself in danger, because he knows that no one will come to the aid of a Filipino except another Filipino. For your continued steadfastness in defending our rights, I salute you, Secretary Albert del Rosario.

Transformation is also brought about by the inspiration provided by good public servants. Millions of Filipinos mourned the passing of Jesse Robredo. For almost two decades, he led with competence, compassion, and humility in Naga. These very principles were the reason why we borrowed him from Congresswoman Leni, and their three children, and the Nagueños, to be part of our Cabinet. That is why, after the tragedy, one of the most difficult tasks I performed was delivering the news to Leni and their children.

Besides mourning, I cannot help but blame myself for what happened to Jesse. Perhaps if I hadn't encouraged him to join the Cabinet, he would still be alive today. Perhaps if he had remained in Naga, we would still have him with us. Perhaps there would still be a Jesse Robredo serving now.

However, on the other hand, I know that Jesse would not have allowed the change and correction of society to stop with him. I, and Jesse, were only given the opportunity to serve the country because of you. The face of change is not singular. It will no longer take a hundred years for the next good person to be born, for the next good Filipino to stand up.

There are those who always ask me: What about in 2016? What will happen when you step down? Is honest governance over? Is the straight path over?

My Bosses, let us think about this: Where did we come from? If you have doubts now, what are they compared to the doubts we had in 2010? Weren't we happy then that the era of darkness was over? Weren't we satisfied then just to replace those in power?

Now, we are enjoying the change. It comes from the seeds of compassion, of empathy, of volunteerism; it comes from millions of Filipinos who, in the simplest ways, volunteered to contribute to the transformation of the country.

In this contribution, look at what we have achieved: Did anyone think that peace would be within reach in a region torn apart by conflict for 40 years? Isn't this the work of Moro people who were willing to lay down their arms and said, “Come, let's talk, I trust you”? Isn't this the work of ordinary citizens who said, “Brother, we are both Filipinos, enough of the conflict”?

When the Pantawid Pamilya (Conditional Cash Transfer) program was first proposed, the question was: How could it achieve its intended impact; where would the funds come from to cover all poor Filipino families? Did anyone think that, after only three years, nearly 4 million households would become its beneficiaries? And aren't they—every mother who wakes up early to prepare her child for school, every student who studies diligently—aren't they also the ones who contributed and continue to contribute to the success of this program?

Did anyone think that, from importing millions of tons of rice, by the end of 2012 we would be 94 percent rice self-sufficient? Did anyone think that the former “Sick Man of Asia,” in just three years of honest governance, would be at investment grade status? Who would have thought that we could implement all of our social services today, without raising taxes except of course for the Sin Tax? Didn't every accountant, doctor, lawyer contribute to this, now paying the correct taxes? Didn't we all contribute to this?

Is there still room for doubt? Now that we are achieving things we didn't even dare to dream of, now that we have progressed, and our aspirations are within reach—Boss, is this the time to doubt?

To every Filipino who believes in the power of small acts of kindness: You are the ones who made the change happen. This is your SONA (State of the Nation Address).

To every teacher who wakes up early to teach in the countryside: This SONA is for you.

To every police officer who served without asking for anything in return: This SONA is for you.

To those who are uneasy with the list of candidates in the election, and knocked on their neighbor’s door to say, “Let’s not be content, let’s work together to find a worthy leader,” this SONA is for you.

To every student who is aware of current social issues, and instead of just complaining on Facebook, suggests solutions: This SONA is for you.

To Brigadier General Ramon Mateo Dizon, retiring chief of the Presidential Security Group, who I have known for a long time, fighting against coups during my mother's time: Throughout my presidency, you protected my security, as well as that of my personal and official family. I confidently went anywhere, whether abroad or in the remote corners of the Philippines. Chito, you also contributed to change; you are truly loyal to the flag, to the Constitution, and to the Filipino people. Of course, if you hadn't been supported by your virtuous wife, Jo-ann, you wouldn't have achieved your successes. This SONA is yours together.

And to all those who awakened the sleeping, to those who opened the eyes of the blind, to those who rattled the deaf: This SONA is yours.

Our journey is still long, and we never said that this path would be easy or without obstacles. But I have no doubt in our ability to overcome any barricade. The successes we enjoy today are not accidental; let us not allow this transformation to be only temporary. Let us seize the opportunity to make the change permanent.

This is my fourth SONA. When I was a Congressman, the people of Tarlac were my strength; when I became a Senator, and until now, in my presidency, the people—the Philippines—you are my strength. In our continued contribution and faith in each other and in God, I tell you: You will ensure that what we have started will continue; you will ensure that the face of corruption will be completely erased; you will ensure that we will never again stray from the straight and narrow path.

They once told me: Noynoy, just start, and we did start, and now, it is clear how far we have come. Now, Filipinos, let us continue to work together, let us nurture, accelerate, and expand the transformation of society. I am Noynoy Aquino; I proudly tell the whole world: I am Filipino. And it is truly wonderful to be Filipino in this time.

Thank you very much. Good afternoon to all.

Read in English

Download the SONA Technical Report