MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 38

AMENDING SECTION 1659 OF THE REVISED ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AS AMENDED BY SECTION 1 OF COMMONWEALTH ACT NO. 543

WHEREAS, in the interest of a more simple and economical administration of justice, it is deemed advisable to reduce the number of officials of the Bureau of Justice as provided in Section 1659 of the Revised Administrative Code as amended by Section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 543, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, do hereby order that Section 1659 of the Revised Administrative Code as amended by Section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 543 be amended by Section 1 of Commonwealth Act No. 543 be amended, as it is hereby amended, so as to read as follows:

“Sec. 1659. Chief Officials of the Bureau of Justice. – The Bureau of Justice shall have one Chief to be known as the Solicitor General whose salary shall be the same as that of a district judge of first instance. He shall be assisted by one Assistant Solicitor General whose salary shall be the same as that of a judge-at-large of first instance. When the Solicitor General is unable to perform his duties or in case of a vacancy in the office, the Assistant Solicitor General shall temporarily perform the functions of said office, or in his absence, the Secretary of Justice may designate the acting chief of the office. There shall also be such number of solicitors as may from time to time be available under current appropriations and as the conditions of the service shall require.

“The qualifications for appointment to the position of Solicitor General and Assistant Solicitor General shall be the same as those prescribed for judges of Courts of First Instance, and those for the solicitors shall be the same as those prescribed for provincial fiscals.”

Done at the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.