MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 108

REQUIRING ALL SHIPS ARRIVING IN THE PORT OF MANILA TO SECURE UNLOADING PERMITS

WHEREAS, the ravages of war have brought destruction and damage to the facilities of the Port of Manila used in the receiving, storing and delivery of cargoes from abroad on account of which the efficient and speedy handling of such cargoes has been seriously impaired;

WHEREAS, as a result of the inadequate facilities now obtaining at the Port of Manila, there exists at present a serious congestion of commercial cargoes on pier premises which is causing considerable delay in the unloading of cargoes from commercial vessels many of which have to stay out in the harbor for several weeks awaiting berthing facilities; and

WHEREAS, in order to relieve the congestion on pier premises and avoid delay sustained by vessels in the unloading of cargoes, it becomes urgently necessary to limit temporarily the types of cargoes to be unloaded at the Port of Manila;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws of the Philippines, do hereby order that all ships arriving in Manila on or after June 1, 1946, from United States and foreign ports must receive an unloading permit from the Insular Collector of Customs before proceeding to the discharge of their cargo whether by lighter or alongside piers. Beginning June 1, 1946, the Insular Collector of Customs will grant priority of unloading on the following basis: First priority–discharge of mail, passengers, passengers’ baggage, and perishables only from any vessel under regulations heretofore or hereafter issued by the Insular Collector of Customs; Second priority–discharge of perishables only from any vessel under regulations heretofore or hereafter issued by the Insular Collector of Customs; Third priority–complete discharge of any vessel whose manifest shows that at least 75% of total tonnage to be discharged at Manila consists of rice, wheat, flour, corn, petroleum products, trucks and automotive parts and tires, and such other essential commodities as may be determined from time to time by the Insular Collector of Customs under regulations heretofore or hereafter issued by that official.

Done at the City of Manila, this 8th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

PARAGRAPH

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.