MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 59

CREATING THE METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION SERVICE (METRAN)

WHEREAS, there is at present a passenger bus service, known as the Civilian Emergency Transportation (CET), operated and maintained by the Emergency Control Administration for the City of Manila;

WHEREAS, the United States Army has manifested its intention to transfer the establishment known as the “Ordinance Commercial Vehicle Unit,” including all facilities, equipment and parts, and the civilian personnel thereof to the Commonwealth of the Philippines; and

WHEREAS, the foregoing enterprises may be coordinated, maintained, and operated under the Department of Public Works and Communications to achieve maximum efficiency and benefit for the public;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, do hereby. create an office to be known as the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) under the supervision and control of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications to take charge of the operation and maintenance of the passenger bus service known as the Civilian Emergency Transportation (CET) operated by the Emergency Control Administration for the City of Manila and the maintenance of the civilian motor vehicle facilities at present handled by the Ordnance Commercial Motor Vehicle Unit of the United States Army upon its being transferred to the Commonwealth of the Philippines. The amount of Thirty Thousand Pesos (P30,000.00) set aside in Emergency Control Administration Order No. 16, series of 1945, issued by the Emergency Control Administrator for the operation and maintenance of the said passenger bus service, and the present personnel, plant, equipment, supplies and records, arid accounts connected with the operation and maintenance thereof, are hereby transferred to the Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN). All facilities of the Ordinance Commercial Vehicle Unit of the United States Army, including equipment and parts, that may be turned over to the Commonwealth of the Philippines, as well as the civilian personnel now forming part of said unit, shall likewise be transferred to the METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION SERVICE (METRAN).

Administrative Order No. 2, dated June 25, 1945, issued by the Emergency Control Administrator and all other orders inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this 27th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.