MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 85

CREATING THE GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the Government of the United States desires to make available to the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, in an effort to rehabilitate the same, a part of the excess stock of materials, equipment, tools, machinery, supplies and other property of the Armed Forces of the United States; and

WHEREAS, it is necessary that an organization be created and established in order to adequately survey the needs of the various departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, dependencies, and instrumentalities of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and to properly and justly distribute and allocate such excess materials, equipment, tools, machinery, supplies and other property to the aforementioned departments, bureaus, offices, agencies, dependencies and instrumentalities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby create and establish the Government Procurement Commission, which shall have authority to requisition, receive, distribute and allocate all excess materials, equipment, tools, machinery, supplies and other property which may be ceded, transferred, assigned or otherwise made available to the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines by the Government of the United States.

The Government Procurement Commission shall be composed of the Secretary to the President, as Chairman, and the Secretary of Public Works and Communications and the Commissioner of the Budget, as Members. The Commission shall appoint such executive officer or officers as may be necessary for the proper performance of its functions and may authorize the payment of per diems for services rendered by said executive officer or officers. It shall, also, appoint the necessary office personnel and determine the salaries, duties and responsibilities thereof.

The operating expenses of the Commission shall be taken from such unexpended net balances as may have accrued from the Petroleum Products Control Administration created by Executive Order No. 57, the funds for which were made available from sources other than the General Appropriation Acts; and upon determination by the Commission of the amount of such expenses and certification thereof by the Department Head, said amount shall be deemed transferred to the Commission.

The Commission shall be under the executive supervision of the Secretary to the President.

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done at the City of Manila, this 7th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippine s

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.