MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 103

AUTHORIZING THE ASSOCIATED PRESS, MANILA, TO OPERATE A RADIO RECEIVING STATION IN THE CITY OF MANILA FOR THE PURPOSE OF COPYING FOR PUBLICATION, IN THE PUBLIC PRESS, PRESS MESSAGES FROM RADIO STATIONS EXTERIOR TO THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, all telecommunication services to and from points in the Philippines to and from points exterior thereto authorized by the Commonwealth Government to engage in such services were disrupted at the outbreak of the war;

WHEREAS, the Associated Press, a company duly authorized to engage in the dissemination of news through the public press, established a radio receiving station in Manila, under Military control shortly after liberation, to supplement the inadequate communication channels, for the purpose of securing news from the outside world to be distributed to the different newspapers; and

WHEREAS, telecommunication facilities so far reestablished are still inadequate to furnish sufficient channels over which news from the outside world may be brought rapidly to these Islands, for the benefit of the Filipino people in general;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Sergio Osmeña, President of the Philippines, in the interest of public welfare and by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws of the Philippines, do hereby authorize the aforementioned Associated Press to continue operating its radio receiving station in Manila, for the purpose of receiving messages for publication in the public press, until June thirty, nineteen hundred and forty-six, subject to the following conditions:

1. That, with the exception of section 1 of Act No. 3846, as amended, all the provisions of said Act and the regulations issued thereunder shall be applicable to said company and the radio station which it operates;

2. That the radio station of the company shall receive radio messages only from radio stations exterior to the Philippines which have authorized the company to do so;

3. That the station of the company shall be so constructed and operated as not to interfere with the operations of other radio stations;

4. That the company shall keep an account of the gross receipts of the business transacted by it and shall furnish the Auditor General and the Treasurer of the Philippines a copy of such account, from the date it started operation to the date of termination of this temporary permit;

5. That the company shall be liable to pay such taxes on real estates, buildings and personal property thereof as other persons or corporations are now or may be required by law to pay;

6. That the company shall further pay to the Treasurer of the Philippines, within ten days after the audit and approval of the accounts as prescribed in No. 4 above, one and one-half per centum of all gross receipts for the business transacted under this permit;

7. That the company shall hold the Commonwealth Government harmless from all claims, accounts, demands or actions arising out of accidents or injuries, whether to property or to persons, caused by the construction or operation of its radio station; and,

8. That this temporary permit shall not be construed as a finding that the operation of the service herein authorized will serve public interest, convenience and necessity, beyond the expressed terms of this temporary permit.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of March , in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.