Office of the President of the Philippines

Executive Order No. 21

DECLARING TO BE ON ACTIVE SERVICE IN THE PHILIPPINE ARMY ALL PERSONS NOW ACTIVELY SERVING IN RECOGNIZED MILITARY FORCES IN THE PHILIPPINES

WHEREAS, many civilians residing in the Philippines of Filipino, America and other foreign citizenships, and Officers and Enlisted Men of the Philippine Army, of the armed forces of the United States and of Allied nations, have continued armed resistance against the Imperial Japanese Government since the sixth of May, 1942;

WHEREAS, this action has written in blood an epic of courage, devotion and loyalty to the Government and the people of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, these military forces have contributed in a large measure to the Allied military effort and to the liberation of the Filipino people from the yoke of the Japanese invader;

WHEREAS, it is the desire of the Government of the Philippines to recognize this allegiance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Emergency Powers Law, Section 22 a and Section 27 of Commonwealth Act Numbered One notwithstanding, do hereby ordain and promulgate the following:

1. All persons, of any nationality or citizenship, who are actively serving in recognized military forces in the Philippines, are hereby considered to be on active service in the Philippine Army.

2. The temporary grades of Enlisted Men, enlisted or promoted in the field by Commanders of recognized military forces or by their delegated authority, are hereby confirmed.

3. The temporary ranks of all officers, appointed or promoted in the field prior to this date by Commanders of recognized military forces, are hereby confirmed.

4. The date of entry into active service in the Philippine Army will be that of joining a recognized military force.

5. The effective date of rank for commissioned Officers and Enlisted Men will be the date on which they were appointed or promoted to such rank by the Commanders of recognized military forces.

6. A recognized military force, as used herein, is defined as a force under a commander who has been appointed, designated or recognized by the Commander-in-Chief Southwest Pacific Area.

Done at the seat of Government in the Field, this 28th day of October, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) ARTURO B. ROTOR Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1944). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.