MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 93

APPROPRIATING THE SUM OF THIRTEEN MILLION PESOS FOR PUBLIC WORKS

WHEREAS, important public works projects, such as bridges, roads, artesian wells, waterworks, river control works, sea protection works, irrigation systems, and public buildings, I have been destroyed or damaged or their construction and improvement suspended on account of war operations;

WHEREAS, it is deemed urgent that those public works projects be repaired or reconstructed, or their construction undertaken, for the social and economic rehabilitation of the people; and

WHEREAS, further abandonment of these projects would net only retard recovery and revival of trade, commerce, industry and agriculture so indispensable In the economic life of the country, but would also expose them to further damages of greater proportion, thus necessitating a vast outlay of public funds for their repair or reconstruction and maintenance;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the existing laws of the Philippines, do hereby set aside the sum of Thirteen million pesos or so much thereof as may be necessary out of any funds in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to be allotted by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, and expended under the disrection of the Director of Public Works, for the purposes specified hereunder:

The appropriations herein provided shall he reimbursed to the General Fund from the proceeds of the sale of bonds authorized under Commonwealth Act No. 6118: Provided , That the balances of the said appropriations the destination of which has not been determined by proper authority on June 30, 1947, and the balances of appropriations remaining unexpended on June 3 0, 1948, shall revert to the bond fund concerned.

Done in the City of Manila, this 14th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred forty-six, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the eleventh.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(SGD.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1946). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.