MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 34

AMENDING TRAFFIC REGULATIONS FOR VEHICLES

WHEREAS, it is deemed advisable to change the existing regulations providing for the driving of vehicles on the left side of the road so that the vehicle traffic in the Philippines shall conform with the practice of driving on the right side of the road obtaining in most countries of the world;

WHEREAS, such a change would bring about certain economic advantages to the people of the Philippines in that it would reduce the price of motor vehicles imported into the Philippines from the United States;

WHEREAS, during the present emergency the great majority of the motor vehicles of the United States Army used on the roadways in the Philippines are right-hand driven and the drivers thereof are accustomed to driving on the right side of the road; and

WHEREAS, the present affords the most propitious opportunity to effect this desired change;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, I, SERGIO OSMEÑA, President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, do hereby order:

“Sec. 60. DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROAD . —Unless a different course of action is required in the interest of the safety and security of life, person, or property, or because of unreasonable difficulty of operation in compliance herewith, every person operating a motor vehicle or guiding an animal drawn vehicle on a highway shall pass to the right when meeting persons or vehicles coming toward him, and to the left when overtaking persons or vehicles going the same direction, and, when turning to the left in going from one highway into another, every vehicle shall be conducted to the right of the center of the intersection of the highway”.

Done at the City of Manila, this 10th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and forty-five, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the tenth.

(Sgd.) SERGIO OSMEÑA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JOSE S. REYES Secretary to the President

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1945). [Executive Order Nos. : 1W – 109]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.