Thank you.

Allow me to greet the former Presidents who are with us here today: President Joseph Ejercito Estrada and President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo; Senate President Chiz Escudero and the honorable members of the Senate; House Speaker Martin Romualdez and the honorable members of the House of Representatives; Chief Justice Alexander Gesmundo and the honorable justices of the Supreme Court; His Excellency, the Most Reverend Charles John Brown and the esteemed members of the Diplomatic Corps; Executive Secretary Lucas Bersamin and the members of the Cabinet; of course the First Lady, the First Lady Louise Araneta-Marcos  ; other distinguished guests; my beloved countrymen, good afternoon to all of you.

The hard lesson of this last year has made it very clear that whatever current data proudly bannering our country as among the best-performing in Asia, means nothing to a Filipino, who is confronted by the price of rice at 45 to 65 pesos per kilo.

Although these statistics are good, they are meaningless to our countrymen who face the reality of high prices of goods, especially food — especially rice.

It is true that market forces — in our country and even around the world — dictate the price. This is due, for example, to war, supply problems, and natural forces, such as El Niño, which has also been experienced in other countries. But this is no longer an important thing to remember for our countrymen who are burdened by the price of rice.

My dear countrymen, I know you feel this deeply. We are not ignoring your complaints and the hardships you are experiencing.

Despite the challenges we face, we have witnessed the highest yield of palay (unhusked rice) in the country in the past year. It reached over twenty million tons — the highest yield since 1987.

However, this yield is equivalent to only thirteen million tons of rice. This is still not enough for our need of sixteen million tons of rice, so we are forced to import.

But, we will still give more value to local production.

Therefore, we continue to support the agricultural sector, to accelerate, facilitate, and strengthen production — from planting, harvesting and catching, to transportation and selling — to also avoid spoilage of products.

In the past year, over one hundred million kilograms of various seeds, seedlings, and fertilizers were distributed to farmers. The government also distributed over three hundred thousand parent stocks to encourage breeding.

For fishermen, over five hundred million fingerlings and three thousand boats were distributed. The construction and repair of fish ports and cold storage facilities also help support their industry.

In addition to these, there is also technical and financial assistance to increase knowledge of modern methods and access sufficient capital.

The government is also ready to release vaccines against Swine Fever, which will strengthen livestock and provide farmers with a guarantee against losses.

We are also undertaking related measures to lower prices and increase our food supply.

Because of compelling emergency reasons, such as illegal price manipulations by hoarders and smuggling, we were constrained to temporarily implement mandated price ceilings on rice. We also extended the reduced tariff rates to facilitate the importation of rice, corn, and pork until the end of this year.

I assure our farmers and the entire agricultural sector that these are only temporary solutions.

Regarding agrarian reform, our program continues, as well as the distribution of titles to our farmers. In the past two years, we have already awarded over one hundred and thirty thousand titles to beneficiaries. We are also continuously accelerating the division of collective Certificates of Land Ownership Award or ‘CLOA’ for its individual beneficiaries.

Certificates of Condonation are also being distributed, related to the cancellation of over fifty-seven billion pesos in debt of six hundred thousand beneficiaries.

Furthermore, more than seventy thousand cases pertaining to agrarian reform have been resolved. This includes more than two thousand cases that had been pending for a long time even before the current Administration took office.

Through modernized customs procedures and heightened enforcement efforts, more than 2.7 billion pesos worth of smuggled agri-fisheries products have been seized, preventing them from entering the market and negatively influencing prices.

As a lesson, the seized rice shipments are immediately distributed to our poor countrymen. The same fate will befall all smuggled rice. Other products, meanwhile, will be destroyed or burned – in addition to the imprisonment of those caught.

Soon, we will be implementing the pre-border technical verification and cross-border electronic invoicing of import commodities.

This will send a strong message that we mean serious business.

To reduce unnecessary business costs, local government units no longer collect fees and charges from motorists transporting goods and merchandise while passing through national roads.  On the same principle, LGUs have been strongly urged to refrain from collecting similar fees for the use of local roads.

KADIWA served as a partner of the people during times of high food prices. Because it was effective, the KADIWA Centers will continue to operate.

Working with local governments, we have increased the number of KADIWA stores in various parts of the country. Above all, we aim to make the holding of KADIWA stores permanent and more frequent.

One thousand two hundred kilometers of farm-to-market roads will be completed throughout the country this year. More than nine thousand three hundred pieces of machinery will be distributed and facilities constructed this year.

We continue to open and repair irrigation systems throughout the Philippines.

This year, we will provide irrigation to almost forty-five thousand hectares of new land. We will also rehabilitate irrigation in almost thirty-eight thousand hectares of land nationwide.

One of the completed projects is stage two of the Malitubog-Maridagao Irrigation Project. Approximately ten thousand hectares of land in North Cotabato and Maguindanao del Sur will be served by this irrigation system.

Some of the irrigation systems we are implementing now are solar-powered. This means they are run by the sun, a non-exhaustible resource, and do not require the use of fuel. An example of this is the recently inaugurated Cabaruan Solar-Powered Pump Irrigation Project in Quirino, Isabela.

Meanwhile, due to the Jalaur River Multipurpose Project in Iloilo, nearly thirty-two thousand hectares of land will be provided with irrigation.

The Jalaur River project will demonstrate the expanded potential of irrigation. It can do more than just irrigate farmlands. It can also be used for flood control, power generation, and even tourism.

Moving forward, irrigation dams will supplement all our other bulk water projects to ensure water security for our people, especially in the underserved areas.

The recent El Niño had a severe impact, especially on farms. Due to the damage from crop destruction, our farmers were provided with protection through the crop insurance we provided.

In the past two years, over nine [billion] pesos worth of indemnity has been paid to affected farmers and fishermen.

However, it is also good that modern farming methods, such as low-water-use farming technologies, have been launched early.

Through our initiated LAWA and BINHI projects, modern water storage facilities are being implemented, to further prepare and protect our farmers from the threat of drought.

As we can see in all the world, weather events are, as has been predicted, getting more extreme, such as torrential rains that instantly shift to scorching heat waves — or vice- versa. Our country’s geographical location makes us highly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.

Precisely because of our inherent vulnerability, we are proactive advocates for heightened climate responsibility and justice on the global stage. To this end, we have secured a seat on the Board of the Loss and Damage Fund. And further, the Philippines has also been selected as host country to that fund.

This will require an enabling law from Congress to confer the legal personality and capacity to the Board.

This welcome development shall complement all our other climate adaptation and mitigation measures, and give us a strong voice to access the needed financial assistance for climate-related initiatives and impacts.

However, the most important thing is that the entire country is resilient and always prepared for harmful disasters. Our DRRM workers are leading the way to ensure our extensive preparation, and our awareness and readiness at all times.

As a primary preparation, we are building essential infrastructure that will serve as protection and coordination centers, especially in terms of aid delivery.

Within the past two years, almost a hundred evacuation centers have already been built. While in January of this year, we started the operations of our Disaster Response Command Center, which shall serve as the central hub for the government’s disaster response efforts.

Now, with the changing of seasons, we are monitoring and preparing for the impact of La Niña and heavy rains.

More than five thousand five hundred flood control projects have been completed, and many more are currently underway throughout the country.

One of these is the Flood Risk Management Project in the Cagayan de Oro River, which will provide long-term protection for more than six hundred hectares of land and sixty thousand of our citizens. Another is the project in Pampanga Bay, which will serve as additional relief from flooding.

In January, we launched “KALINISAN sa Bagong Pilipinas” (Cleanliness in the New Philippines), where we mobilized our barangays to clean up their respective communities. In just five months, more than forty thousand tons of waste have been collected by more than twenty-two thousand barangays across the country. I expect the continued support of local governments in cleaning up our communities.

As an example here in Manila, a large-scale collaborative effort to Revitalize the Pasig River has begun.

As we enter the mid-term, our infrastructure development remains sustained, strategic, and on schedule.

Aside from agriculture and disaster risk, our other vital sectors and pillars — such as education, health, energy, low-cost housing, transport, information technology — they all stand to benefit from our aggressive infrastructure development, as befitting our upper middle-income economic target.

With the results that we have seen two years into this Administration, we can claim that despite challenges, we are steadily progressing towards our targets in the medium-term.

Our power and internet services are continuously being upgraded in both capacity and connectivity.

In our Free Wi-Fi Program, almost ten million unique user devices are benefiting from free internet in more than thirteen thousand locations throughout the Philippines. This is accessible in many of our schools and remote areas. We continue to increase the number of free Wi-Fi sites throughout the country.

As part of our nationwide internet infrastructure development, phase 1 of the National Fiber Backbone has been completed and operationalized. Phases 2 and 3 have already begun early this year, and shall be completed by 2026. This fiber backbone will give us sufficient capacity in terms of bandwidth.

As of 2022, only seventy-seven percent or 20.6 million households were connected to the Internet.

This is much too low.

Together with our private sector partners, we will efficiently harness the concept of common towers to provide connectivity to Filipinos who are at the far end of the last mile. Expect full government support to ensure the successful completion of this critical project, including policy reforms and streamlined processes.

Bigger and faster IT infrastructure requires stronger and more impervious cyber-defense. Our recently launched National Cybersecurity Plan lays down the blueprint for us to safeguard our systems against cyberattacks.

With these said, I have directed the agencies concerned to ensure that the speed and quality of our IT development always mirrors the pace and trajectory of our economic aspirations.

As energy projects get completed and new investments pour into the sector, we expect our nation’s power supply to increase at a steady pace to meet our growing demand in the next few years. Nonetheless, we are continuously diagnosing and urgently addressing power shortages, as well as the systemic causes of blackouts in unserved and underserved areas.

We are addressing the needs of areas that still lack electricity and frequently experience brownouts, through microgrid and off-grid systems, and missionary small power utilities that are still supported by solar.

Running through Bataan, Pampanga, and Bulacan, the newly inaugurated Mariveles-Hermosa-San Jose transmission line will further strengthen the reliability of the Luzon power grid.

In the Visayas, all stages of the Cebu-Negros-Panay backbone project have likewise been completed. This project shall serve to stabilize the power situation in Western and Central Visayas, and avert recurrences of power outages experienced in the past.

Due to this project, blackouts were avoided on Panay Island from April to June, despite yellow and red alerts in the region.

And just last week, the Dumanjug-Corella Line of the Cebu-Bohol Interconnection Project was energized, enabling the transfer of power between Cebu and Bohol.

With these systems currently operating at capacity, these major power lines shall contribute to the efficient power exchanges not only between Luzon and the Visayas, but also involving Mindanao. Energy sharing and transfers between, among, and within the three island groups have now been made possible with the energization last January of the Mindanao-Visayas Interconnection.

The energization of the Mindanao-Visayas Interconnection is a defining moment not only for the power sector but for the entire country. Finally, we have connected the power grids of all three major island groups.

The “unified Philippine Grid” is a fulfillment of this dream, whose seeds were planted in the 80s, through a vision bolstered by R&D, which we accomplished by applying typical Filipino persistence and dedication.

We are all aware that the price of electricity in our country is high. That is why we continue to add electricity infrastructure that will eventually lower prices.

On the other hand, we are also ensuring that billing to consumers is fair.

Some of the measures implemented by the government are: first, a more organized and fair Lifeline Rate program for the poor, especially for beneficiaries of 4Ps;

Second, the temporary suspension of the FIT-All Tariff on our electric bill;

Third, the Anti-Bill Shock program;

And fourth, the suspension of the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market during the time of red alerts on the Luzon and Visayas grids;

And lastly, refunds and the removal of overcharges to consumers, such as the franchise fee.

We are revisiting and thoroughly examining the EPIRA to determine if it is still appropriate for our current situation, or if it is time to amend it.

I ask Congress to work together on this, for the benefit of the Filipino people. With the high price of electricity in the country, not only businessmen are struggling – but especially the citizenry.

As of May this year, twelve thousand kilometers worth of roads and more than one thousand two hundred bridges have been built and upgraded across the country.

Of note, we have provided the budget to upgrade three hundred sixty-seven bridges and almost one thousand six hundred kilometers of road along our country’s longest thoroughfare — the Maharlika Highway — from Luzon all the way to Mindanao.

Moreover, significant segments of major expressways, which are part of the Luzon Spine Expressway Network, have now been opened to the public.

The C-LEX, NLEX-SLEX Connector, and the Plaridel Bypass will be fully completed by the end of this year.  CALAX and the C5 South Link will be fully operational by next year.

Because of these important routes, the North, Central Luzon, Manila, and Southern Luzon will now be even more connected to each other.

Under our Inter-Island Linkage Bridge Program, we expect two major bridges to be opened to motorists this year. One is the Panguil Bay Bridge — touted as the longest water-spanning bridge in Northern Mindanao.  This bridge will connect Lanao del Norte to Misamis Occidental. The other is the Guicam Bridge in Zamboanga Sibugay, which shall connect Olutanga Island to the mainland of Mindanao.

In addition, travel to and from Clark Airport is now much faster and more convenient, with the inauguration of the twenty-kilometer Airport-New Clark City Access Road in Pampanga.

We are also in the midst of a “railway renaissance”. The Metro Manila Subway Project has logged significant accomplishments in its tunneling works. At this point, the depth excavated is equivalent to three to six stories, and is continuously progressing to the next station.

Other railway projects, such as the MRT-7 and the North- South Commuter Railway, are likewise progressing.

We will make sure that the right of way issues are resolved in the most equitable, efficient, and expeditious manner, so that these will not get in the way of our infrastructure development.

As part of the LRT 1 Cavite Extension project, the route of LRT Line 1 in Metro Manila will be extended from Baclaran to Sucat. It will be opened to the public within this year. And in a few years, this line will reach as far as Bacoor.

We also added seventy-six new and modern trains to LRT 1 to increase capacity, speed up travel, and make the ride more comfortable for passengers.

Recently, we reopened the PNR Bicol Line to the public, with a length of one hundred kilometers, from Naga to Legazpi.

Likewise, we continue to improve our airports and seaports for the convenience of our travelers.

First and foremost is the Manila International Airport. With the management of the private sector, its appearance and services are expected to improve in the coming years.

Soon, it will be capable of accommodating 48 flights per hour, servicing our ever-increasing local and international flight routes, and catering to more than 62 million passengers every year.

More than seventy airport and seaport development projects across the country have now been completed, and another three hundred fifty ongoing projects are set to be completed by the year 2028.

Notably, the capacities of the Passenger Terminal Buildings of the General Santos Airport and the Bicol International Airport have been expanded by three hundred and five hundred percent, now catering to two thousand and one thousand six hundred passengers, respectively. Meanwhile, the Batangas Port PTB, our popular marine gateway to MIMAROPA, the Visayas and to Mindanao, can now accommodate eight thousand travelers at any given time.

Thanks to Congress, the Public-Private Partnership, as a crucial funding mechanism for big-ticket projects, is now institutionalized by the force of law.  PPP is seen to facilitate strategic investments and the timely development of projects under our Build Better More program, especially since around one-fourth of our flagship projects have been envisioned to be funded through this modality.

As a perfect example, the NAIA PPP will go down in our history not only as among the largest and fastest approved PPP, but one that has set the bar in terms of openness, transparency, and competitiveness of the process.

Through this partnership, our foremost aerial gateway is now primed for a revitalization. Once considered as among the worst and most stressful airports in the world, it will soon be a world-class international airport that we can all be proud of.

But even before that, the UP-PGH Cancer Center is the first PPP to be approved in this administration.

Together with the Philippine Cancer Center of the DOH, which broke ground last March, these two specialty hospitals will soon join our nation’s fight against cancer. These Centers will be a godsend to the more than four hundred thousand Filipinos who are afflicted with this deadly disease.

While these modern hospitals are still being built, we continue to add to and improve the quality of our hospitals and specialty centers.

We have already opened to the public more than twenty New Urgent Care and Ambulatory Service, or “BUCAS” Centers, in various parts of the country.

Intended to decongest public hospitals, these Centers shall provide competent ambulatory care, most especially to the poor and to the disadvantaged, for health conditions that do not require hospital admission.

We are also working with local governments on the construction of what we call “Super Health Centers”. With the help of LGUs, we will be able to staff these with enough doctors and nurses, and we will add more in the coming years.

Our goal is that, as soon as possible, all of our provinces will have enough centers or facilities capable of providing basic medical services for our citizens.

Meanwhile, we will ensure that each province is provided with a Mobile Clinic, so that laboratory exams and some other basic medical services can be brought closer to our countrymen.

In PhilHealth, the type of generic medicine included in the benefits for outpatients has been increased. From twenty-one generic medicines, it is now fifty-three. There are new medicines for high blood pressure, and there are also medicines for nerve pain and epileptic seizures.

In response to the increasing number of incidents and rising cost of treatment, Philhealth has more than doubled the benefits for serious illnesses, such as acute stroke and pneumonia. The limit for these conditions has now been raised to seventy-six thousand pesos and ninety thousand pesos.

To further strengthen our fight against cancer, PhilHealth has increased the benefit for breast cancer treatment by more than one thousand percent. The previous limit of one hundred thousand pesos is now 1.4 million pesos.

The benefit for colon cancer has also been enhanced. And before the end of the year, chemotherapy for lung, liver, ovary, and prostate cancer will also be included in PhilHealth benefits.

We have allocated a higher fund for our medical assistance program, so more Filipinos will be helped this year.

Aside from our aggressive hiring efforts, we have enhanced medical and allied health programs, allocated seed funds for public medical schools, and launched scholarships, and review and upskilling programs. These are to support the medical and nursing professions, with the goal to strengthen and increase our human resources for health.

As part of our recalibrated health approach towards prevention and healthy habits, we are prioritizing vaccinations, nutrition, mental well-being, and active and healthy lifestyles.

We continue to pursue the vaccination of infants and children – especially in Region 6 and BARMM, where less than half have been vaccinated.

And the Philippine Plan of Action for Nutrition continues, which we are focusing on this July, Nutrition Month.

Our convergent programs to stamp out hunger and malnutrition were not only successfully launched, but have yielded inspiring results thus far.

One survey confirmed that our expanded School-Based Feeding Program has had a significant impact on the physical and mental well-being of more than half of the learner-beneficiaries. Therefore, we will continue to further enhance these feeding programs in our schools and day-care centers.

The recently launched “Walang Gutom 2027” will now be fully rolled out from the initial two thousand three hundred households, now all the way to three hundred thousand food- poor households across the country by the end of this year. But the program will go on until we feed the one million most food-poor families by 2027.

An important component of our strategies to address malnutrition shall be the program for the “First One Thousand Days,” or the first two years of a child’s life.

To ensure the health and nutrition of children zero to two years old from the poorest families, we have proposed in the 2025 Budget a new grant under the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program for this purpose.

Through this, a pregnant woman or a mother who is a 4Ps beneficiary will be given additional financial assistance allocated for her and her child.

This assistance is to ensure that she and the baby in her womb, or young child, are cared for by a doctor, vaccinated, and given adequate nutrition.

Closely related to these, the DOST has been continuously undertaking scientific research to develop nutritious food and drinks, which can be integrated into the government’s feeding program.

Government is aware of the pressing yet delicate social issues of the day, such as the mental well-being of our people.

The DOH has launched its comprehensive mental health plan and ensured sufficient supply of medications. PhilHealth has also released this year its mental health benefit package for all its members.

At the same time, grassroots and sports-for-all programs are back in the mainstream, catering to Filipinos of all ages.

The annual Palarong Pambansa has been successfully relaunched, after three years of being halted due to the pandemic. We congratulate Marikina and Cebu, and the Department of Education on their successful presentation of these Games.

We will continue to support these health-enhancing sports programs. Through these, we will also set forth our youth on the same well-established path that has taken some of our national champions and renowned athletes to sporting greatness.

As we speak, twenty-eight of our finest athletes are competing in Paris now for the glory of the Philippines. [applause and cheers]

Let us wish them well and the best of luck.

In the field of education, investing in our own people is not only a fundamental moral imperative for us, but an economic one as well.

In its report, the World Bank revealed that our promising economic growth is largely attributable to our people. The great bulk of the country’s wealth is being created by the skill, the industry, and the resourcefulness of all Filipinos .

But the Filipino truly has much more to offer.

We must harness the totality of the Filipino’s potential.

Thus, for consecutive years, we have prioritized an increase in budget for the inclusive development of Filipinos. Not just in food, nutrition and health, but even moreso, in education and training.

Recent assessments have revealed the poor reality that more than half of our grades 6, 10, and 12 students have failed to reach the ideal proficiency levels, faring low in information literacy, problem-solving and critical thinking skills.

Therefore, our national learning recovery program must proceed without the slightest disruption, especially in basic education.

Our system of education must be strategically calibrated to make sure that our youth are not only taught to become literate. But, it must also consciously develop them into problem-solvers , and into critical thinkers — hungry for success, ready for the future.

Similarly, as we relentlessly address the classroom gap, the digital gap must also be bridged with equal intensity.

We are working towards the day when all students will be equipped with computers, smart TVs, essential programs, digital books — and once again, access to reliable power and the Internet.

Digitalization and solar-powered electricity must now become the standard features in our schools and in our classrooms. Simply put, this is educational reform through technology.

The perennial problem surrounding textbooks shall be resolved.

The production of instructional materials, especially textbooks, which are up-to-date and error-free, must be ensured. The whole process, from approval of manuscript to procurement, all the way to distribution, will be cut short from its present three years to just one year.

This now becomes the challenge for our new Secretary: to ensure the recovery and improvement of the quality of education in the country, as soon as possible.

Clearly, of course the quality of our education rests on the quality of our teachers.

Every classroom that we build will be but an empty and lifeless structure without its moving force — the teacher.

But our teachers are not just perfunctory figures in our schools; they are the very foundation of our educational system.

And so, as we build and upgrade schools, so too must we uplift and upskill our teachers, whose competence and trademark Filipino patience, determination, and compassion will be at the core of our national learning recovery.

We have increased the number of employees to replace teachers in order to perform the various tasks in school. Thus, our teachers will be able to focus well on their profession of teaching.

With the cooperation of Congress, the “Kabalikat sa Pagtuturo” (Partners in Teaching) Act has been enacted. This will provide public school teachers with an annual teaching allowance to purchase teaching materials and related expenses. They will start receiving this next year.

They also have Personal Accident Insurance from the GSIS. A Special Hardship Allowance will also provide additional relief for additional public school teachers covered by it, who are experiencing severe hardship and danger in their daily work.

And there will be no more “Debt Tagging” for teachers. Their indebtedness will not be a hindrance to renewing their licenses. Rather, they should be allowed to continue teaching, so they can earn a living and have income.

Of equal significance, we have allocated funds to finally implement the expanded career progression system for our public school teachers. This will promote professional development and career advancement within their ranks. This expanded system lays out two major career paths for our teachers to pursue: the teaching; and the school administration tracks, each of which shall have ample career growth opportunities.

With this system in place, we will accelerate the career growth of teachers. In this system, no public school teacher will retire as only a Teacher I.

In short, if we truly desire the success of our aspired revival in the field of education, it is them – our teachers – whom we must support and strengthen.

Last year, we reported that our system of higher education was gaining international recognition for all the right reasons. As further evidence, eighty-seven of our Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) have now made it into various world university rankings. Fifty-one of them are public universities or colleges.

Also, we witnessed this past school year a significant rise in the enrollment rate in higher education, both in public and in private institutions. The same upward trend is likewise noted in technical-vocational education and training (TVET).

Statistics do not lie. Eight out of ten graduates of TVET ultimately land decent jobs. So with its high employability rate, TVET will definitely be instrumental in capacitating our people, and in maintaining our employment rate at consistently high levels.

Cognizant of its potential, the DepEd, CHED, DOLE, and TESDA have joined forces now to incorporate TVET in the Senior High School curriculum to further boost the employability of our students.

The Filipinnovation and Malikhaing Pinoy programs have been launched, both drawing vast interest and inspiring key sectors and the public to generate solutions, to share ideas, and to drive innovation forward across the country.

The IT and creative sectors are burgeoning industries, knowing no territorial bounds, and they hold great promise for our talented and hardworking people.

This is the call of our times, and we are moving to answer that call.

The schools will serve as the preeminent incubators of the innovative and creative energies of all Filipinos.

Advanced learning systems and technologies, in the areas of robotics, artificial intelligence, and the Internet of Things, shall be made available in TVET Innovation Centers nationwide. Highly technical and professional-level training courses will soon be launched, notably in cybersecurity and in the creative industries.

Of our globally ranked HEIs, sixty-three have made it into the WURI Global Top 300 innovative universities.

In the face of tough global competition, the Mabalacat City College in Pampanga was awarded the Technological or Digital Innovation of the Year.  And for the second straight year, Samar State University topped the rankings for its digitally pioneering R&D project entries.

Relevant scholarships and R&D grants will continue to be available, aligned with our agenda to foster start-ups. To commercialize and mass produce R&D outputs, crucial support, such as intellectual property rights enforcement, and venture financing, have been put in place.

We are also building essential infrastructure and linkages to support the ethical development of artificial intelligence systems for high-impact practical applications.

Since the nation’s foray into space technology, our satellites in space have generated more than fifty-one thousand maps, images and space-borne data for various purposes. These now provide us with vital information that guide our country’s stratagems and decision-making in agricultural development, urban planning and environmental management, including the strengthening of our maritime domain awareness, to name but a few examples.

Along with these discoveries, we are likewise in awe of our countrymen who have carved out their niche as pioneering space scientists and engineers in this emergent field, in collaboration with local space technology companies that provide an additional impetus.

As we speak, sixteen of our space engineers are in the United Kingdom resuming work on the development of the Multi-Spectral Unit for Land Assessment, or the MULA satellite. Once completed, the MULA satellite will be our largest earth observation satellite to be launched into space so far.

May they inspire the next generation of Filipino students to follow [in] their footsteps and reach for the stars.

Sa ating mga trabahador, our employment rate has increased to 95.9%.  We also saw a significant increase in high-quality jobs. Underemployment too has decreased from 11.7% in May of 2023 to 9.9% today.  This is our lowest number since 2005.

Notably, we also saw an increase in middle-skilled employment, wage and salaried employment, and full- time jobs.

These are still good news, despite the experienced high prices of food.

Aside from creating jobs, we are also strengthening the capabilities of our citizens, especially during times of hardship.

Our adaptive and responsive social protection programs assist our countrymen in times of dire need, reaching those in geographically isolated and disadvantaged areas. More importantly, these programs seek to develop their productive potential and bridge their capacities towards self-sufficiency.

With the noble aim of breaking the cycle of poverty across the country, the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program has not only consistently accomplished its annual targets. It has also proven its efficacy over the years.

Since the last SONA, more than four hundred and twenty thousand families have graduated from the program. This means, with the help of 4Ps, their situation and ability to face the challenges of life have improved. In fact, more than four thousand 4Ps graduates are now in the ranks of licensed teachers.

And that is not all: thirty-five of the topnotchers of various board exams held in the past two years came from families who are beneficiaries of 4Ps.

Some of them are Teacher Khane Jevie Cervantes of Davao Oriental, who got number one in the Licensure Examination for Professional Teachers. [applause and cheers] There is also Engr. Alexis Alegado who topped the Civil Engineering Board Exams last April of the past year.

Tomorrow — the birthdate of Apolinario Mabini — we cap off the National Disability Rights Week. Our PWDs can rest assured of government’s effective implementation of beneficial policies and programs that will guarantee equitable opportunities, special interventions, and incentives for them.

Since this Administration came into power, livelihood programs intended for our PWDs have already begun. Next year, PhilHealth will launch its benefit for children with disabilities.

The discount given to PWDs, and to senior citizens like you, for basic necessities and prime commodities has almost doubled. [applause and cheers] You were all happy about that.

In all that we do, we always have the private sector as our partner, especially in important matters of employment and wages.

With tripartite consensus, minimum wage levels have been increased in various sectors in all regions, including the BARMM, for workers in private establishments. This will bring relief to more than four million of our countrymen and their families.

For our government employees, they will have a reliable medical allowance as an additional benefit next year.

And that is not all. There is also an impending adjustment in salaries that they will receive in four tranches. We have already allocated funds for this starting this year and in the coming years.

Furthermore, we have extended the services of our job order and contract of service personnel working in government. This will also afford them ample opportunity to work on their civil service eligibilities, while gaining additional relevant experience and training to upgrade their employment qualifications.

Our aggressive infrastructure development, business-friendly policies, investment and export promotions, foreign visits, and economic missions, are all aimed at generating not just jobs, but quality and competitive jobs.

A substantial number of investment pledges have already commenced operations, with many more at various stages of development. In our count, aside from the large income for the country, these will create more than two hundred and two thousand jobs for our countrymen.

The rationalized incentives scheme under the CREATE Act has also made possible the generation of investments amounting to more than one trillion pesos, and more than a hundred thousand new jobs. This promising state of affairs is now beckoning us to create more — through the passage of the CREATE MORE Act.

Conscious efforts to improve the ease of doing business and of delivering government services, through our digitalization, integration, and streamlining of processes, have produced their intended multiplier effects. Cost savings from operations have translated to higher revenues and to more speedy transactions.

These have effectively addressed the fragmented, overlapping, and time-consuming procedures that have hindered optimal productivity by government.

Attributable to these transformative reforms, government services are becoming more efficient.

More and more systems are now digital and cashless, assimilating individuals, MSMEs, even agricultural workers. These have expedited transactions and commercial exchanges and promoted the convenience of all parties concerned.

Palen-QR is one of the programs that is gradually gaining traction with the public and has a growing number of users.

Bolstering our Cybercrime Prevention Act, the recently passed Anti-Financial Accounts Scamming Act will further protect the public by heightening the responsibility and security systems of banks and financial institutions, and imposing high criminal liabilities on social engineering schemes and money mules.

Job placement also has seen significant progress, especially through our Public Employment Service Offices (PESOs) nationwide. PESOs have harnessed IT capabilities and improved labor-industry coordination. Collectively, they boast a job placement success rate of ninety-eight percent.

Likewise, due to shortened timelines, we have recorded a significant increase in new business and corporate registrations, including foreign firms, which surpassed last year’s numbers.

The observed chokepoints in our food supply chains and in the logistics sector are now being removed. And, at the same time, the identified gaps are being filled in, to make them efficient, interconnected, and seamless, saving precious time and cost.

The approval of energy projects is moving towards complete virtual integration of its required procedures. The expedited processing of our infrastructure flagship projects under the Build Better More program shall also follow suit.

Our digital infrastructure was substantially strengthened courtesy of common towers that more than tripled in number since last year, owing to streamlining of permitting requirements.

Air transport and tourism have been made more convenient, because of the shift to paperless immigration and customs forms, thanks to the E-Travel system. And soon, the piloted E-Gates will be standard fixtures at airports, to further facilitate ease of mobility during departures and arrivals.

And with all these said, the implementation of the Philippine E-Visa will be next in our digital transformation agenda.

Let us now go to tourism, because we, in the Philippines, have no less than seven thousand six hundred and forty-one beautiful reasons to tap the potential of our tourism sector, for which our archipelagic nation is internationally renowned and from which many Filipinos derive their livelihood.

While a resurgence in this all-important sector is being observed, pre-pandemic data present to us a great challenge that we must surpass.

It is a challenge that is well within our grasp.

Our infrastructure and digital reforms, through development of tourism sites and the enhancement of the overall tourist experience, are all calculated to boost the productivity of the tourism sector. While doing so, we shall interpose the wholesome and hospitable Filipino brand in all the key tourism touchpoints — from tourist arrival all the way to departure.

But the tourism challenge has already evolved, and now requires a multi-faceted strategy. The focus now is on “experiential tourism”.

Food, culture, heritage, the arts, education, halal, Islamic traditions, dive, cruise, farm and eco-tourism, even sports, have now become potent subjects and products of a nation’s tourism.

This is an imperative and that we must elevate and expand our understanding of the “one town, one product”, or OTOP, concept. It must not inhibit, but rather, it must inspire. We must not rest content to have just “one”. Rather, we must seek the “optimal” number of high-quality products and services, which at the same time showcase our community’s distinctive history, traditions, and talents.

Filipino creativity and ingenuity will enliven and unlock the as yet untapped potential of these new facets of Philippine tourism.

For our OFWs, according to data from the Bangko Sentral, more than thirty-seven billion dollars were remitted to the country by our OFWs last year. [applause and cheers] This is a truly huge help to our recovering economy.

Therefore, we extend not only gratitude, but also honor to all our OFWs. I hope they are watching this. Your sacrifice is truly felt here in our country.

Through vital partnerships with like-minded states, we have been able to promote our mutual interests, resulting not only in investments here and our strengthened national security, but also in quality jobs for our nationals seeking foreign employment.

Through intense Philippine lobbying, the United Nations has adopted the resolution on “Promoting and Protecting the Enjoyment of Human Rights of Seafarers.” This will ensure their safe and decent living and working conditions at sea — a human rights imperative.

We continue to help our OFWs. This does not end with their departure from the country.

We have opened additional special facilities and services for them, such as the OFW Lounge at NAIA and the Seafarer’s Hub in Manila.

We have assisted and safely brought home our OFWs affected by various disturbances – such as in Israel, Gaza, Sudan, Lebanon, and Yemen.

We also provided assistance to our countrymen affected by disasters and crises, such as in Taiwan and New Zealand.

Until their return, we wholeheartedly welcome and care for them. Returning OFWs, along with their families, are well-supported to ensure a good new beginning here in the country – to get a good job or, if they wish, to start a business.

Related to my report last year, Saudi Arabia has begun distributing checks to our workers who lost their jobs there. Gradually, our affected OFWs are being paid.

For this, we convey our sincerest gratitude to the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Lessons from history and current events teach us that peace and order is an essential ingredient of genuine prosperity and social development.

This is the path that we choose to take. Despite difficulties, despite our diversity and differences as a people, we are joined together by a unique history, and have constantly invested our energies and resources in strengthening the pillars of peace.

Our police, military, and coast guard undergo continuous capacity-building and asset-upgrading, so that they are better able to preserve the peace and defend our territory.

We have noted an overall decrease in crime rate and an improvement in crime solution efficiency.  But this is not enough. Our law enforcers need to continue to earn the trust of our people.

The strong pillars of our criminal justice system, especially in light of the new rules on criminal investigation, and our independent Judiciary, function in unison.

In tandem with the justice system, COA’s audit mechanism works in harmony with our transparency, streamlining, and open government initiatives. All in all, these successfully foster a culture of accountability that curbs corruption in government.

With the newly enacted Republic Act No. 12009 that I signed just last Saturday, government procurement will be modern and innovative, more streamlined and efficient, and truly at par with global best practices.

We sincerely thank Congress for its timely and decisive action in amending the twenty-year old law.

We have come a long way in our quest for a lasting and inclusive peace.

No guerilla fronts remain active across our country today. Only seven weakened groups remain to be dismantled, and they are the subject of focused operations. But along with the assertion of government might, we also offer peace,  community  development,  and  reintegration programs for those who have returned to the fold of the law.

Through a comprehensive and transformative approach, we have rebuilt not only lives, but also conflict-affected communities.

The implementation of peace agreements is now in its concluding phase. Former combatants now live peaceful and productive lives in their respective communities. Some of our former rebels are now absorbed into the AFP, serving in the defense of the Republic; while others are now part of the PNP BARMM.

Government will honor and fully comply with its remaining deliverables and commitments under these agreements.

In November last year, we signed proclamations granting amnesty to former rebels. A month later, and then in June of this year, the House of Representatives and the Senate issued their respective resolutions concurring with these amnesty proclamations.

That Congress is one with us, is a testament to the whole nation’s sincere desire for peace.

In such a short period, the BARMM has impressively established the strong foundation for its progressive autonomous social development.

Investments continue to pour into the BARMM. Last year, investments in the region increased by one hundred forty percent year-on-year.

The improved peace and order situation, good governance — not to mention high hopes and confidence amongst its people — all contribute to the reasons why BARMM’s poverty index has significantly decreased since 2018.

In Marawi, the rehabilitation and rebuilding continue — under the supervision now of the Office of the President.  Our focus remains on restoring energy, water, and livable communities.

As of today, all seven inter-governmental mechanisms of the BARMM, as mandated under the Organic Law, have been organized and activated. These will guarantee effective and constant consultation between the Bangsamoro and the National Governments in the fundamental aspects of governance.

Five out of the seven essential laws for the BARMM have already been enacted by the BTA Parliament.  Now, it has its own Administrative Code, it has its own Local Government Code, its own Election Code, and those for Education and the Civil Service as well.

So with these inspiring developments, the BARMM appears primed and ready for its regular elections, the first ones that they will have in the coming year.

On the fight against dangerous drugs, our bloodless war on dangerous drugs adheres, and will continue to adhere, to the established “8 Es” of an effective anti-illegal drugs strategy. Extermination was never one of them. [applause and cheers]

And yet, in more than seventy-one thousand five hundred operations, it has resulted in the seizure of more than forty-four billion pesos worth of illegal drugs, and the arrest of more than ninety-seven thousand drug personalities.

More than six thousand of those arrested were high-value targets. Four hundred forty of them were government employees, of whom forty-two were uniformed personnel. Seventy-seven were elected officials.

So to further paralyze their operations, dirty money and assets worth more than five hundred million pesos have been frozen and preserved. With strong case build-up and efficient prosecution, the drug conviction rate is at a high of seventy-nine percent.

Together with this, we welcome the report that the number of drug-affected barangays in our country has been reduced by thirty-two percent.

In our international relations, we have faced challenges to our territorial sovereignty, and we will assert our rights and interests in the same fair and pacific way that we have always done.  Proper diplomatic channels and mechanisms under the rules-based international order remain the only acceptable means of settling disputes.

Peace and community-building will always be our clarion call, especially when the country serves as chair and the host of the ASEAN Summit in 2026.

We continuously try to find ways to de-escalate tensions in contested areas with our counterparts, without compromising our position and our principles. I know that our neighbors too are doing their best to make this work.

The Philippines cannot yield. The Philippines cannot waver. [applause and cheers]

We are now more conscious as a people, and strategic in heightening our aerial and maritime domain awareness. We are continuing to strengthen our defensive posture, both through developing self-reliance and through partnerships with like-minded states.

The West Philippine Sea is not just our imagination. It is ours. [applause and cheers] And it will remain ours as long as the spirit of our beloved Philippines burns. [applause and cheers]

We will strengthen and enhance the awareness and knowledge of the entire nation, and ensure that we can pass this on to the youth and our future generations.

Laws on our Maritime Zones and Archipelagic Sea Lanes will make sure that this intergenerational mandate — this duty — will firmly take root in the hearts and minds of all our people.

To the entire Armed Forces, the Coast Guard, and our fishermen in the West Philippine Sea: Please accept the heartfelt gratitude of the entire nation for your vigilance and sacrifice. [applause and cheers]

Let us now turn to our economic status and our prospects, in spite of the headwinds that we have faced, we have stayed the course.

The country exhibits healthy signs of post-pandemic resilience comparable to strong economies in our region.

Our poverty rate has significantly dropped to 15.5%, down from 18% in 2021.  This present figure is even lower than the pre-pandemic level of 16.7% in 2018.

The equivalent of this is that we have lifted almost two and a half million Filipinos out of poverty.

At the same time, the number of Filipinos who do not have enough money to buy food has been reduced by more than one million and seven hundred thousand. We will continue to strive to lift many more from poverty.

To sustain the country’s economic gains, we are promoting investment-led growth. We have set in motion policies and programs to create an environment conducive for businesses to thrive, like reforms in the capital markets, and implementation of “green lanes”.

As a result, we have “green-lane certified” around a hundred projects with a total investment of about three trillion pesos across the sectors of renewable energy, digital infrastructure, food security, and manufacturing.

The Philippine financial system remains robust and resilient. Tax and non-tax revenue collection has also become more efficient, in pace with our rejuvenated economy. Notably, for the past two years, our GOCCs have remitted dividends to the National Government with a combined tally exceeding their contributions in 2022.

To build on these, and guided by strong fiscal discipline, our proposed government budget for this year was crafted with utmost care, diligence, and meticulous attention.

We look to the cooperation of our colleagues in the Legislature, not only that our proposed National Budget be approved in your usual timely manner, but it be adhered to as closely as possible.

We expect all agencies to ensure that every centavo allocated will be judiciously spent for our urgent priorities and socially impactful programs.

My fellow countrymen: in all that we do and will do, I am highly confident that we will also overcome the challenges we are facing. Because this is the main grievance of the people, we will not stop fighting poverty, and searching for a solution to return the prices of goods to normal – especially rice.

And now, we hear the loud outcry of the people against the POGOs.

Disguising as legitimate entities, their operations have ventured into illicit areas furthest from gaming such as financial scamming, money laundering, prostitution, human trafficking, kidnapping, brutal torture, even murder.

The grave abuse and disrespect to our system of laws must stop.

We need to stop the trouble it is causing in our society and the disrespect it shows to our country. [cheers and applause]

Effective today, all POGOs are banned. [cheers and applause]

I hereby instruct PAGCOR to wind down and cease the operations of POGOs by the end of the year. [cheers and applause]

The DOLE, in coordination with our economic managers, shall use the time between now and then to find new jobs for our countrymen who will be displaced.

This will solve many of the problems that we are encountering. It will solve many of the problems that we have been encountering, but it will not solve all of them.

To solve all the problems that we have been suffering under, all officials, law enforcers, workers in government, and most of all the citizenry, must always be vigilant, principled and think of the health of the nation.

So, ladies and gentlemen, let me end by recalling the words of a great man: Let not any one pacify his conscience by the delusion that he can do no harm if he takes no part, and forms no opinion. Bad men need nothing more to compass their ends, than that good men should look on and do nothing. [cheers and applause] He is not a good man who, without a protest, allows wrong to be committed in his name. [cheers and applause]

My dear countrymen, let us always fight what is wrong and evil. Let us always fight for what is right and good.

Let us always love the Philippines. Let us always love the Filipino.

Long live you and long live the New Philippines!

Thank you very much. [cheers and applause]

— END —

Uploaded on: July 22, 2024