MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 264

REPRIMANDING MR. EDILBERTO Y. DAVID, DEPUTY COLLECTOR OF CUSTOMS AND FORMER ACTING COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS

This is an administrative case against Mr. Edilberto Y. David, deputy collector of customs (airport), who while Acting Commissioner of Customs was charged with and investigated for (1) maladministration, (2) conduct prejudicial to the service, (3) corruption in office and (4) moral unfitness for public office.

After a review of the record I am satisfied with the explanations offered by the respondent except that he overstepped his powers by interfering with functions properly belonging to the collector of customs in connection with the case of a certain shipment of undeclared saccharine and jewelry involved in charge (1) and that he made a poor choice of occasion in boarding a ship owned by a strike-bound company for his inspection trip to the South embraced in charge (2). As to the third charge, it appears that he was already rebuked for using a car belonging to the Philippine Port Terminal Co. while he was arrastre superintendent in 1949. The claim in the last charge that he maintained immoral relations with a married woman when he was arrastre superintendent has not been clearly established.

Under the attendant circumstances it is believed that the improper acts alluded to above are not of such a nature as to warrant the taking of drastic disciplinary action against the respondent. In view thereof, Mr. Edilberto Y. David is hereby reprimanded and warned that commission of similar acts in the future will be dealt with more severely.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.