MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 355

REMOVING MR. QUINCIANO D. VAILOCES FROM OFFICE AS JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OF BAIS AND MANJUYOD, ORIENTAL NEGROS

This is an administrative case against Mr. Quinciano D. Vailoces, suspended justice of the peace of Bais and Manjuyod, Oriental Negros, based on an information for falsification of a public document in connection with the alleged execution of the last will and testament of a certain person, filed against him and three others by the Acting Provincial Fiscal of Negros Oriental, alleging:

“That on or about the 14th day of December, 1950, in the Municipality of Payabon, Province of Negros Oriental, Philippines, and within the jurisdiction of this Court, the accused Quinciano Vailoces, availing himself of his position as, notary public in and for the province of Negros Oriental, and the three other accused, Carlos Academia, Narciso Oracoy, and Clicerio Carriaga, conspiring and confederating together and helping one another, did then and there, willfully, unlawfully, and feloniously prepare and sign a public document which purports to be the last will and testament of one Tarcila Visitacion, stating and making it appear that the same was executed and signed by said Tarcila Visitacion and that the latter appeared before notary public Quinciano Vailoces and acknowledged the document to be her free and voluntary act and deed, when in truth and in fact, as the said four accused well knew, Tarcila Visitacion never executed and signed the document purporting to be her last will and testament in their presence, nor did each of them sign and attest the same in the presence of the said Tarcila Visitacion and of one another.”

At the hearing of the administrative case, both the complaining witness, Ledesma de Jesus-Paras, and the respondent agreed to submit the case on the evidence to be presented in the criminal proceeding. The respondent and his co-accused in the criminal case were subsequently convicted in the Court of First Instance, and upon appeal, the sentence as to the respondent was affirmed by the Court of Appeals in a decision which became final on July 15, 1958.

After a careful review of the administrative aspect of the case, the Secretary of Justice and I agree with the District Judge in finding the respondent guilty of having falsified a public document and in his recommendation that respondent be dismissed for dishonesty effective as of the date of his suspension.

WHEREFORE, Mr. Quinciano D. Vailoces, is hereby removed from office as justice of the peace of Bais and Manjuyod, Oriental Negros, effective as of the date of his preventive suspension.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1961). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.