MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 261

REQUIRING MR. EUFEMIO H. GUAMOS TO RESIGN AS JUSTICE OF THE PEACE OF DONSOL, SORSOGON

This is an administrative case against Mr. Eufemio H. Guamos, justice of the peace of Donsol, Sorsogon, which arose from a complaint filed by Mr. Alfredo Hoelzl charging the respondent with (1) ignorance of the law, (2) partiality, (3) bribery, and (4) habitual drunkenness or conduct unbecoming a justice of the peace. The charges were investigated by the district judge who found them without merit except the last. After a review of the record the Secretary of Justice and I agree with the investigator’s findings.

In the years 1950 and 1951, it appears that respondent and his friends used to drink strong liquor in his office and courtroom; that during a registration day he and some companions went to a polling place and drank wine which they had brought along; that oftentimes he was seen drunk in the streets of Donsol; that he was also seen drunk, zigzagging and vomiting, in other public places during special occasions; and that at one time he moved his bowels in public because of drunkenness.

Respondent’s claim that he was never drunk in all his life and that when forced to drink he would simply dip his lips and tongue and return the glass is untenable in the face of the positive and convincing testimony of several eye-witnesses to his drunken state on many an occasion.

By his proven conduct, obviously notorious and reprehensible, the respondent does not deserve to remain in the judiciary where only men of strong personal character and upright conduct have a right to be. He has not only created public scandals and exposed himself to public ridicule and contempt but has also violated the sanctity of his courtroom where public justice is administered, thereby impairing the people’s respect for his person and undermining their faith and confidence in his office.

WHEREFORE, Mr. Eufemio H. Guamos is hereby required to resign as justice of the peace of Donsol, Sorsogon, within five days from receipts of a copy of this order. Should he fail to do so, he would be considered removed from office effective on the day following the expiration of the period given.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the twelfth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.