MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 341

PROVIDING FOR SPEEDY IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PHILIPPINES-UNITED STATES AGREEMENT KNOWN AS TEXTBOOK-PRODUCTION PROJECT (92-095)

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Carlos P. Garcia, President of the Philippines, do hereby issue the following instructions:

1. All government purchases of privately-authored basic textbooks in the elementary and high school, if such textbooks have been adopted by the Board of Textbooks through the regular competitive adoption procedures, shall be considered as having complied with the public bidding requirements prescribed in Executive Order No. 298, s. 1940, and may therefore be ordered from their respective publishers at prices approved by the Board on Textbooks.

2. Upon the recommendation of the Advisory Committee of the Textbook Printing Project, and upon approval of the Director of the Project and the Secretary of Education, the printing of the textbook manuscripts written by the staffs of the Bureau of Public Schools may be given to private printers through the method of public bidding (for the printing only) conducted by the Project Committee.

3. All purchases of textbook printing materials, so long as they are financed by the ICA under this agreement, may be handled directly by the Project Director upon the recommendation of the Advisory Committee of the Project.

4. The printing of textbooks by the Regional Service Center (% U.S. Embassy, Dewey Boulevard), upon the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, may be considered as emergency measures which can be given immediate approval in the same manner that printing jobs done at the Bureau of Printing are given approval.

Done in the City of Manila, this 12th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) NATALIO P. CASTILLO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1961). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387 ]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.