MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 284

CREATING A SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON BACKPAY CLAIMS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, CARLOS P. GARCIA, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Special Committee on Backpay Claims to introduce such innovations and make such changes, conformably with existing laws, in the personnel assignment, operational setup, and office policies and procedures of the Backpay Unit, Bureau of the Treasury, Department of Finance, as may bring about the speedy and efficient processing, disposition, and satisfaction of backpay claims under Republic Act No. 304, as amended by Republic Acts Nos. 800 and 897, and also to take the necessary steps for the procurement and proper administration of the backpay sinking fund.

1. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

2. The Treasurer of the Philippines and all other officials and employees at the Backpay Unit, Bureau of the Treasury, are hereby enjoined to extend full assistance and cooperation to the Special Committee and its Consultants on Backpay Claims. Technical assistance in the work of this Committee will be furnished by the Budget Commissioner.

3. The Committee is further authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the Government, or upon any officer or employee thereof, for such assistance as it may need in the performance of its work.

4. The Committee may submit partial reports and recommendations from time to time to the Secretary of Finance who shall advise the President of the Philippines of the progress of the Committee work, but it shall complete and submit a final report not later than three months from the date thereof. Its final report shall state among other things the conditions of affairs in the Backpay Unit before and after the implementation of the remedial measures deemed necessary and practicable by the Committee.

5. Administrative Order No. 88, dated December 7 , 1954, is hereby revoked.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the thirteenth.

(Sgd.) CARLOS P. GARCIA President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. PAJO Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1958). [Administrative Order Nos. : 235 – 387]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.