PROCLAMATION NO. 1841

DECLARING THE REGULAR HOLIDAY SPECIAL (NON-WORKING) DAYS, AND SPECIAL HOLIDAY (FOR ALL SCHOOLS) FOR THE YEAR 2010

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 9492, dated July 24, 2007, amended Section 26, Chapter 7 Book I of Executive Order (EO) No. 292, also known as the Administrative Code of 1987, by declaring certain days (specific or movable) as special or regular holidays;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9492 provides that holidays, except those which are religious in nature, are moved to the nearest Monday unless otherwise modified by law, order or proclamation;

WHEREAS, RA No. 9492 provides that the Eid’l Adha shall be celebrated as a regional holiday in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao;

WHEREAS, in order to foster closer family ties and enable our countrymen to observe Christmas more meaningful, it is but fitting to declare December 24 (Friday) as an additional special (non-working) day throughout the country; this will also serve to strengthen family relationships by providing a longer week-end and renewing ties for a longer period of time, as well as promote domestic tourism;

WHEREAS, the EDSA People Power Revolution, which restored and ushered political, social and economic reforms in the country, serves as an inspiration to Filipinos everywhere as a nation and as a people;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA M. ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following regular holidays and special days for the year 2010 shall be observed in the country:

SECTION 2. The proclamation declaring a national holiday for the observance of Eid’l Adha shall hereafter be issued after the approximate date of the Islamic holiday has been determined in accordance with the Islamic calendar (Hijra) or the lunar calendar, or upon Islamic astronomical calculations, whichever is possible or convenient. To this end, the Office on Muslim Affairs shall inform the Office of the President on which day the holiday shall fall.

SECTION 3. In order to bring the religious and cultural significance of the Eid’l Adha to the fore of national consciousness, a proclamation declaring a national Holiday shall also hereafter be likewise issued after the approximate date of the Islamic holiday has been determined in accordance with the Islamic calendar (Hijra) or the lunar calendar, or upon Islamic astronomical calculations, whichever is possible or convenient. To this end, the Office on Muslim Affairs shall inform the Office of the President on which day the holiday shall fall.

SECTION 4. The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) shall promulgate the implementing guidelines for this Proclamation.

SECTION 5. This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

SECTION 6. This Proclamation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21 st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary