MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 420

DECLARING FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 2003, AS A SPECIAL (NOW-WORKING) DAY THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY

WHEREAS, August 21, 2003 marks the twentieth anniversary of the assassination of Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr.;

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper that the nation recognize the efforts and sacrifices of Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. after twenty years following his assassination and seventeen years following the restoration of a representative democracy;

WHEREAS, it is necessary for the country to celebrate the twentieth death anniversary of Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. to inculcate the values of self-sacrifice and patriotism that his life and death exemplified and to appreciate the gifts of democracy and freedom that he and all those who died for their restoration;

WHEREAS, this year’s commemoration falls on a Thursday; and

WHEREAS, to enable our countrymen to avail of the benefits of a longer weekend, Friday, August 22, 2003, may be declared as a special (non-working) day instead of Thursday, August 21, 2003.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare Friday, August 22, 2003, as a special (non-working) day throughout the country, except that:

a. The heads of departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities or government-owned or controlled corporations (GOCCs) may, if required by the exigencies of public service, direct their employees to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date;

b. Employees of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, Bureau of Customs and other government agencies/instrumentalities that impose deadlines on the transacting public for payment of taxes, fees or fines and for compliance with reportorial and other requirements shall be required by the head of the department, office, agency or instrumentality to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date; and

c. Employees of government departments, offices, agencies or instrumentalities providing police, security, fire protection, custodial, rescue, emergency, medical and other similar services shall be required by their respective heads to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date.

All activities and celebrations for the commemoration of the 20 th death anniversary of Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. shall be observed on August 21, 2003.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9TH day of July, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia