MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 240

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM THE YEAR 2003 TO THE YEAR 2012 AS THE PHILIPPINE DECADE OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

WHEREAS , the desire for the total development of the sector of persons with disabilities is a state policy enshrined in the Philippine Constitution of 1987 and reaffirmed by various legislations and executive issuances;

WHEREAS , by virtue of Proclamation No. 125, the Philippines observed and participated in the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons, 1993-2002;

WHEREAS , while the nation’s observance of the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons has been very instrumental in promoting the plight of Filipinos with disabilities, and advancing disability concerns, the state goals for the sector, such as rehabilitation, self-development and self-reliance and their integration into the mainstream of society as spelled-out in the Philippine Constitution of 1987, Magna Carta for Disabled Persons (R.A. 7277), Accessibility Law (B.P. 314) and other legislation, are all far from being met;

WHEREAS , the participants of “Makabagong Pilipinong May Kapansanan: Kabalikat Din ng Bayan” Conference ‑ The Culmination of the Decade of Disabled Persons (1993-2002) based on the results of their assessment of the country’s performance during the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons, unanimously recommended the need for observance of another decade to build on the gains and continue whatever are left unfinished by the earlier Decade;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from the year 2003 to 2012 as the Philippine Decade of Persons with Disabilities.

The National Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons is hereby directed to rationalize all disability related efforts by formulating and issuing a Comprehensive National Plan of Action for the Decade which translates the objectives of R.A. 7277, B.P. 344, and other disability-related laws and policies into concrete programs of action for the Decade.

All heads of Departments, Chief of Bureaus, Offices, Agencies and Instrumentalities of the National government, including officials of Local Government, are hereby instructed to implement plans, programs, and activities geared towards the development of persons with disabilities based on the National Plan of Action for the Decade.

The funds necessary to carry out the provisions of this Proclamation shall be sourced out by the concerned agencies from their annual appropriation, the amount of which shall not be less than 1% of each agency’s total budget for the year or equivalent to the amount provided for under Sections 29 and 31 of the General Appropriation Act of 2002.

Non-government organizations and self-help groups among persons with disabilities, as well as other organizations are hereby enjoined to take full cognizance of the National Plan of Action for the Decade of Persons with Disabilities and to fully cooperate in the attainment of its goals and activities by gearing their policies and aligning their programs to said National Plan.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21 ST day of August, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia