MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 743

DECLARING THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 2005 AS THE “NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM MONTH”

WHEREAS , many of our less privileged countrymen do not seek medical assistance in hospitals even under the most trying times because they cannot afford the exorbitant cost of health care;

WHEREAS , through the National Health Insurance Program (NHIP), more than 30 million indigent Filipinos were granted access to quality health care services;

WHEREAS , there is a need to further expand the coverage of the NHIP to bring the benefits to even more Filipinos, particularly in the countryside;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), the government corporation that spearheads the full implementation of this health care program, continues to exert all efforts to make its services accessible;

WHEREAS , the PhilHealth needs all the support it can get to push the program farther, especially as it celebrates its 10th year on February 14, 2005.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of February 2005 as the National Health Insurance Program Month .

Active multi-sector involvement is hereby urged to ensure the success of this campaign, primarily from the following agencies, organizations and their heads:

1. Local Government Units – to primarily undertake the enrolment of indigent families in their own locality to the Sponsored Program .

2. Department of Health – to actively support the campaign in all aspects as required in attaining its over-all objective.

3. Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) – to lead the implementation of the campaign by (a) mobilizing essential personnel; (b) undertaking intensive information, education and communication (IEC), and marketing activities; (c) formulating and disseminating all the necessary detailed guidelines and procedures on various components of the campaign; (d) encouraging associations, charitable institutions, cooperatives, private non-profit health insurance organizations/associations or individuals to mobilize funds for the enrollment of as many persons who cannot afford to pay premium contribution; and (e) coordinating all national and regional activities pertaining to the campaign. As lead agency, PhilHealth may call on the assistance of other government and non-government agency, civic and religious groups, industrial establishments, and concerned sectors to achieve the over-all goals of the campaign and ensure its success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 6th day of December , in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Four.

( Sgd .) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: ( Sgd .) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia