MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 374

DECLARING FRIDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2003, AS A SPECIAL (NON-WORKING) DAY THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR

WHEREAS, paying homage to the dead on All Saints Day, celebrated in the first day November of every year, is one of our most cherished traditions;

WHEREAS , All Saints Day, which is a nationwide special day, falls on a Saturday, November 1, 2003;

WHEREAS, to give full opportunity to our people to properly observe the day with all its religious fervor, which invariably requires them to travel to and from different regions of the country, Friday, October 31, 2003 may be declared as special day without detriment to the public interest;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, ALBERTO G. ROMULO, by order of Her Excellency, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , do hereby declare Friday, October 31, 2003, as a special (non-working) day throughout the country for all officials and employees of the government, its agencies and instrumentalities, including government owned or controlled corporations, except that:

a. The heads of departments, offices, instrumentalities or government-owned or controlled corporations (GOCCs) may, if required by the exigencies of public service, direct their employees to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date;

b. Employees of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, Bureau of Customs and other government agencies/instrumentalities that impose deadlines on the transacting public for payment of taxes, fees or fines and for compliance with reportorial and other requirements shall be required by the head of the department, office, agency or instrumentality to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date; and

c. Employees of government department, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities providing police, security, fire protection, custodial, rescue, emergency, medical and other similar services shall be required by their respective heads to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and cause the seal of the Republic of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9 th day of May , in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Three.

By order of the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

By the Executive Secretary: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN C. LAGONERA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia