PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION NO. 2057

AUTHORIZING THE PHILIPPINE FOREST CORPORATION TO ADMINISTER THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE AREA COVERED BY THE BUSUANGA PASTURE RESERVE DELINEATED BY PRESIDENTIAL PROCLAMATION NO. 1387 DATED 13 TH FEBRUARY 1975, SITUATED IN THE ISLAND OF BUSUANGA, PROVINCE OF PALAWAN

WHEREAS , a parcel of public domain situated in the island of Busuanga, Province of Palawan, was withdrawn from “sale, settlement or any other form of disposition, exploration or exploitation,” except through lease, and was decreed “reserved as pasture reserve” by Presidential Proclamation No. 1387;

WHEREAS , since 1975, pasture-related interventions undertaken in the area have failed to achieve their desired results;

WHEREAS , the Bukidnon Forest Corporation belonging to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) was expanded into the Philippine Forest Corporation (PFC) to implement, among others, support activities all over the country to the President’s agribusiness development program, including agroforestry and the development of marginal lands;

WHEREAS , Executive Order No. 292, otherwise known as the Administrative Code of 1987, grants the President the continuing authority to reorganize the executive department, and/or re-align functions, or transfer/merge/consolidate offices;

NOW, THEREFORE I, GLORIA M. ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the land, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The PFC is hereby mandated to be the administrator of the area covered by the afore-cited Proclamation No. 1387. As such, it shall have the following powers, duties and functions:

a) Assess, evaluate and determine the possibility of redefining and/or modifying the land use of the subject property; provided, that any redefinition and/or modification thereof; b) Based on the results of its assessment under the preceding paragraph, it shall identify and implement other economic activities calculated to enhance the development potential of the area; and if still feasible as originally intended, plan out other development interventions that can co-exist with pasture; c) Actively enlist, invite and solicit the participation of the private sector in any facet of the development of the area, taking into consideration the limited resources of the government and other statutory limitations in the utilization and development of the said property; d) Enter into contract, agreement, lease, loans, bond flotation activities, and similar modes of government indebtedness in order to augment the corporate funds of the PFC; e) Network and build alliances with business and industry leaders as well as with international development partners, whenever necessary.

SECTION 2. In developing the area, the PFC as administrator of the property shall prioritize the following business and economic activities:

i. pasture, grazing dairy and related activities; ii. agro-forestry, industrial tree plantation and high value crop production; iii. tourism-related developments (i.e., eco-tourism, retirement havens and related activities); iv. infrastructure in support of i, ii and iii (i.e. hotel, housing and accommodation facilities; ports, airports and other transport and communication components; warehouses and other processing facilities).

SECTION 3. The Presidential Commission on Good Government, the Department of Agriculture, the Bureau of Animal Industry, and other government agencies that may be carrying out activities in the area hereby directed to cease, desist and refrain from introducing further activities therein; and, upon effectivity of this Proclamation, shall forthwith transfer, endorse or turn-over assets, rights and other interests over the property to the PFC.

SECTION 4. Prior rights that may have been acquired through leases and other similar agreements under the different programs of the DENR and the PFC shall, in the event of redefinition/modification of land use, be respected and accorded preference.

SECTION 5. All orders and issuances the provisions of which are inconsistent thereto are hereby modified and/or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 6. This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 7 th day of May in the year of Our Lord 2010.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) LEANDRO MENDOZA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia