MALACAÑAN PALACE MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 905

DECLARING 2006 AS PHILIPPINES-JAPAN FRIENDSHIP YEAR

WHEREAS , the enduring friendship between the Philippines and Japan is based on similar aspirations for liberty, justice and democratic values;

WHEREAS , the Philippines and Japan are bound by a common vision of the future;

WHEREAS , the Philippines and Japan have close historical ties and both countries enjoy a strong, vibrant relationship in trade, business, investment and tourism;

WHEREAS , 2006 is a most fitting time to celebrate and commemorate the diplomatic relations of Philippines and Japan with the ratification of the Peace Treaty and Reparations Agreement on July 23,1956;

WHEREAS , Sunday, July 23, 2006 has been declared as Philippines-Japan Friendship Day by virtue of Proclamation No. 854.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare 2006 as Philippines-Japan Friendship Year .

The Department of Tourism (DOT) is designated as the lead agency to coordinate and monitor the execution of programs, ceremonies and activities to be undertaken for the whole year of 2006 to commemorate the Philippines’ and Japans’ 50 years of strong partnership and diplomatic relations with the support and participation of government agencies, local government units and non-governmental organizations involved in the tourism industry.

The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to create the appropriate committees/task forces; promulgate such guidelines as may be necessary in the execution of this proclamation; allocate the necessary funds for the programs, ceremonies and activities of this event; solicit donations, grants, contributions, sponsorships and/or any form of assistance from private and government entities, subject to the approval of the Office of the President.

The Secretary of Tourism is hereby authorized to call on any government agency, instrumentality, including government-owned and controlled corporations to extend their full support and assistance for the successful celebration of Philippines-Japan Friendship Year.

I call upon all tourism establishments and businesses in the private sector to give their full cooperation to ensure the successful celebration of Philippines-Japan Friendship Year.

This proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia