MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 802

DECLARING THE MONTH OF JUNE 2005 AS NATIONAL INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY (ICT) MONTH AMENDING PROCLAMATION NO. 412

WHEREAS, Section 24, Article II (Declaration of Principles and State Policies) of the 1987 Constitution states that, “ The State shall recognize the vital role of communication and information in nation-building” ;

WHEREAS, the government, further recognizing that the ICT is one of the major sectors for economic growth and as such, has resolved to fully implement a national ICT program that shall optimize the utilization of ICT;

WHEREAS, the Commission of Information and Communications Technology (CICT), created through Executive Order (EO) No. 269, s. 2004, is tasked to be the primary policy, planning, coordinating, implementing administrative entity of the executive branch of Government that will promote and develop integrated and strategic ICT systems and reliable and cost-efficient communication facilities and services;

WHEREAS, the CICT as an empowered national body is keen to work closely with the private sector to encourage ICT-related business and investment, enhance the skills of the country’s workforce, pursue meaningful infrastructure, and promote e-governance, consistent with Philippine goals to compete in the global ICT market;

WHEREAS, the government also recognizes the need to harmonize and coordinate the government’s and private sector’s ICT programs and projects and other ICT-related initiatives to ensure their consistency with the government’s overall development goals;

WHEREAS, there is a need to amend Proclamation No. 412 (s. 1989) to, among others, expand the definition of “Information Technology, the convergence of computer technology, telecommunications and office systems technology” to “Information and Communications Technology (ICT)”, which is defined in EO No. 269 as the totality of electronic means to collect, store, process and present information to end-users in support of their activities, consisting of, among others, computer systems, office systems and consumer electronics, as well as networked information infrastructure, the components of which include the telephone system, the internet, fax machines and computers.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the month of June 2005 as National Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Month . The National ICT Month shall be under the auspices of the Commission on Information and Communications Technology, with the cooperation of other government agencies and private organizations that are involved in the development of ICT in the country.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, including officials of the local governments, are hereby called upon to coordinate with the CICT to implement plans, programs and activities geared towards the objectives of this Proclamation.

Non-government organizations as well as other organizations are hereby encouraged to take full cognizance of this Proclamation and to fully cooperate in the attainment of its goal and activities.

All presidential acts, letters of instruction, executive orders, rules and regulations, proclamations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Proclamation, are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Five.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia