MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1232

DECLARING FEBRUARY 8 TO MARCH 8, 2007 AS THE “NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROGRAM MONTH”

WHEREAS , many Filipinos do not seek medical services in hospitals even under the most trying times because they simply cannot afford the exorbitant cost of health care;

WHEREAS , there is a need to let Filipinos realize that a better way of preparing for medical emergencies is by enrolling themselves into a health insurance;

WHEREAS , the National Health Insurance Program (NHIP) must be brought to as many Filipinos as possible, including Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) and their families, so that quality health care can be more accessible;

WHEREAS , the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), the government corporation that spearheads the full implementation of this health care program, continues to exert all efforts to make its services accessible;

WHEREAS , there is a need to further strengthen the communication and networking efforts of PhilHealth to ensure that members are updated on the developments of their PhilHealth membership and benefits;

WHEREAS , the PhilHealth, the government corporation that spearheads the full implementation of the NHIP, needs all the support it can get to push the NHIP further especially as it celebrates its 12 th year on February 14.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare February 8 to March 8, 2007 as the National Health Insurance Program Month.

Active multi-sector involvement is hereby urged to ensure the success of this campaign, primarily from the following agencies, organizations and their heads:

1. Department of Health — to actively support the campaign in all aspects as required in attaining its over-all objective.

2. Department of Labor and Employment — to include the IEC module PhilHealth in its orientation programs and collection of premium payments both in local and in its Philippine Overseas Labor offices;

3. Local Government Units — to primarily undertake the enrollment of indigent families in their own locality into the Sponsored Program;

4. Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA) — to include in their Pre-Departure Orientation Seminar (PDOS) the IEC module of PhilHealth which is mandatory and to be attended by all out-going OFWs;

5. Philippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) — to include the IEC module of PhilHealth in their Pre-Employment Orientation Seminar (PEOS) which is being attended by aspiring OFWs;

6. Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) — to include the display of PhilHealth IEC materials such as Tarpaulins, posters and flyers in areas frequented by OFWs in their offices abroad;

7. Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) — to lead the implementation of the campaign by (a) mobilizing essential personnel; (b) undertaking intensive information, education and communication (IEC), and marketing activities; (c) formulating and disseminating all the necessary detailed guidelines and procedures on various components of the campaign; (d) encouraging associations, charitable institutions, cooperatives, private non-profit health insurance organizations/associations or individuals to mobilize funds for the enrollment of as many persons who cannot afford to pay premium contribution; and (e) coordinating all national and regional activities pertaining to the campaign. As lead agency, PhilHealth may call on the assistance of other government and non-government agency, civic and religious groups, industrial establishments, and concerned sectors to achieve the over-all goals of the campaign and ensure its success.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 7th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia