MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 318

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM JANUARY 20 TO 26, 2003 AS FAMILY MISSION WEEK

WHEREAS, the Philippines recognizes the family as the foundation of the nation and from which society draws its solidity;

WHEREAS, the Philippines remains committed to promote the dignity of the family, protect the sanctity of family life and uphold adherence to family values;

WHEREAS, the Philippines faced with the cultural and social decay presently taking place, in the presence of ills such as violence, drugs, organized crime, graft and corruption, resolves to renew every family as a united family, morally healthy and socially involved;

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines highlights the role of the family as a basic autonomous social institution.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period from January 20 to 26, 2003 as Family Mission Week in celebration of the Fourth World Meeting of Families in Manila and marking the Philippines’ solidarity with the United Nations’ declaration of the year 2003 as the International Year of the Family.

Section 1. Ad Hoc Task Force. There is hereby constituted an Ad Hoc Task Force to plan, organize, and oversee, in coordination with the organizers of the Fourth World Meeting of Families the assistance Government can extend in the preparation and implementation of the programs, activities and events of said Meeting. The Task Force shall be composed of the following Departments and Agencies:

Department of Foreign Affairs Department of Tourism Department of Education Department of Public Works and Highways Department of the Interior and Local Government Department of Social Welfare and Development Office of the Presidential Adviser for Ecclesiastical Affairs Office of the Presidential Adviser for Special Concerns National Commission on Culture and Arts Philippine Information Service Metropolitan Manila Development Authority Philippine National Police National Parks Development Committee

The Task Force shall enlist the support and cooperation of relevant private sector and non-governmental organizations, to the extent that it will contribute to the meaningful and fruitful observance of Family Mission Week.

All other Departments and agencies of government, including local government units, shall extend full support and assistance to the Task Force, in the fulfillment of its mandate.

Section 2. Funding. Funds in the amount of five million pesos (Php 5,000,000.00) shall be made available from the President’s Social Fund (or Contingency Fund) for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Proclamation.

Section 3. Effectivity. This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15 th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and three.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia