MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 367

DECLARING FRIDAY, MAY 2, 2003, AS A SPECIAL DAY THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR

WHEREAS, “Labor Day” which is observed as a regular holiday on May 1 of each year, recognizes the efforts and contribution of the labor sector, both at home and abroad, in the economic development of the country;

WHEREAS, the commemoration of “Labor Day” falls this year on a Thursday;

WHEREAS, May 2, 2003, Friday, may be declared as special day for the public sector without detriment to public service.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, ALBERTO G. ROMULO, by order of Her Excellency, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, do hereby declare:

SECTION 1. Friday, May 2, 2003, shall be a special (non-working) day throughout the country for all officials and employees of the government, its agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, except that :

a. The heads of departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities or government-owned or controlled corporations (GOCCs) may, if required by the exigencies of public service, direct their employees to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date;

b. Employees of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, Bureau of Customs and other government agencies/instrumentalities that impose deadlines on the transacting public for payment of taxes, fees or fines and for compliance with reportorial and other requirements shall be required by the head of the department, office, agency or instrumentality to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date; and

c. Employees of government departments, offices, agencies, or instrumentalities providing police, security, fire protection, custodial, rescue, emergency, medical and other similar services shall be required by their respective heads to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date.

SEC. 2. Labor and management in the private sector shall have the option of choosing which between Thursday (May 1) or Friday (May 2), 2003 they jointly prefer to observe as a special day.

All activities and celebrations for the historical milestone in observance of “Labor Day” shall, in any event, remain to be observed on May 1, 2003.

The Department of Labor and Employment is hereby directed to issue appropriate circulars in implementation of this Proclamation in the private sector.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and cause the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25th day of April, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and three.

By order of the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

By the Executive Secretary: (Sgd.) JOAQUIN C. LAGONERA Senior Deputy Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia