MALACAÑANG MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 359

WITHDRAWING FROM USE FOR MILITARY PURPOSES A PORTION OF THE PARCEL OF LAND KNOWN AS CAMP CLAUDIO, SITUATED IN TAMBO, PARAÑAQUE CITY, AND RESERVING THE SAME FOR HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES

WHEREAS, President Manuel L. Quezon issued Proclamation No. 94 dated October 14, 1936 reserving for military purposes a parcel of land of the public domain, otherwise known as Camp Claudio, situated in Tambo, Parañaque City, consisting of 5.4112 hectares, as follows:

“Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-four of Act Numbered Twenty-seven hundred and eleven, as amended, I hereby withdraw from sale or settlement and reserve for military purposes, under the administration of the Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, the following-described parcel of land, situated in the barrio of Tambo, municipality of Parañaque, Province of Rizal, Island of Luzon, and particularly described in Bureau of Lands plan Swo-14653, to wit:

Beginning at a point marked 1 on Bureau of Lands plan Swo-14653, N. 7° 11′ E. 1,874.37 m. more or less, from B.L.L.M. No. 1, municipality of Parañaque, thence N. 2° 47′ E. 33.69 m. to point 2; S. 82° 59′ E. 121.93 m. to point 3; S. 9° 10′ W. 239.44 m. to point 4; S. 81° 39′ E. 150.70 m. to point 5; S. 10° 22′ W. 15.00 m. to point 6; N. 81° 30′ W. 150.40 m. to point 7; S. 9° 10′ W. 21.20 m. to point 8; N. 81° 44′ W. 104.25 m. to point 9; N. 7° 19′ E. 429.05 m. to point 1, point of beginning.

Containing an area of 54,112 square meters.”

WHEREAS, the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), particularly the Philippine Navy (PN), occupied Camp Claudio and used the same for housing purposes for its personnel;

WHEREAS, Republic Act (RA) No. 7227, otherwise known as the “Bases Conversion and Development Act of 1992”, authorized the sale of two (2) hectares of Camp Claudio, with the remaining 3.4112 hectares of Camp Claudio still reserved for military purposes;

WHEREAS, out of the two (2) hectares which had been authorized for sale and transferred to the Bases Conversion Development Authority (BCDA) pursuant to RA No. 7227, one (1) hectare was declared as a socialized housing site and authorized for disposition to qualified occupants and beneficiaries by virtue of Executive Order No. 116 dated August 15, 2002;

WHEREAS, the Office of the Vice President (OVP), the Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), the Department of National Defense (DND), and the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council (HUDCC) entered into a Memorandum of Understanding dated June 4, 2002 which reads:

“WHEREAS, Presidential Proclamation No. 94, dated October 14, 1936, reserved for military purposes a parcel of land in the Municipality, now City, of Parañaque containing an area of about 5.4112 hectares as particularly described in Bureau of Lands Plan SWO-14653;

WHEREAS, the Armed Forces of the Philippines, particularly the Philippine Navy established in this parcel of land Camp Claudio and is currently being utilized for housing purposes of its personnel;

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 7227 transferred 2.0 hectares of Camp Claudio to the Bases Conversion Development Authority (BCDA) for disposition, leaving 3.4112 of the said Camp still reserved for military purposes;

WHEREAS, BCDA, in its letter of 29 January 2002 to HUDCC, approved the use of its property in Camp Claudio for socialized housing;

WHEREAS, OVP, in cooperation with the DFA, in its economic empowerment program for migrant workers, is promoting housing for Overseas Filipino Workers;

WHEREAS, OVP desires to provide affordable housing for its personnel;

WHEREAS, DFA desires to provide affordable housing for its personnel;

WHEREAS, HUDCC desires to provide affordable housing for its personnel;

WHEREAS, DND, in line with the action taken by BCDA, is willing to have the remaining 3.4112 of Camp Claudio considered for mixed use, to include socialized housing primarily benefiting the military organization and its personnel;

WHEREAS, while the 5.4112 hectares area under Proclamation No. 94 is contiguous, the areas titled in the name of the BCDA are not adjacent to each other, consequently leaving the military-retained portions similarly scattered; and

WHEREAS, the Parties hereto appreciate that the best land use could be attained through an integrated planning and development of the total area of Camp Claudio;

NOW, THEREFORE, in view of the foregoing premises and in consideration of the mutual covenants hereinafter set forth, the Parties hereto have agreed as follows:

1. The area subject of this Agreement covers the 2.0 hectare property of BCDA and 3.4112 hectares military retained area, for a total area of 5.4112 hectares, as described in said Proclamation No. 94, a copy of which is hereto attached as Annex ‘A’ and made an integral part of this Agreement, subject to the condition that the integrated development plan shall clearly delineate and identify the areas respectively belonging to the BCDA and AFP and the development particulars in each property.

2. An Inter-Agency Committee is hereby formed to be composed of duly authorized representatives of the Parties of this Agreement to –

a. Formulate a consolidation plan so as to make contiguous the BCDA property, making the military retained area also contiguous;

b. Formulate an integrated planning and development program for the subject area; and

c. Determine the allocation to the Parties of the socialized housing units and the commercial areas and/or facilities that may be put up.

3. The consolidation plan for the BCDA property and the military-retained area, the integrated planning and development program and the allocation of housing units and commercial areas/facilities shall be unanimously approved by the representatives of the Inter-Agency Committee before their presentation to the Parties for approval.

4. Implementing arrangements for this project shall be entered into by and among the Parties after the recommendations of the Inter-Agency Committee shall have been approved and signed by the Parties.

5. This Agreement in no way diminishes the responsibility and authority of the DND over the military-retained area.

6. The OVP shall be Lead Agency in this project.”

WHEREAS, the Vice President of the Philippines, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the HUDCC Chairman, and the BCDA Chairman, has proposed that the 3.4112 hectare-portion of Camp Claudio (which remains reserved for military purposes) be reserved instead for housing and urban development purposes;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Vice President of the Philippines with the concurrence of the DENR Secretary, the HUDCC Chairman and the BCDA Chairman, do hereby withdraw from use for military purposes the 3.4112 hectare-portion of Camp Claudio which remains reserved for military purposes, and reserve the same for housing and urban development purposes, insofar as not otherwise provided by law, under the administration of the Vice President of the Philippines for said purposes, subject to private rights, if there be any.

The Inter-Agency Committee created under the Memorandum of Understanding dated June 4, 2002 between and among the OVP, DFA, DND and HUDCC shall, pursuant to said Memorandum of Understanding: (i) formulate the consolidation plan and the integrated planning and development program, and (ii) recommend the allocation of the socialized housing units and commercial areas/facilities to the Vice President of the Philippines for approval.

City of Manila, April 4, 2003.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia