PROCLAMATION NO. 1224

DECLARING FEBRUARY 22 TO 25 OF EVERY YEAR “EDSA PEOPLE POWER COMMEMORATION WEEK”

WHEREAS , the February 22 to 25, 1986 EDSA People Power Revolution which restored democratic institutions and ushered meaningful political, social and economic reforms in the country serves as a national inspiration as we chart our collective course as a nation and as a people;

WHEREAS , Executive Order No. 82 dated 22 February 1999 institutionalized the legacy of the EDSA People Power Revolution by creating an EDSA People Power Commission to perpetuate and propagate the spirit of the historic event.

WHEREAS , the Filipino nation has gained the respect and admiration of the world with feats of valor and demonstration of people’s solidarity in transforming a society, during these four historic days of the EDSA People Power Revolution.

WHEREAS , there is a need to highlight the principles and values that the EDSA People Power Revolution stands for, through its yearly commemoration that will serve to enshrine EDSA People Power as a continuing and permanent source of inspiration for future generations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare February 22 to 25 of every year as “EDSA People Power Commemoration Week”.

All agencies of the government, civil society organizations, professional and religious organizations, the mass media, and the citizenry are called upon to actively participate in all commemoration activities and programs of the EDSA People Power Commission, The Spirit of EDSA Foundation and other similar private sector groups, relative to this yearly commemoration.

All provincial governments are also hereby enjoined to actively participate in the yearly commemoration activities from February 22 to 25, in coordination with the EDSA People Power Commission, with the widest media coverage possible.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 30th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Seven.

Source: CD Asia