PROCLAMATION NO. 1481

DECLARING APRIL 22 OF EVERY YEAR AS THE PHILIPPINES EARTH DAY

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 553, issued on April 16, 1990 and signed by then President Corazon C. Aquino proclaimed April 22, 1990 as “Earth Day 1990” to raise the level of awareness on the gravity of environmental degradation and destruction in the country that threatens the very quality of life of many Filipinos;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1276, signed by President Gloria M. Arroyo and issued on April 20, 2007 declared April 22, 2007 as Philippines’ Earth Day;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 1276 identified the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) as the main convenor of the celebration and enjoined all agencies of the executive branch including but not limited to commissions, national government agencies, local government units (LGUs), state universities and colleges, government-owned and controlled corporations, in cooperation with other private sectors of society, i.e. the Church, Industry, Civil Society and other Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) to come up with environmental activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare April 22 of every year as the “Philippines’ Earth Day”

The concerned agencies aforementioned are hereby enjoined to conduct environmental activities in partnership with the private sectors for the month of April of this year and every year hereafter.

The agencies and private sectors shall provide listings of their environmental activities to the DENR, which shall make a nationwide list of environmental activities that would engender cooperative endeavors with interested parties.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10 th day of April, the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Eight.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Acting Executive Secretary