PROCLAMATION NO. 1881

DECLARING SEPTEMBER 21, 2009 AS THE “INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PEACE IN THE PHILIPPINES”

WHEREAS, by Resolution 55/282 dated September 7, 2001, the United Nations General Assembly designated 21 September of each year beginning 2002 as the International Day of Peace, and declared that it be observed as a day of global ceasefire and non-violence, an invitation to all nations and people to honor a cessation of hostilities for its duration;

WHEREAS, the same Resolution further invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system, regional and non-governmental organizations and individuals to commemorate the International Day of Peace, in an appropriate manner, including through education and public awareness, and to cooperate with the United Nations in the establishment of a global ceasefire;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 675, declares the month of September 2004 and every year thereafter as “National Peace Consciousness Month” to instill greater consciousness and understanding among the Filipino people on the nation’s comprehensive peace process and in support of the global movement spearheaded by the United Nations to promote a Culture of Peace based on non­violence, respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, tolerance, understanding and solidarity;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 675 designates the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPPC as the lead government agency to coordinate and monitor the observance of the “National Peace Consciousness Month”;

WHEREAS, Proclamation 675 cites the annual observance by the United Nations of the International Day of Peace on September 21;

WHEREAS, there is a need to mark this Day in the Philippines as a special day of non-violence and cessation of hostilities in solidarity with the community of nations.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare September 21, 2009 as the “International Day of Peace”.

I hereby direct the Department of Foreign Affairs, in coordination with the OPAPP, to initiate and lead the proper observance of the International Day of Peace, as part of the observance of the “National Peace Consciousness Month”.

I hereby further direct all concerned departments, agencies and other instrumentalities of the Government as well as relevant non-governmental organizations, including churches, religious communities, civic organizations and the business community to support the Department and work together in ensuring active participation of everyone in this event.

All national and local publications, television networks and radio stations are enjoined to help generate awareness and public support for activities in promoting the observance of the event.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8 th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary