MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 1724

DECLARING THE LAST WEEK OF JUNE OF EACH YEAR AS “INTERNATIONAL FRIENDSHIP WEEK”

WHEREAS , the enduring diplomatic relations between the Philippines and the Foreign Missions accredited to the country is based on similar aspirations for friendship, goodwill and lasting peace;

WHEREAS , the Philippines and the Missions share the common goal of continuing the robust and prosperous friendship between their Governments and their people;

WHEREAS , the 30 th , 40 th , 50 th , 60 th , and other milestone anniversaries of the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and the Missions merit appropriate observance and official commemoration;

WHEREAS , a yearly celebration shall ensure that all countries enjoying diplomatic relations with the Philippines are given a fair and equal treatment in celebrating their respective milestone years;

WHEREAS , the 24 th of June 2009 is the most fitting time to begin the celebration and commemoration of the 1st International Friendship Week following the June 23rd celebration of the Foundation Day of the Department of Foreign Affairs;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the last week of June of each year as “ International Friendship Week “.

The Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA) is designated as the lead agency to coordinate and monitor the execution of programs, ceremonies and activities to be undertaken in commemoration of the yearly “International Friendship Week” with the support and participation of the relevant government agencies, as well as the respective Diplomatic Missions celebrating their landmark years.

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs shall create a committee that will be responsible for the programs, ceremonies, activities for the “International Friendship Week”. He shall allocate funds for the purpose subject to the usual government accounting rules and regulations.

All Diplomatic Missions accredited with the Government of the Republic of the Philippines are hereby encouraged to give their full cooperation to ensure the success of this momentous celebration.

This Proclamation shall take effect immediately.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10 th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) EDUARDO R. ERMITA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia