MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 2062

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM JUNE 14 TO 18, 2010 AS “METALS AND ENGINEERING WEEK”

WHEREAS , the Metals and Engineering play a vital and significant role in the country’s economic growth and development, being an indispensable part in almost all government and private infrastructure projects;

WHEREAS , the Metals and Engineering fill our country with confidence that it can sustain its economic growth and development;

WHEREAS , since its creation as a government corporation under Republic Act No. 4724 as amended by Republic Act No. 6428, the Metals Industry Research and Development Center remains engaged in providing the public and private sectors with professional management and technical expertise, on such vital activities as training of engineers and technicians, information exchange, trade accreditation service, quality control and testing of metal products, research and business economics advisory program;

WHEREAS , as the contribution of the Metals and Engineering unfold overtime, this provides an opportunity to reiterate our awareness and gratitude to the metals and engineering for their sustained effort in partnership with Government, in promoting, developing and expanding the metals industry.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period of June 14 to 18, 2010 as “Metals and Engineering Week” under the auspices of the Metals Industry Research and Development Center and Department of Science and Technology.

I call upon all Metals and Engineering industries including private sectors, associations and entities to participate actively in the proper observance of the Metals and Engineering Week and to give their full support, publicity and recognition to the ever-growing importance of Metals and Engineering in the nation-building.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24 th day of MAY, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Ten.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) LEANDRO R. MENDOZA Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia