MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 270

CREATING THE ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL EMPLOYERS AWARDS AND AN INTERNATIONAL EMPLOYERS AWARDS COMMITTEE TO ADMINISTER THE CONFERMENT OF THE AWARDS

WHEREAS, government has recognized the vital role of overseas Filipino workers and Philippine recruitment agencies as overseas employment providers, their contribution to the upliftment of family life, and the country’s economic development;

WHEREAS, the overseas Filipino workers’ continued employment overseas would not have been possible without the indispensable and essential cooperation of foreign companies/principals/employers, and the overseas employment providers who continue to recognize the proficiency, competency and skill of the overseas Filipino workers;

WHEREAS, government recognizes and appreciates the efforts and significant role of these foreign principals/employers who have promoted the continued employment of overseas Filipino workers and have advanced the interest of the Philippines in the field of landbased manpower deployment;

WHEREAS, while the government has given official recognition to the overseas Filipino workers and the overseas employment providers, it has yet to give recognition to deserving foreign companies/employers/principals in providing employment to thousands of landbased overseas Filipino workers worldwide.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the award and decoration to be known as “International Employers Award” in recognition of the significant contribution of foreign companies/principals in helping to ensure employment to landbased overseas Filipino workers and their role as a partner of the government and the private sector in the promotion and protection of the welfare of the overseas Filipino workers.

For this purpose, there is hereby created an International Employers Awards Committee that shall administer the conferment of the award and decoration upon deserving entities. The Committee shall be composed of the Secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment as Chair, and the Administrator of the Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, the Administrator of the Overseas Workers Welfare Administration and the duly designated representative of landbased industry associations, as members. The Awards Committee shall immediately organize itself and shall prescribe the rules to guide its deliberations in the choice of the recipients of the Outstanding Employers Awards.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1 ST day of October, in the year of Our Lord, two thousand and two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia