PROCLAMATION NO. 1895

DECLARING THE FOURTH MONDAY OF SEPTEMBER 2009 AS “SALU-SALO NG PAMILYA MAHALAGA” DAY

WHEREAS, Section 12 of the 1987 Constitution mandates that the State recognizes the sanctity of family life and protect and strengthen the family as the basic social unit;

WHEREAS, Proclamation No. 60 dated September 23, 1992 declares every last week of September as “Family Week”, to focus on the importance of strengthening and promoting unity, solidarity and stability of the Filipino Family as the basic unit of Filipino society and for those well-being all national development efforts are directed;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 238 dated September 22, 2003, amending Executive Order No. 241, expands the powers and functions and membership of the National Steering Committee of the Family Week, renaming it as the National Committee on the Filipino Family (NCFF);

WHEREAS, one of the meaningful traditions of Filipino families is the common family meal or Salu-salo ng Pamilya where all members of the family are present to signify their unity and thanksgiving for God’s abundant blessings;

WHEREAS, Salu-salo ng Pamilya is an opportunity for families to enhance family communication, when members can express affirmation of each other and share a positive experience of joy and love, thereby further strengthening the bond of families;

WHEREAS, there is a need to highlight and celebrate the value of Salu-salo ng Pamilya as a national tradition that should be observed and sustained by all Filipino families;

WHEREAS, this celebration is in conjunction with the Family Week Celebration.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the fourth Monday of September 2009 as “Salu-salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga” Day.

The National Committee on the Filipino Family shall lead in the national observance of Salu-salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga Day. The heads of all Departments, agencies, government-owned and controlled corporations, local government units and other governmental instrumentalities shall support the Committee in its activities related to the event.

All national and local publications, television and radio stations are encouraged to help generate awareness and public support for activities in promoting the observance of Salu-salo ng Pamilya Mahalaga Day.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, Two Thousand and Nine.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President:

Executive Secretary