MALACAÑANG Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 297

EXCLUDING A CERTAIN AREA FROM THE OPERATION OF PROCLAMATION NO. 369 DATED FEBRUARY 27, 1931, AND DECLARING THE SAME AS MINERAL RESERVATION AND AS ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA

WHEREAS, Article XII, Section 2 of the Constitution provides that the exploration, development, and utilization of natural resources shall be under the full control and supervision of the State;

WHEREAS, by virtue of Proclamation No. 369, series of 1931, certain tracts of public land situated in the then provinces of Davao, Agusan and Surigao, with an area of approximately 1,927,400 hectares, were withdrawn from settlement and disposition, excluding, however, those portions which had been certified and/or shall be classified and certified as non-forest lands;

WHEREAS, gold deposits have been found within the area covered by Proclamation No. 369, in the Municipality of Monkayo, Compostela Valley Province, and unregulated small to medium-scale mining operations have, since 1983, been undertaken therein, causing in the process serious environmental, health, and peace and order problems in the area;

WHEREAS, it is in the national interest to prevent the further degradation of the environment and to resolve the health and peace and order problems spawned by the unregulated mining operations in the said area;

WHEREAS, these problems may be effectively addressed by rationalizing mining operations in the area through the establishment of a mineral reservation;

WHEREAS, after giving due notice, the Director of Mines and Geosciences conducted public hearings on September 6, 9 and 11, 2002 to allow the concerned sectors and communities to air their views regarding the establishment of a mineral reservation in the place in question;

WHEREAS, pursuant to the Philippine Mining Act of 1995 (RA 7942), the President may, upon the recommendation of the Director of Mines and Geosciences, through the Secretary of Environment and Natural Resources, and when the national interest so requires, establish mineral reservations where mining operations shall be undertaken by the Department directly or thru a contractor;

WHEREAS, as a measure to attain and maintain a rational and orderly balance between socio-economic growth and environmental protection, the President may, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1586, as amended, proclaim and declare certain areas in the country as environmentally critical;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Philippines, upon recommendation of the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby exclude certain parcel of land located in Monkayo, Compostela Valley, and proclaim the same as mineral reservation and as environmentally critical area, with metes and bounds as defined by the following geographical coordinates;

Corner

Longitude

Latitude

1

126°08′

7°46′

2

126°08′

7°51′

3

126°13′

7°51′

4

126°13′

7°46′

with an area of Eight Thousand One Hundred (8,100) hectares, more or less.

Mining operations in the area may be undertaken either by the DENR directly, subject to payment of just compensation that may be due to legitimate and existing claimants, or thru a qualified contractor, subject to existing rights, if any.

The DENR shall formulate and issue the appropriate guidelines, including the establishment of an environmental and social fund, to implement the, intent and provisions of this Proclamation.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

DONE in the City of Manila, this 25 th day of November, in the year of our Lord, two thousand two.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) ALBERTO G. ROMULO Executive Secretary

Source: CDAsia