Malacañang Manila

PROCLAMATION NO. 949

DECLARING THE PERIOD FROM 30 NOVEMBER 2005 TO 7 DECEMBER 2005 AS A NATIONAL WEEK OF PRAYER, PENANCE AND FASTING FOR OUR NATION

WHEREAS , it has always been the aspiration of past and present administrations to have a strong Filipino nation united by a common goal of bringing peace, unity and prosperity to our people;

WHEREAS , the quest for the attainment of this noble aspiration has been continually deterred by differences of the people brought about by political bickering, religious diversity, economic difficulties and our own individual shortcomings and transgressions;

WHEREAS , true peace, unity and prosperity can only be achieved by reconciling the nation with God, through a period of national renewal wherein everyone can set aside their individual differences for the sake of our country and people, unite in reaffirming their faith to God, and draw strength and resiliency in order to shape an environment that is conducive to the attainment of this national aspiration;

WHEREAS , in order to reaffirm our commitment to peace and unity, through personal reflection, change in attitudes, and solidarity for the public welfare and development of our country, Proclamation No. 910 (s. 2005) was issued declaring 12 September 2005 as a National Day of Prayer, Conversion, Reparation and Consecration for our nation;

WHEREAS , in order to promote cultural understanding and integration, give the Filipino Nation full opportunity to join their Muslim brothers and sisters in the observance and celebration of Eid’l Fitr , and to bring the religious and cultural significance of the Eid’l Fitr to the fore of national consciousness, Proclamation No. 933 (s. 2005) was also issued declaring 4 November 2005 as a Regular Holiday throughout the country;

WHEREAS , a national week of prayer, penance and fasting to reflect on our individual shortcomings, acknowledge our ever need and dependence to

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO , President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the period commencing from 30 November 2005 to 7 December 2005 as a National Week of Prayer, Penance and Fasting for our nation.

In this regard, offices in the executive department, as well as the local government units, are encouraged to come up with appropriate activities for this occasion, allow their respective employees to express their oneness to this celebration in a manner consistent with their own religious persuasions, and provide their employees suitable time and space within the office for this purpose.

The Congress and the Judiciary, as well as the private sector, may come up with their own appropriate way of expressing their oneness with the nation in observing this National Week of Prayer, Penance and Fasting.

During this National Week of Prayer, Penance and Fasting, everyone is encouraged to consecrate himself to God, to refrain from activities that defile the body, to meditate on God’s love, greatness and salvation, and to offer prayer for himself, for his family and for the nation for peace, unity and prosperity.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF , I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed.

City of Manila, 29 November 2005.

(Sgd.) GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO

By the President: (Sgd.) MERCEDITAS N. GUTIERREZ Acting Executive Secretary

Source : CDAsia