Acceptance speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Nacionalista Party Convention

[Delivered at the Araneta Coliseum on June 3, 1961]

MR. SPEAKER, PRESIDENT OSMEÑA, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THE CONVENTION, MY FRIENDS:

I THANK you all from the very depth of my soul for the stuff of leadership which you have decided by unanimous vote of this convention to entrust to me for the second time. This is an occasion of great meaning to me. Humbly but also buoyantly, I accept this nomination as a new attestation of your faith in my leadership. I like to believe that this nomination is a resounding ratification of my administration during the past four years. It is a reaffirmation of the nationalism consistently and courageously espoused by the Nacionalista Party. It is also a fresh challenge to scale new heights of national progress and development. With you supporting my leadership, I accept this challenge and with God’s help, we shall fight with invincible determination and indivisible solidarity until the victorious Nacionalista banner will fly proundly over every temple and tower and summit in this beloved native land of ours.

My friends, as I closely observed the Nacionalista convention by television, and as I look at it now before me I can attest to the outstanding fact that the enthusiasm and optimism characterizing this Nacionalista gathering is something never before witnessed in our own country It is the greatest democratic process towards the election of the National leaders that has ever taken place in all Asia I dare say it is symbolic of the irresistible and irrepressible march of democracy over the continent of Asia. I therefore extend my warmest hand of congratulations to the Chairman, Speaker Romualdez, Executive Committee members Senator Primicias and Speaker Protempore Castañeda, Gen. Romulo, and all the other leaders and workers who gave made possible the grandest political convention ever staged in this part of the world.

I also take note of a signal feature of this convention and that is the invincible spirit of unity that pervades in this Nacionalista national rally. When we take into account that detractors, saboteurs, and hecklers have been pouring into the ears of the nation a veritable stream of vilification vitriol, and defamation and continuous flow of divisive jargon against the Nacionalista administration, it is almost a miracle to see the Nacionalistas from all nooks and corners of the Philippines forged into an indestructible unity that ensures not only the Nacionalista victory at the polls, but also the triumph of the Nacionalista administration following that victory.

Fellow Nacionalistas, this unity—this solidarity of the Nacionalistas which is the most important outstanding fact of this election year is the irrefutable proof that it is futile for any man or group of men to try to divide the fundamental Nacionalista unity. We may have our differences of opinion, as all of us think freely, but this divergency of view never, never can divide the Nacionalista Party.

My friends, our immediate objective is to achieve victory at the polls. With this as our objective, I shall lead the Nacionalista forces and we shall fight for the attainment of such objective however long and hard the road may be. Fighting under the banner of social justice and freedom, our political army will storm all the citadels of poverty, disease, and ignorance. We shall fight the opposition in Mindanao and beat them. We shall fight and crush them in the Vis ay as. We shall fight and vanquish them in Luzon. The banner of the NP shall march triumphant all over the Philippines from Aparri to Tawi-Tawi. The Nacionalista banner shall fly as the queen of the Philippine air for the next four years.

The NP is invincible because it is inspired by spirit of Quezon, Palma, and Osmeña. It is invincible because of its record of leading in the achievement of our national freedom. It is invincible because it is the party of the great martyrs and heroes who have given their all to make possible the independence of the Philippines. It is invincible because its titanic program of social service and social uplift has redeemed the submerged millions in the rural areas. It is invincible because it possesses the Key, the only Key to victory—Unity.

Nacionalistas, the fight is on. I call upon all of you to join the triumphant army. As your standard bearer, I shall lead you whenever and wherever duty calls. There shall be no backward step. There shall be forward action, and an unrelenting forward march until victory is won.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Acceptance speech of President Carlos P. Garcia at the Nacionalista Party Convention. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(24) , 4411-4412.