Address of Honorable Carlos P. Garcia Senator of the Philippines On his opposition to a project

DISCURSO DEL SEN. GARCIA EN CONTRA DEL PROYECTO

Senator GARCÍA. Mr. President, the last stage of this bill was the voting on the amendment by substitution as amended. Now, I ask for an opportunity to discuss the amendment together with the amendment to that amendment by substitution before it goes to final voting.

Mr. President, the amendment by substitution provides for the suspension of article 125 of the Penal Code, with special reference to the time of detention of six hours provided therein, so that it will be possible to detain a person accused of rebellion or insurrection for fifteen days, extendible to two months by order of the Court of First Instance having jurisdiction over the case. These fifteen days, by virtue of the amendment of the gentleman from Quezon, have been reduced to five, so that now the amendment by substitution as amended or altered by the amendment of the gentleman from Quezon will make it possible for the detention of a man accused of rebellion or insurrection for only five days, extendible to two months by order of a Court of First Instance.

Mr. President, I have pointed out that, under Article VI of our Constitution, the President of the Philippines can suspend the writ of habeas corpus in case of invasion, insurrection, rebellion, or imminent danger thereof; and this power and prerogative of the President of the Philippines is absolute, leaving it to the entire discretion of the Chief Executive to determine whether or not to suspend the writ of habeas corpus . It is known by everyone of us that the writ of habeas corpus has been suspended throughout the Philippines with the exception of fifteen provinces, now made seventeen by the recent lifting of the suspension in the provinces of Negros Occidental and Negros Oriental. So the writ of habeas corpus has been suspended throughout the Philippines except in seventeen provinces where conditions are considered to be normal.

Now, what will happen if we pass the bill under consideration, as amended? The consequence will be that those who are under detention and arrest by virtue of the Executive Order suspending the writ of habeas corpus will have to be released in five days or in two months if the Court of First Instance having jurisdiction of the case gives the corresponding order. But supposing that the President declares: “This man has been detained under my proclamation suspending the writ of habeas corpus , he must remain in detention ” Will this measure be enforceable even against the will of the President, who may maintain that this man must be detained for as long as may be necessary for security reasons under the proclamation suspending of the writ of habeas corpus ? Will this bill, if enacted into law, have the effect of modifying that proclamation of the President of the Philippines?

Mr. President, I do not believe there is anyone here who can successfully contend that that executive order of the President will be modified or set aside as a result of this proposed bill. Should the President insist that any person who has been detained and arrested under his executive order remain under arrest indefinitely, a law such as this one shall not prevail over the will and decision of only a nugatory effect, because one man, the Chief Executive of the nation, may render it ineffective.

At this moment, Sen. Sumulong presides by designation of the Chair.

Are we willing to place the Congress of the Philippines in the embarrassing position of having a measure enacted solemnly by it remain ineffectual and, as a matter of fact, useless, because the will of the Congress has not been heeded by the Chief Executive of this country?

Mr. President, I believe that, if we approve this bill, one of two things will happen. The President may insist that detentions be made under his proclamation suspending the writ of habeas corpus or consent that his executive order be modified in order to make it conform with the provisions of this bill. If the first case happens, the detainees subject of this legislation may continue to be detained in accordance with said executive order, and as a result this law will be ineffective, this law will be of nugatory effect, and the Congress will be placed in a very embarrassing position. Now, if the President decides in favor of the second case, that is, to accept the decision of the Congress and say, “Let the detentions be shortened according to the provisions of this law”, then, well and good, Mr. President.

But can this action or consent of the President to shorten the time of detention not be obtained by a simple request or representation made to him instead of risking the prestige and honor of the Congress by enacting a measure that, after all, may be useless and of nugatory effect? Would it not be wiser and better for the Congress to appoint a committee or make representation in Malacañan so as to shorten the period of detention of those who have been caught and detained by virtue of the proclamation of the President suspending the writ of habeas corpus ? I believe, Mr. President, that the second is the wiser course. That is why I am reluctant to give my vote to a legislative measure the effectivity of which will depend only upon the President of the Philippines. We certainly cannot consent to having this bill, if enacted into law, prevail over the will of the President with respect to the detention of those who are accused of insurrection and rebellion because in doing so, we would be invading the powers expressly conferred upon the Chief Executive by the provisions of Article VI of the Philippine Constitution.

Suppose that detentions are effected in the provinces where the writ of habeas corpus has not been suspended and this bill is passed, what will happen, Mr. President? Will that create an anomalous situation? Actually, in those provinces no citizen can be held, arrested, or detained for more than six hours or without a complaint having first been filed against him in court. Whether it is insurrection, rebellion, sedition, or any other crime, the people living in those provinces, cannot be detained for more than six hours without an accusation being presented against them. After that period, they must be released. In other words, the provisions of article 125 of the Penal Code are still in force in those provinces. Now, what will happen if we pass the bill under consideration? The result will be that the inhabitants of those regions, for example, Cebu, Bohol, Negros Oriental, Negros Occidental, Misamis, Surigao, Leyte, and Samar, instead of being free from detention for more than six hours, may be detained for at least five days under the amendment presented by the gentleman from Quezon or even for two months if the Court of First Instance in the provinces concerned so orders. So it has been wisely or justly remarked here by the distinguished members of this body that this bill, if passed, will become a carabina de Ambrosio because instead of benefiting the inhabitants of the seventeen provinces free from the suspension it will become an instrument to turn them into a “semipolice state.”

What benefit then will the people of these provinces derive from this bill? Instead of enjoying freedom and liberty, instead of strengthening the safeguards against the government’s power of arbitrary or illegal detention, those people will be shorn of safety and security, and exposed to detention and arrest which can last for five days or even two months. Instead of benefiting the people in those provinces, this proposed legislation will prejudice them despite their living within the law and keeping faith with the Government.

Is this Congress willing to pass a bill that will do harm to the good elements—the law abiding citizens of this country—by removing the safeguards provided by article 125 of the Penal Code?

Is this Congress ready now to go on record as restrictive of the freedom of the citizens of the free provinces simply because they want the Chief Executive to modify the proclamation suspending the writ of habeas corpus in the other provinces?

Mr. President. I have always expressed the view that the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus is unwarranted. I have always held that the time has not yet come, as provided in our Constitution, to suspend this writ. So, when the resolution, authored and sponsored by the gentleman from Quezon, requesting the President to lift the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus , was discussed, I was one of those who stepped forward in its defense because I did believe, and still do believe, that the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus was unwarranted.

And yet, our Chief Executive has stood pat. He believes that it is a prerogative vested upon him by the fundamental law of the land to determine when the suspension of the writ should be made; and he maintains that conditions in this country are such that the writ of habeas corpus must be suspended. His power to suspend the writ being a prerogative expressly conferred upon him by the Constitution, there is no way to deprive him of it, unless we amend the Constitution. But as long as that provision exists in our Constitution, as long as our fundamental law is not amended so as to withdraw from the President this power, we shall have to admit that the Chief Executive is the sole authority that can determine when to suspend the writ of habeas corpus .

And now that the President has decided to suspend the writ in question, except in seventeen provinces, it has been said that this bill is being introduced in order to induce the Chief Executive to lift the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus . My friends, this lifting can be achieved in many other ways without putting the prestige and honor of the Congress of the Philippines at stake, without laying the Congress open to the accusation that we are trying to invade the constitutional powers of the President. I believe, Mr. President, that the lifting of the suspension of the writ can be accomplished without in any way removing the constitutional safeguards around the said seventeen provinces, the population of which constitutes more than one-third of that of the Philippines.

Hence, Mr. President, if the idea is to induce the President to lift the suspension of the writ, certainly the authors cannot ignore the fact that the President has been alleging that six hours are too short for investigation purposes in matters of insurrection and rebellion; that even six or twenty days are not enough. The authors of the bill believed that fifteen days were sufficient. Perhaps, the President will agree to that. But here we have the amendment of the gentleman from Quezon, making it five days only instead of fifteen days. Will the Chief Executive be induced now that the time has been shortened from fifteen to five days? Mr. President, those are the reasons why I cannot subscribe to the passing of the present bill, the only objective of which is to induce the President to lift the suspension of the writ. As I have said, this objective can be obtained in many other ways without exposing the Congress of the Philippines to the risk of being placed in an embarrassing position and open to the attack or to the suspicion that we are trying to invade the constitutional powers of the Chief Executive. We cannot claim this objective without cutting or removing in any way the constitutional safeguards now protecting the citizens of the aforementioned seventeen provinces of this country.

For all these considerations, Mr. President I urge that this measure be disapproved, or, at least that more time be taken in the modifications that should be made so that the Congress may attain its avowed purpose of inducing the President to lift the executive order suspending the writ of habeas corpus .

Source : Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Garcia, C. P. (1952). Discurso del Sen. Garcia en contra proyekto. Congressional record : senate , 3(51) , 760-762.