Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the opening of the Fourth International Student’s Festival

[Delivered at the University of the Philippines, Quezon City, February 16, 1959]

PRESIDENT SINCO, DISTINGUESHED GUESTS, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, STUDENTS, AND FRIENDS:

I AM pleased to be with you on this festive occasion. Some of you may recall that only three months ago I was on this campus to deliver the opening address of the Conference of Asian Universities on Cultural Cooperation. I am told that the purpose of this celebration complements the objectives of that conference. The emergence in recent years of new independent nations in Asia has made imperative a reorientation of cultural and spiritual values in this part of the world. It seems to me that this festival dramatizes that new concept—a concept based on a mutuality of interests, closer cultural ties, and sincere understanding among Asian nations.

I congratulate the University of the Philippines and its President for the establisment and operation of an exchange scholarship program in this area. Their efforts, as evidenced by this cordial gathering, directly contribute to the evolving of solidarity among kindred peoples who were politically separated from each other for centuries as a result of colonialism.

My administration is committed to a policy of friendship with our Asian neighbors. I have taken and will continue to take positive steps toward the realization of this policy. My trip to Japan last December was made in pursuance of this objective. You will recall that the press enthusiastically supported that mission, in the realization that its success would hasten the return of normal and friendly relations between two former enemy countries. Such relations must be restored for the sake of peace in Asia as well as in the whole world. The recent state visit of Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaya was another proof of our untiring efforts to establish closer cultural and economic cooperation among Asia’s free nations.

The friendship that we seek in Asia and in other parts of the world is one that is premised on mutual respect and appreciation of one another’s integrity. On this ground alone does this country stand, its arms outstretched in a sincere gesture of friendship for peoples everywhere.

As I understand it, the Southeast Asia scholarship program of this University attempts to give meaning to our democratic ideals as a nation. By making possible the coming of Asian scholars to the Philippines, the program forges an enduring link in the chain that binds us in this region. In a sense it is a most effective instrument, because it deals with the minds of men. Its raw materials are ideas, its goals the liberation of the human spirit from the bondage of ignorance. Its ideal is freedom.

At this point I should remind you that our country is unconditionally committed to support the various pacts and alliances of which it is already a member. Without exception, these unions are based on sound democratic values. They represent a free and collective will to survive in a world torn by violent dissensions and threatened by nuclear annihilation. But these very same pacts necessarily place emphasis on the defensive economic, political, and military aspects. The educational and the cultural are, as it were, only incidental aspects.

Not too much emphasis has been given to the educational, the cultural, and the artistic elements of Asian life. And this is where I see the scholarship program of the University of the Philippines as a positive influence for the establishment of a more intense, more direct, and vastly more effective cultural cooperation among the peoples of Asia.

Let us not minimize the urgent role of economic or military assistance which the more highly developed countries give to the less industrially developed. In many cases such aid brings crucial relief. But material goods, no matter how profuse, soon disappear. Food and shelter; agricultural implements and machinery; ships and airplanes; dams, acqueducts, and railways are all essential commodities. They help sustain life. Yet they all pass away with time. Ideas and ideals, on the other hand, never die. Every single scholar that comes and goes through the portals of this University returns to his own country at least a potential human reservoir of goodwill and democratic ideals.

Similarly, Filipino scholars sent under the program to neighboring Asian countries become living instruments of cultural unity. In searching through the libraries of the great universities of India, Indonesia, Malaya, China, and Japan—to mention just a few—these scholars imbibe the wisdom and the culture of those ancient civilizations. They bring back to the Philippines a keener appreciation for their neighbors’ culture, as well as a more tolerant outlook on other people’s views.

It is good that this festival stresses the things that unite the mind rather than those which divide it. It is fortunate that in this atmosphere of cordiality, the Asian nations mix freely with the rest of the peoples of the world. For here is the unrehearsed camaraderie of men of diverse faiths and diverse colors, united by a common factor: a heritage of freedom. And because freedom is essentially indivisible, because it recognizes no barrier of place or time or color, it can unite where other factors might fail.

The great paradox of our time can be stated simply. It is this: that while man’s genius continues to shrink the universe through the conquest of space, the minds and the hearts of men seem to drift farther away from one another. The issues which divide them tend to become sharper with each passing day.

On my part I refuse to believe that the cleavage is either permanent or necessary. I believe that if we search deeply into our own hearts, we would find therein enough commonness of feeling and singleness of purpose. We would discover an innate trust in the capacities of man to be an instrument of goodwill toward all of his fellowmen.

Perhaps what we need are more gatherings of the kind we have here today. Here peoples of different origins, of different languages, and of different religious views work in practical harmony toward the achievement of a common goal. Here there is no insidious rivalry, no gripping tension. There is rather a community of minds speaking in various forms but seeking a oneness of spirit.

All this is happily made possible by the Southeast Asian scholarship program of this University with, I understand, the financial support of the Asia Foundation. It is my wish to see this project expanded, if necessary, with the generous assistance of our own civic-spirited citizens. The criticism has too often been levelled at our people that they are prone to be over-dependent on the Government. Although the charge may be valid in its general application, experience has demonstrated that the opposite is true in many instances. Private initiative and private funds have been responsible for some of the most successful civic ventures in our country. No statistics, I am sure, are needed to prove this statement.

I call on our more fortunately situated citizens—on the business men, the industrialists, the financiers, the professionals—to come forward and support this scholarship program. I ask them to extend a helping hand, with vision and generosity, in order that their own country might take a rightful place of honor in the family of Asian nations. I ask them to invest in human goodwill—an investment to be reckoned not in terms of profit and loss, but in unselfish service.

The University of the Philippines has meager resources and cannot afford by itself to sustain the program. Foreign foundations and agencies have been generous in their assistance to some of our national projects. But obviously they cannot and should not be expected to carry the burden indefinitely. We have to help ourselves if we must achieve our destiny as a people.

In parting, let me congratulate the foreign students of this University, as well as all others who are responsible for this festival.

I believe they are rendering invaluable service to their respective countries, to Asia, and to the rest of the world. I join them in their prayer for world peace and genuine international understanding.

I now declare the Fourth International Students’ Festival formally open.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Address of President Garcia at the opening of the Fourth International Student’s Festival. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(8) , 1344-1347.