Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Assembly

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel on October 16, 1957]

SPEAKER OSMEÑA AND REVERED MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE ASSEMBLY, SENATE PRESIDENT RODRIGUEZ, SPEAKER LAUREL AND MEMBERS OF THE CONGRESS, PRESIDENT FABELLA AND MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I FEEL privileged and fortunate to be able to participate in the commemoration, under the auspices of the Philippine Historical Association, of the Golden Anniversary of the Philippine Assembly. It is regrettable, as Speaker Osmeña mentioned in his address this morning, that the Resolution, which provided for an official celebration of this occassion, was overlooked primarily because of the death of its senior author, Congressman Pedro Lopez of Cebu. In this sense, the airplane crash that suddenly snatched away from our midst many respected public servants and dear friends, including the late beloved President Ramon Magsaysay, was a double tragedy. I wish therefore to add my commendation of the Philippine Historical Association for its deep sense of history and duty in assuming the leadership in the fulfillment of an important national responsibility.

In his interesting study of history the famed British historian, Dr. Arnold Toynbee, tells us that, in humanity’s long existence, at least 21 major civilizations have perished, primarily because they have failed to respond properly and adequately to the chcallenge of their times, and that their failure was mainly due, in turn, to the absence of a great leader to lead the nation through its times of trouble. When the American Congress authorized the establishment of the Philippine Assembly, we received a great boon, but we were at the same time confronted by a great challenge. It was a boon, surely, in that it offered us the opportunity to take the first forward step towards our goal of sel-goyernment and freedom. But it was also clearly a challenge in that if we failed to live up to the expectations of our American friends and thus confirmed the opinion of our American critics who claimed that we were unfit for self-government, we would have found the road to free and independent nationhood blocked for a long time, if not indeed forever.

Thanks to Divine Providence, in the face of that challenge, we did not fail. We succeeded decisively and massively, because at that time of our national need there arose a great leader and statesman who possessed the wisdom and foresight to lead our people to fulfillment and around whom they instinctively and ardently rallied. That leader and statesman was Sergio Osmeña.

Only 29 years old then and one of the youngest members of the first Philippine Assembly, he already had won a distinguished record of public service. As prosecuting attorney for Cebu and Oriental Negros and, subsequently, as provincial governor of the former, he had manifested dynamic energy, great courage, and a keen vision of the national destiny. The widening popular acclaim for this rising young man began spontaneously like a brilliant morning when, in the first national convention of provincial governors, he was unanimously elected the chairman. The earmarks of natural leadership in his public acts and in his youthful personality were so unmistakable that, on the eve of the organization of the Philippine Assembly after most of the first assemblymen had converged in Manila, but before he himself had arrived, the Manila Times of October 10, 1907, predicted his choice as Speaker and paid him the following tribute:

“No other candidate for the position is mentioned and his unanimous election seemed almost certain. He has been pledged the support of such men as Pedro A. Paterno, Felipe Agoncillo, and Leon Ma. Guerrero.”

Inevitably chosen Speaker of the Philippine Assembly, Sergio Osmeña plotted the national course that unerringly led to eventual independence and sovereignty. To appreciate the difficulty of this task, it should be remebered that, after having vainly fought a series of revolutions and war, we .Filipinos had also failed to gain our freedom. The Katipunan Revolution of 1896 ended in the Pact of Biak-na-Bato and the exile to Hongkong of its surviving leaders. The Revolution of 1898, though successful against Spain, was telescoped into the war with the United States that resulted in a new conquest of our country.

After the wars, a new set of leaders veered the national orientation from the extreme of “violent nationalism” to the opposite extreme of “lost nationalism”. They advocated the annexation of the Philippines to America. Organizing the Federal Party, they adopted as their guiding political principle the following declaration in their platform:

“The territory of the Philippine Islands may be considered one of the states of the Union, but it is never to ceded as a whole or in part by the United States to any foreign power.”

It was Sergio Osmeña, as president of the new Nacionalista Party and Speaker of the Philippine Assembly, who developed a new and sane Philippine nationalism, a nationalism that took into full consideration the past experiences and the contemporary conditions of the country as well as the political principles of the new sovereign power. It was a nationalism of peace, yet firm and uncompromising in its insistence and demand for dignity, equality, and independence. Under the spirit of this new nationalism and with Sergio Osmeña as the national leader, v/e won the Jones Law, together with its concessions of broad self-government oriented to a definite promise of national independence. Under the leadership of Manuel L. Quezon but continuing in the direction of the Osmeña nationalism, we obtained the Independence Act, under which we finally established the Republic of the Philippines.

Sergio Osmeña was our first modern and successful nationalist, our first national leader and spokesman, the father of our widening self-government that inevitably led to na­tional sovereignty and independence. He was our country’s answer to the challenge of a new national opportunity. And he fully rose to the occasion; he is the architect of Filipino freedom.

But while Sergio Osmeña was the leader of the Assembly, the nation was equally blessed with many other great and patriotic men among its first members. These were Pedro A. Paterno, the peace-maker of the Biak-na-Bato and last president of the Malolos Cabinet; Felipe Agoncillo, leading diplomat of the Malolos Republic; Alberto Barreto, outstanding finance authority of the time; Leon Ma. Guerrero, the older in years and to whose matured judgment other members deferred; Manuel L. Quezon, one of the brightest and most promising among the younger members; Isauro Gabaldon, the patriotic country squire from Nueva Ecija; Vicente Singson Encarnacion, wise leader of the minority in the Assembly, and Jose A. Clarin, uncompromising fiery nationalist of the Dagohoy type. Like their leader, these men and the others who composed the first Assembly, no less among them the eleven living members, a number of whom have honored us with their historic presence today: Assemblymen Picazo, Zandueta, Aguas, Alkuino, Borma, Demetrio, Osmeña, Pobre, Rodriguez, Encarnacion, Sotto, and De Veyra were selfless in their dedication to duty and responsibility and in their passion for public service.

With such patriotic members under a great leader and statesman, the record of the Philippine Assembly has been like a luminous star by which succeeding legislatures have steered their course to the harbor of fruitfulness and wisdom. In his address this morning, ex-Speaker Osmeña briefly reviewed the Assembly’s record. In the field of legislation it planted the seeds of social justice, educational advancement, fiscal and budgetary efficiency, economic development and other great policies which together constitute the foundation of our national policies. In the area of self-government, the Assembly widened its powers over and above the limitations of the Bill of 1902, especially with respect to appropriations and the budget and the selection of the Resident Commissioners to Washington. In the realm of nationalism, it gave eloquent expression and firm direction to the national demand for independence. And, as a peaceful instrument of human liberation, it helped to forge Philippine-American friendship and the American policy of international altruism, which in time exploded colonialism in all its forms. Indeed, the Philippine Assembly performed its task with wisdom, oriented the direction of national progress with vision, led the country with dignity and firmness in its search for freedom and independence, and contributed substantially to the development of international altruism, amity, and peace.

The nation’s debt of gratefulness to the Philippine Assembly and its members and Speaker is therefore immense and enduring. Its brilliant record is far more than a list of solid accomplishments. For in truth, by its acts, the Assembly increased the national and racial prestige and stature and placed all of us and all our unborn generations under obligation to keep faith with the statesmen who were its immortal members.

Fortunately, all these years and up to the present time, the nation has been singularly benefited by the continuing services of Sergio Osmeña. Upon the expiration of the life of the Philippine Assembly in 1916, he became the Speaker of the House of Representatives which supplanted it and, as such, the recognized national leader. Although in 1922 the political leadership passed to Manuel L. Quezon, Sergio Osmeña continued as member and president pro-tempore of the Senate and, in these positions, became the stabilizing force behind the aggressive Quezon leadership. In 1933, leading a small mission together with Manuel Roxas, he succeeded in getting the American Congress to enact the first independence law.

The controversy in the Philippines which resulted from this law at first threatened to disrupt thee country’s political life and “even to frustrate the achievement of nationhood already within our grasp. It was again the balanced statesmanship of Osmeña that restored harmony and led to the virtually unanimous acceptance of the independence law, reenacted together with a minor amendment regarding American military bases, which never took effect. As Vice-President of the Commonwealth, he once more gave to the country the benefit of his experience and wisdom. During the last years of the war, when President Quezon was unfortunately dying of tuberculosis, it was Sergio Osmeña who loyally and selflessly carried on and who succeeded him upon his death on August 1, 1944, at Saranac Lake, New York., At long last, the architect of sound Philippine nationalism and independence became the President of his country. To this position no other Filipino was more entitled than he.

But, alas, upon the return of peace and after the shocking and tragic experiences of our country during the war and enemy occupation, our people had changed. In the presidential election of 1946, when Sergio Osmeña did not campaign for his election but simply relied on the people’s wise judgment on the basis of his lifetime of public service, a new party, organized and led by men who were soon to be found wanting, won the election. For the first time since 1904, Sergio Osmeña ceased to be active in our Government.

It was an irreparable loss. As everyone now knows, his retirement from the public service became the opportunity for a party and an administration to perpetuate themselves in power through the most fraudulent elections in our history, to give the country the most corrupt government we have known, and to give our young Republic the poorest and most inauspicious start possible. But thanks to the people’s sober change of mind, in 1953 the Nacionalista Party was returned to power and, with it, the steadying influence of Sergio Osmeña, as Elder Statesman.

I think I can truthfully say that the late President Ramon Magsaysay highly valued the opinion and advice of Sergio Osmeña not only as a member of the Council of State but also as the principal founder of the Nacionalista Party and the only living ex-President of the nation. For myself, I can say without reservation that I defer to and respect the counsel of our Grand Old Man whom God has obviously given us to serve as our leader and mentor during our history’s most critical and decisive decades.

Perhaps the most authoritative verdict on the services of Sergio Osmeña is that of former Supreme Court Justice George A. Malcolm in what he has announced as the last book he will ever write. A wise and competent observer, a detached and impartial judge, Justice Malcolm states the following as his last verdict on President Osmeña in particular, and Filipino public servants in general:

“From 1904 to 1946, Osmeña held office without interruption. In every position, although harassed by trouble, he displayed those qualities that were to make him the country’s leading statesman—possibly the only statesman that the Philippines has produced. I was an on-the-scene observer for the major part of the years that Osmeña was in official life. It is from personal experience and authentic sources, therefore, that I profer evidence of Sergio Osmeñas’ statesmanship.”

Sergio Osmeña is truly God’s gift to the Filipino people. In power and victory he was humble, magnanimous, and far-visioned. In defeat he was disciplined, loyal and dignified. In retirement from public service he is selfless, wise and dedicated to people and count man, who has become the symbol of Philippine freedom and nationalism, the Philippine Assembly truly continues to live.

The brilliant record of the Philippine Assembly has made the work of subsequent legislatures and the entire Government far easier than it might have been The Assembly established policies so sound and so wise that, by adaptation to new conditions and widening in scope, they continue as our guideposts today. We have geared a tree from the seeds of social justice it planted to have broadened its educational work; we have expanded its economic program, including the establishment of government corporations; and, we have maintained the juicy of friendship and cooperation with the United States that it began. Indeed, the friendship between America and the Philippines that became the basis of the cooperative effort that culminated in the establishment of the Philippines also serves today to be the basis of the continuing friendship and good will between our two sovereign nations. We who have followed the great statesmen who composed the first Philippine Assembly, can only strive and hope that we may succeed in standards of integrity, statesmanship, and patriotism.

On this day, the Golden Anniversay of the inauguration of the Philippine Assembly, I claim the privilege and duty of giving expression to the national gratitude and tribute to Sergio Osmeña and his colleagues. On behalf of the 22,000,000 Filipinos who compose our region, I wish to make of record my sincere belief that Sergio Osmeña was the soul of the Philippine Assembly, that the Philippine Assembly is the cornerstone of Philippine liberty, that to him and his colleagues the Filipino people owe the impetus and direction of their orderly and successful growth to nationhood, and that the Republic of the Philippines is the fruit of their great and patriotic work.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s address on the Golden Jubilee of the Philippine Assembly, delivered at the Manila Hotel, Wednesday, October 16, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(20) , 7215-7220.