Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Silver Anniversary of Far Eastern University

[Delivered on January 29, 1959]

MR. PRESIDENT, MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, DISTINGUISHED VISITORS, AND FRIENDS:

I WISH to express my deep appreciation for the privilege to participate in the observance of the silver anniversary of Far Eastern University. I salute this University, its founders, its leaders, its faculty, its student body, its alumni, for their contribution to the, building of our Republic.

The training of our youth for citizenship is a “constitutional mandate left to the state to afford every possible aid and support. The role of this University in the first quarter century of its existence represents a singularly substantial and effective contribution from private effort towards the performance of a massive public responsibility.

It is inconceivable how such a responsibility could be discharged in a democracy such, as ours without the major and direct participation of private institutions. The portion they bear for the development of higher Education during the last ten or twelve years literally dwarfs the share assumed by the state itself.

The expansion of private education in this country has no precedent in our history, and it is well exemplified in the growth of this University, starting with 4,000 students in 1934 and having 40,000 today, the University is indeed, a most impressive demonstration of response to a public challenge rooted in our people’s absolute faith in education as the basic instrument to secure and keep freedom and to promote individual and social well-being.

The anniversary of an institution acquires memorable meaning according as it provides occasion for searching reexamination of the principles it lives by, the measure and quality of the progress it has achieved, the objectives on which its sights have been trained over the years to meet the challenge of contemporaneous problems.

Such an analysis could well develop fresh insight for its present leadership in. following its, charted course for the University in the next quarter century and succeeding epochs.

As of today, reviewing its first 25 years and viewing the potentials of its future in the light of our country’s present problems, this great university may well assess its biggest apportunities to improve on its proud record for nation-building.

Our country has been rebuilt on the rubble of World War II, emerging as the first dependent country to have set up a republic in our part of the world. After 12 years of freedom, what is our problem that constitutes our greatest opportunity?

To answer this question is to define the challenge of our time to the Far Eastern University and to all similar institutions of higher learning in this country. It is also to point the road to full fulfillment of their mission.

It is an experience widely confirmed that we live in a confused age. The condition obtains no less in developed countries as well as in so-called underdeveloped countries.

In developed countries where there are individuals bright enough to produce instruments to range the cosmic space and create a planet, orbiting around the sun itself, the impression is of leadership perpetually swinging around attitudes and policies between survival and absolute liquidation for the human race. In a less industrially developed country like ours, there is a haze spread all over the intellectual landscape hostile to clear thought and honest action.

The clamor is increasing in our midst for men, thoughtful men, skilled men, honest men, men of decision and dedication. The clamor has never risen to such proportions as today.

The situation can be taken as an impressive indication that the opportunities in our country have never been greater, wider, more demanding; and we alone are to blame if they go and continue to go begging.

It is possible then that our educational system, notably our institutions of higher learning, the Far Eastern University among others, are falling short of giving us such men or enough of them to fill the requirements of our country in a most critical period-of its building?

I do not propose to reply to such a question here. But it is appropriate to call attention to the existence of a crucial situation patent to all—a situation that constitutes one of the greatest opportunities for service of a university, and of all universities worth-the name in this country. The positive progress our country has made to date in the administration of its affairs and in the development of its natural and social resources as a free country brought up on the traditions of Rizal and the rest of our heroes attests that we have had men. The point is that we can use more of them, that we need more of them, that our universities should produce more of them in a measure to meet our needs.” We need them to dissolve the present confusion which is obstructive of effective appreciation and resolution of our problems of development.

I would commend, in this connection, to the leaders of this University as to all others, the added urgency of a program of general education essential to the attraction, encouragement, and production of such men –men who can judge for themselves, think for themselves, plan for themselves so that they can truly govern themselves as the word is understood in a true democracy.

Much of the distrust experienced today in the administration of our affairs among the general population arises. Not so much from the lack of technical competence in various specialized endeavors. It is from a common conviction that they lack, the discipline of a liberal education essential to a broad understanding of our age and to a deep appreciation values of lasting validity.

Substantial as the contribution is of private higher education in the common effort to prepare our youth for citizenship, alongside the limited endeavors of the state, there is a general feeling that private institutions of higher learning have yet to outgrow the common report of being largely mechanical assembly lines, mass producers of individual units, long in ambition but short in vision and principles.

We come at a time that is appropriate to scrutinize the situation closely. I feel we could strike out for a reorientation in objectives and methods in the development and; Use of our human resources, I can understand the feeling that there could or might be a change from the straight-jacket that the government imposes in order to give them elbow room to work out the fuller fulfillment of their potentials.

The institution and enforcement of state regulations governing private education in this country came out of a laudable concern for standards at a time when the frenzied desire to satisfy the tremendous public hunger for schooling was outrunning the supply of available resources, facilities, and competence, with the state itself immensely short of means even to help appease that hunger. A government regulatory agency has been set up to enforce what has been at best a minimum of standards on a largely quantitative basis. It must be admitted that, to this day, the arrangement, for inadequacy of means, has remained a makeshift. I must frankly confess that our Bureau of Private Schools has neither adequately attained the desirable facilities or prestige to become a completely acceptable organ for the definition and maintenance of standards among private institutions of higher learning on university level whose very physical growth as exemplified by the Far Eastern University, for one, makes imperative the setting up of an adequate state agency for the purpose.

The time has come, I believe, that in our concern for the preparation of our youth to be men of principle, vision, and skill, we must arrange for a system of education that has the latitude to grow, consistent with the needs of our democratic order.

By constitutional mandate, “the natural right and duty of parents in the rearing of the youth for civic efficiency should receive the aid and support of the government.” A fundamental principle implied in that constitutional provision is “that the government does not have exclusive control over education for good citizenship.”

In this connection, a constitutional authority of our land has well; said:

“The parent may not be compelled by law to send his child to public schools; or to any particular school. By the constitutional recognition of his natural right as a parent, he has the choice and discretions to what sort of education, what school, teachers, and what courses of study his child should pursue to acquire civic efficiency. And to give reality to this basic right, the constitutional provision impliedly guarantees the establishment of private schools uncontrolled by the government to the extent that they do not promote conduct inimical to public order, public morals, and the safety of the state.”

Court decisions hold, further, that the liberty guaranteed to the individual by the Constitution “excludes any general power of the state to standardize its children by forcing them to accept instruction from public teachers only. The child is not the mere creature of the state; those who nurture him and direct his destiny have the right, coupled with high duty, to recognize and prepare him for additional obligations.

“Our own Constitution in fact gives a wider scope of authority; It assumes the parental right to prepare the child for obligations not due the state, and imposes upon the government the obligation to aid and support him in the exerciser of that righty and in the performance of that duty. The constitutional obligation implies a duty of the government to encourage, or at least not to discourage, the establishment of schools of different types out of which parents may select one which in their judgment can best educate their children for civic efficiency and other duties.

How this constitutional guarantee to freedom of education may find more flesh in the development and operation of private institutions, of higher learning is the challenge that should be met and exploited today, in response to our pressing need for good men and true, alive and alert to our responsibilities and potentials as a free people.

The Far Eastern University may well take a lead in this direction. It can advocate and work for the establishment of a system of accreditation among private institutions of higher learning that would have the continuing elevation of standards as its objective. We might have the University of the Philippines to serve as a touchstone in the enforcement of this system. Until such a system is developed and established, I am afraid we shall continue to be tolerant with the operation of a government, agency of manifestly limited resources and the application of what is generally deplored as an educational straight-jacket.

We grant that private education in this country with all the handicaps and difficulties it has been subjected to has moved forward with unprecedented strides, and this University is at its, vanguard.

We grant that but for the major share of private education in shouldering the task of preparing our youth for citizenship, our government would be suffering a far greater handicap in measuring up to its constitutional obligations.

We must also consider it our high opportunity, at this solemn moment and in this critical period of our history, to render our investment in higher education more productive. And this can only be in terms of men who are leaders in the conservation of our highest heritage and the development of our precious resources for the happiness of this generation and our posterity.

Once again I congratulate this great institution of higher learning for its successful attainment of its silver anniversary; May it continue to grow and contribute to the Welfare arid progress of but people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Address of President Garcia at the Silver Anniversary of Far Eastern University. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(6) , 997-1001.