PRESIDENT GARCIA’S ADDRESS UPON BEING CONFERRED DOCTOR OF LAWS DEGREE BY THE PHILIPPINE LAW SCHOOL, FRIDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 5, 1957

IN a spirit of deep humility and profound gratitude, I accept the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, from the Philippine Law School. In congratulating you for your graduation this year, may I reiterate today my deep appreciation to our Alma Mater for conferring upon me the highest scholastic honor upon my graduation as valedictorian of the law class of 1923. These are landmarks in my own life which I shall cherish to the end of my days, golden ties of loyalty and affection that bind me to our Alma Mater. This day also marks the beginning of the careers of this years’ graduates and may I wish for all and each of you success and happiness.

Please permit me also to take advantage of this happy occasion to extend my heartfelt greetings to my former classmates, college mates, and professors and to the dynamic leader of this institution since its foundation, President Ricardo Lacson. To me this is not only an occasion from which I derive spiritual satisfaction and joy, but also an opportunity for renewing that friendship the roots of which are 35 years deep. It is my fervent hope that this association will go on in ever deepening love and intimacy.

And as year after year this great institution of learning continues to fulfill its; mission by training the intellectually capable for membership in the bar, that circle of alumni and friends owing allegiance to this Alma Mater is enlarged and thus all the more firmly bound by a common loyalty.

Nor is the bond forged solely by our gratitude to this great and honored school. We are knit together likewise by the indestructible ideological unity that covers all of us in the legal profession. If we think of her, as the great jurist Holmes did, as a mistress, we do, to follow his language, know “that she is a mistress only to be wooed with sustained and lonely passion—only to be won by straining all the faculties by which man is likest to a god.”

That mood both of exaltation and reverence, I am certain, has made us captives tonight, without any will on our part to resist, for indeed the law is deserving of such an accolade from us her votaries, faitful votaries, I trust.

As new members of a great and noble profession, you stand upon the threshold of a golden opportunity to help your country and people. The Philippines is beset with great problems that challenge the best in us. The call today is for men with stout hearts, clear and steadfast eyes, unswerving loyalty and adequate training; men who will go forth unafraid and determined to do battle for the good of the people. Every man who has it in himself to solve these problems must come forth immediately if it is his wish to see a happy and prosperous Philippines.

I call your attention just to two major problems of our country today: the plight of the common man and the threat to our national security. Multitudinous problems face our government today, but to me the two problems I just mentioned stand out in importance.

You are well aware of the great program of this administration to help the small man fight his gallant battle to emancipate himself from the grip of the loan sharks. You have heard of his fight to liberate himself from the clutches of the speculators and profiteers, to free himself from the octopus of monopolism. You know of his fight to emerge out of the darkness of ignorance into the light of education. You are familiar with his fight for better, more extensive, and adequate health services. You know of his gallant fight to own a piece of land, a parcel of his country, where to build his home and his altar and to terminate once and for all the cruel days of perpetual tenancy.

In this epic struggle of the masses, in this great awakening of the masses, I want to declare before the nation that the Administration will give our people full backing and support and will do its utmost to holp them attain these noble objectives.

I would like to recapitulate that this Administration is committed to an unrelenting crusade to the following objectives:

1. To give this country back to the people by enabling every head of a family to own a piece of land whereon to build his own home, erect his altar, and assure for him and his loved ones reasonable economic security;

2. To emancipate the small man from loan sharks, speculators and profiteers, monopolists, and other exploiters of society;

3. To establish a strong and militant middle class;

4. To assure for the people the fullest enjoyment of their constitutional rights, especially freedom of thought and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear; and

5. To attain full sway of democracy, liberty, and justice and to maintain in all fronts relentless fight against the godless, ruthless, and totalitarian ideology of communism.

To the young lawyer, an untapped and fertile field for service lie in our rural areas. Removed from the Presidencia, the health clinic, and even the public school in some barrios, many farmers have lost touch with active government. Sometimes a wandering rural health nurse comes to his barrio, but to the barrio folk the government is a remote and forbidding entity.

You who have the advantage of a legal education and who feel the abiding concern of government for your welfare must sell the government to our rural folks by explaining to them their rights and obligations under a democracy.

There is need of bringing our government to the people so that they will learn to respect and love it, to cherish it in their hearts, and defend it if need be, and I trust the necessity dose not arise, with their lives.

More important than just disseminating the benefits of government, everyone who loves the legal profession should stand ready to help the harassed farmers to enforce or defend his rights. Lawyers must be imbued with a deep sense of sympathy and compassion for the lot of the small man. The nobility of the legal profession is never more manifest than when it acts as a shield against injustice and neglect; and the lawyer is never more exalted than when he plays the role of a defender of the right. Let us use our knowledge of the law to enhance the happiness of our people and to protect our unlettered brethren from unscrupulous men. Having drunk deep from the inspiration of this institution, I know you are well equipped to help your people. I pray that you employ your new found weapon in the service of your country.

The second problem which I wish to present before you today is our national security.

Today we are again compelled to harness the resources of the nation in defense of our freedom and our chosen way of life. Perhaps it is unnecessary for me to identify this new threat to our security. But if I do so, it is to make crystal clear the nature and seriousness of this threat. On several occasions recently, I have expressed the determination of the Administration to maintain the position of active resistance and opposition to the new enemy—communism, international communism. This policy I would like to emphasize is not merely a question of choosing to oppose something of which we disapprove nor is it a question of taking sides in a matter of dispute between two other principals. It is a matter of self-defense, a matter of acting to contain and repel an incessantly aggressive, malignant force.

Active participation in the struggle against communism is imposed upon us by the very nature of its conspiratorial methods. Even if we were to ignore matters of moral obligation or defense of principle, neutralism is denied to us by the mere fact that we, as a non-communist, area, according to Marxist-Leninist doctrines, are a target of hostile Communist intentions. The danger that stems-from this threat, this new enemy, could perhaps be brought to a sharper focus when we consider the basic doctrines of international communism. For instance, we who profess belief in God, will never accept Communist attacks upon our religious institutions in the form of aggressive atheism.

Let us look into the fundamental antagonism and aggrandizement of the state over the individual and on our democratic philosophy of government existing only by virtue of the will, and in the service of the people. The communistic economic system, dependent for its success upon the regimentation and brutal coercion of the citizens, stands in stark contract to the system of free enterprise upon which we base our program of achieving the material well-being of our people.

On this occasion it would be appropriate and helpful to consider the matter of communism and law.

At the very outset it is important that we take note of the facets of the question which must be borne in mind if we are to understand the Communist threat. One is a matter of semantics and the other a matter of intent. There is a great danger of our being taken in by Marxist propaganda unless we bear constantly in mind the readily established fact that the Communists attach meaning to words not at all in keeping with their common usage.

A good example of this propaganda device is the term “legal struggle”. Even now, our Congress, engaged in consideration of legislative means bolstering our defense against communism find something of an obstacle in widespread misunderstanding of this term. There are many among us who have not studied the intricacies of Communist method. Hearing that the Communists have shifted their tactics from open violence to “legal” struggle there is a tendency to feel that a democracy should be willing to tolerate the movement a slong as it adheres to “legal” means of achieving its objectives. These well-intentioned citizens would be justified in their position were it not for the fact that by “legal struggle” the Communist means something entirely different from our understanding of- the phrase. In Marxist-Leninist terminology, “legal struggle” is the alternative to the unsuccessful program of physical violence. It is the tactics of infiltrating legal organization and legal government for the purpose of weakening, capturing, or subverting them to Communist ends.

Let us consider the matter of intent. Here we are confronted by overwhelming evidence that the Communist acknowledges no sanctity of law, whether domestic or international. He resorts to it as a matter of expediency if it furthers his objective, ignores it without compunction if it is in his inerest to do so.

The most recent example of this tendency, of course, is revealed in the findings of the International .Commission of Jurists assessing the legal significance of the recent Soviet intervention in Hungary. It should be noted that their study was based on Hungarian and Soviet sources of fact and that they reached their conclusion on the basis of the Soviet’s own definition of aggression. As you will recall Soviet leaders refused to admit UN observers into Hungary, basing their, refusal upon the contention that it was a matter which did not concern the UN. Their refusal in part included the argument that the intervention was legally justified under the terms of the Warsaw Treaty. Yet, in Article IV of that same Treaty we read the following:

“In conformity with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, the Security Council shall be informed of the measures taken on the strength of the present article. These measures shall be terminated as soon as the Security Council takes the necessary measures for restoring and maintaining international peace and security.”

That is how communism works. How can we avoid being keenly aware of the grave threat that it poses to our way of life? We must be prepared to meet it whenever and wherever it rears its ugly head? It would be suicide for us to sit idly by in complacent indifference. If we are determined to preserve our hard-won freedom, as I know we are, we must meet this new threat with all the vigor and all the energy at our command.

Our democratic principles are worthy of defense, and it will be defended to the utmost. Let those who entertain any doubt as to our intentions so realize. We can do no less; we shall do our best.

Force we shall meet with force. For those who sincerely realize their mistake and desire to go back to the path of law and righteous life, we keep open the door. Subversion we shall root out. In doing so, we shall not lose our freedom. Democracy can be and will be defended democratically, not by maligning the innocent, subverting our liberties and disgracing the heritage of the land proud of its strength and its freedom.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library