Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the closing of First National Conference on Filipino Family Life

Madam Chairperson, ladies and gentlemen:

I CONGRATULATE the participants in this First National Conference of Filipino Family Life which is closing today. A greater understanding of the functions of the family in modern society, for the purpose of rendering it capable of greater contributions to the common welfare, is an undertaking of the greatest magnitude and importance. You have embraced a pioneering work which I hope will lead to an increasing and continuing interest in our family life, which in turn will endow it with greater strength and effectiveness in performing its basic share in the massive task of nation-building. This work is especially important today when the family is threatened by various forces of distintegration.

The exhaustive preparations preceding this conference, the scientific approach to the problem before you, preceded by discussions by competent leaders in their respective fields and facilitated by working papers based on actual field studies, augurs a bright future for a realistic approach to our family problems. The result of your conference may serve the basis for the reexamination of the overall program for our primary and elementary education. For as the old saying goes, and this is the stubborn fact, education begins at home.

In a country like the Philippines which seethes with manifestations of varied influences, not all of which are easily homogenized into a neat, single impression, Filipino family home life has to be projected to the spectator in different pictures. To simplify these aspects, it would be safe to distinguish between the rural picture and the urban one, projecting the different ways in which family life has changed according to the degree of its assimilation of influences.

The Filipino family and for that matter, all family organizations the world over, have been, arid are being, affected by social and economic changes. Be that as it may, the Filipino family shall remain unified, patriarchal, and religious, for our chosen representatives in Congress, in recognition of our time-honored customs and traditions, has declared it to be so by the enactment of Republic Act No. 386, instituting the Civil Code of the Philippines.

A new title constituting 39 Articles dealing on the family has been provided for in the New Civil Code. It defines the Filipino family as a basic social institution which public policy cherishes and protects (Art. 216 C. C). It outlaws customs, practices, or agreement destructive of the Filipino family; establishes the presumptions in favor of the solidarity of our family; enshrines the authority of parents over their children; ordains mutual assistance, both moral and material, among members of the family; and institutes the family home and creates the family council. (Arts. 218, 219,220, 252, & 253 C.C.).

So that we may have a clearer estimate of the value of this work, we should recall to ourselves the indispensability of solid units as the foundation of the social order in a free community. The existence of well-knit families, identified in the community as groups living in separate homes, constitutes a necessary beginning in the maintenance of peace and order in a democracy. Where the opposite is true, where there are no families but merely individuals without family ties, each an island in himself, the maintenance of an orderly society will necessitate no less than regimentation.

Yet there are today active threats to the integrity of the family as an institution. In the belief that it is the last refuge of property right, communism is hostile to the family. You are familiar with the systematic eradication of families in Russia. In that country numerous youth organizations have been substituted for the family, both as an attempt to obliterate this valuable social unit and as a means of uniformly rearing and conditioning future citizens at an early age.

Although we are fortunately free from this threat, for we are uncompromisingly against communism as a way of life, even a modern democratic society like ours develops conditions which, while generally desirable in themselves, tend to undermine family cohesion. Co-education, industrialization, woman suffrage, and the increasing search for recreation outside of the home as a result of a rising standard of living and shorter hours of work, each contributes to this end.

Indeed, we are as yet fortunately free from the more extreme consequences of contemporary material progress now common in other countries, like birth control and divorce. Without children, marriage fails of its mission, the home is incomplete, and the family lacks the strongest reason for staying together. Divorce, being a frontal attack against the institution of marriage, is itself the final disintegration of the family.

Our concern, therefore, is to protect the family from the threats to its stability. But more than merely protecting it, we should buttress it so that it may withstand the threats. And more than merely buttressing it, we should increase its capacity and efficiency to perform its functions in a free society with the attendant developments in education, economics, politics, and recreation that often includes forms of vice.

Home care for the children is a vital function of the family. Where this function is neglected, the child is permanently injured and becomes a potential social problems. The injury may be in the form of impaired health, retarded mental development, or resentment against individuals or society. On the other hand, the growing years offer the best opportunity to set the young in the proper direction of normal physical, mental, and social maturity. For as the poet has well said, as the twig is bent so the tree will grow. Education, adequate economic means, and the proper sense of parental responsibility are factors that can make this task successful.

It is perhaps in the inculcation of the attitude of self-reliance and independence in the child that the home can make its best contribution to the improvement of Philippine society. We have been criticized for pampering our children and tying our matured offsprings to our apronstrings. As a natural consequence, We have had to burden ourselves with fringe relatives whom our mistaken sense of family duty has deprived of the opportunity to learn personal independence. In other countries children are encouraged to learn self-support early. Even when they belong to good, well-to-do families, American boys go out to work at an early age. The advantage of this youthful effort is found not so much in the money earned as in the training gained in business, self-reliance, and personal responsibility.

It is said that the lack of self-reliance in Filipinos generally stems not only from the over-indulgence of parents but also from the method of teaching in our schools in which the students are spoon-fed and otherwise treated to easy pedagogics. Just as we should give more opportunities to our children for self-discipline and self-reliance at home, so they should be drilled in the same virtues in school. This will not be a job of a year or a decade but of generations. Yet, if undertaken in the proper manner, it should result in revolutionizing our society from the attitude of looking upon the family and the government as nothing but welfare organizations, created to extend material assistance, to one of regarding them as more needful of support themselves.

The teen-age problems are really home, problems. They are indications of the weakening, of home discipline and of the respect for elder’s injunctions and counsels. There is no doubt, of course, that a great deal of this teen-age rebellion is due to the influence of unwholesome movies, television, magazines, comics, and books, as well as to the new fad among the young that anything new and different is commendable. Since obedience to home, school, and church, to mention the three major agencies of influence for the youth, means conformity; therefore, disobedience means smartness, so the young reasons out. Were the home unit and its spiritual hold strong on the teen-age, there would not be, it is believed, this present-day flagrant disobedience and open practice of evil ways. The home would then be the haven that it was in the days of old, the place where the whole family stays during evenings, doing things together, enjoying themselves together, and praying together.

The family possesses a significance of great importance to democracy in that, historically, it is the social and jural upholder of private property. Not only is property right essential to a free society, but its consequence of free enterprise is the economic essense of democracy itself. This is in fact the most important reason why communism systematically and ruthlessly uproots families. While this policy may also force individual integration into the communistic society so as to facilitate regimentation, it also abolishes property as a right and an institution in the same stroke. Useless to communism, the family is indispensable to democracy.

A family established on its very own family home acquires the feeling of having a share—a tangible, physical share—of the country. Filipino families, anchored firmly on their plot of ground and thus know that they own a part of their Motherland and of the earth itself, have a stake to protect and will be interested in every effort to improve the community, the country, and the world, be it civic, political, educational, or some such similar measure in character.

A family thus possessed of substance begins to develop family pride. Loyalty to good family background as against the stigma of broken homes and child illegitimacy becomes part of the national mores and folkways. Family honor becomes a badge. All this, in turn, are now factors of strength in the family itself.

The family is then society itself. It is the source and the original as well as the final mould of the citizen and citizenship. It is the most important single influence in the life of the individual and therefore of the nation as well.

The old order in its completeness cannot continue unchanged, but the new order, spelling modernity and emancipation in its wake, and unfortunately producing teen-age deliquency and youth confusion, cannot be allowed to replace it completely either. Between the old and the new is the middle ground of moderation, which has always been the ground that classical wisdom has trodden. There is much to preserve in the old, like discipline, order, and reverence for the basic spiritual values; there is much to adopt from the new, like ideas of democratic discussion and participation. Let us draw from both influence even as we adopt the principle of the Aristotelian golden mean, which is, to my opinion, one of the finest principles to follow in living.

The Filipino family should mean a unified home, ruled by the father and the mother whom the children obey, love, and respect, even as they understand them and are understood by them as people they share problems with, their joys and sorrows. It should remain the impregnable rock, the firm anchor, and effective working unit of our national existence.

This is as it should be, the ideal Filipino family and home, which you and I would like to preserve for our people and posterity.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s address before the closing of First National Conference on Filipino Family Life, read by Executive Secretary de Leon, Malacañang Social Hall, December 7, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(23) , 8531-8535.