ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT CARLOS P. GARCIA ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE SEATO SEMINAR ON COUNTERING COMMUNIST SUBVERSION, DELIVERED IN BAGUIO CITY, NOVEMBER 26, 1957

Mr. Chairman, distinguished guests, delegates, my friends:

IT GIVES me profound pleasure to address this SEATO Seminar on Countering Communist Subversion—the first international seminar of its kind to be held in this area. I understand that the delegations now present are composed not only of security experts in the military field, but also of civic and political leaders who have been hand-picked to represent their respective countries in this seminar. This is significant and noteworthy, because it underscores the growing appreciation by the various Treaty member-nations of the complex nature of the Communist threat and of the correspondingly varied measures that must be undertaken to counter that threat.

Distinguished delegates, it has been my privilege to represent my country in past conferences of the SEATO. The last time was in Canberra in March, whence I had to return to the Philippines immediately upon receiving the sad news of the untimely death of our beloved leader—an outstanding friend of the Free World—President Ramon Magsaysay.

While still mourning the loss of a beloved leader, our people were called upon to exercise one of the fundamental rights, and one of the primary responsibilities they have imposed upon themselves as free men—the right and obligation of suffrage. But it is the beauty of Democracy that howsoever serious the test, a people determined to continue to be free always could rise equal to the challenge of the time. Thus, in the case of the Filipino people, not only did free processes attendant to the Constitutional transfer of governmental authority take their due course in a most orderly manner, but our people also succeeded, .a few months later, in electing their national leaders with com­mendable sobriety, wisdom, and decorum in accordance with the be.st democratic traditions.

I consider it particularly significant that I appear before this important conference with a fresh mandate from my people to continue at the helm of our Ship of State for the next four years as their Chief Executive and as Constitutional Commander-in-Chief of their Armed Forces. I say significant because, armed with such a mandate, I can proceed with confidence and authority to enumerate here some of the basic principles and objectives which will guide my administration in the prosecution of the long drawn-out and continuing struggle against Communism in this country.

Before this group, and through it to the rest of the world, I wish to state that the Philippine Republic, during my humble stewardship of its affairs, shall continue to be dedicated to a vigorous and uncompromising stand against Communism. Within our means, and in keeping with our commitments with other free countries for mutual defense, we shall endeavor, as we have done in the past, to help contain Communism. We shall continue to help the SEATO in its task of consolidating the material and moral defensive resources of free peoples in this part of the world.

I am sure you are familiar with the outcome of our struggle against Communism in this country, as well as the measures which we have adopted to ensure the success of our efforts at containing the military and political onslaughts of that alien ideology. I wish to emphasize the point that our unwavering stand against Communism in all its varied forms has been dictated not by extraneous influences, nor by national policies of recent vintage, but rather by our people themselves and by our tradition of freedom and liberty ennobled and enriched by our forebears. God-fearing, and steeped in the ways of truth, justice, and morality, the people of this country are unqualifiedly opposed to anything that negates the existence and influence of a Divine Being, or detracts from their full enjoyment of individual and collective rights and liberties. For centuries, they have re­sisted aggressors who sought to implant in this sacred land of their fathers the seeds of imperialism and oppression. They sacrified the cream of their manhood in the new historic battlefields of Bataan, Corregidor, and elsewhere so that they could avenge the indignities committed against their homes, their women, and their children by a ruthless invader. In the grim battlegrounds of the Huk Campaign, countless fighters for freedom fell in the night, in the prosecution of the nation-wide effort to foil the attempt of local advocates of that repulsive ideology to gain a foothold in the country. In the first collective action by the Free World against Communist aggression in Korea, the Philippines contributed its humble share.

In this connection, allow me to reiterate our fervent hope that the determined effort of the United Nations to bring about a just disarmament may succeed. Thereby two things essential to the survival and well-being of mankind may be achieved. The means to wage war will be placed under effective international control, and the vast resources now being expended in the sterile and mortally dangerous armaments race could be devoted to the creation of a world climate of peace and to the promotion of economic and social progress for all peoples, thus ultimately removing the root causes of war.

But until this goal is achieved, we should maintain our vigilance and further strengthen our defenses. Accordingly, while succeeding in containing the internal threat to our way of life, we further strengthened our defenses by entering into a collective defense alliance with other free countries of Southeast Asia and the West. We did so aware of the international nature and subversive character of the threat posed by Communism to the peace and security of the world. If, through such a collective alliance, other free countries may profit from our experience in containing Communism, them we shall feel amply rewarded for our efforts.

We in the Philippines are proud to note that the SEATO, in the three years of its existence, has made steady progress towards the achievement of its goal. It is becoming increasingly evident that the SEATO is succeeding in putting into shape the various instruments necessary to implement its defensive economic, political, and social approach to the Communist problem.

The free flow and the extensive exchanges of ideas among SEATO member-nations have been and continue to be most fruitful, and it is my hope that more conferences, meetings, or seminars of this nature will be conducted on a give-and-take basis. To my mind, this should be so, because to contain successfully the many-faceted threat of Communism, each nation situated within or dangerously near the Communist line of aggression must necessarily profit from a candid interchange of views, knowledge, and experiences. Permit me therefore to call upon the architects and engineers of this alliance to revitalize their efforts in this direction, for herein lies a way of knowing better the danger that confronts us.

My friends, in the never-ending struggle to give enduring substance and meaning to human freedom and dignity everywhere, no sacrifice is too great. Thus, the SEATO to the teeming millions of Southeast Asia should be the symbol of freedom and an instrument for the defense of that freedom and the fuller enjoyment of our democratic way of life.

My friends, we feel honored by the decision of the SEATO headquarters to hold your meeting here. To you all, I say Welcome. Although your gathering is understandably small in number, the field encompassed by this meeting is vast and imposing. I have no doubt that you are profoundly aware of this, and that, knowing this, your meeting here will be productive of good and lasting results.

Thank you most sincerely for this kind honor you have accorded me to open officially your seminar today. I hope that your brief stay with us will also prove to be pleasant and memorable.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library