Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the induction of officers of the Lions International District 301

[Delivered at the Fiesta Pavilion of the Manila Hotel, August 22, 1959]

MY FRIENDS:

I CONSIDER it a privilege to be able to speak to you tonight. The Lions are a hardy breed, even in captivity, and they have been known to face a battery of speakers as other men face a firing squad—with desperate courage. I ask you to summon that courage now.

Tonight I shall speak as a partisan. I shall not be brimming with the spirit of goodwill, but I promise to tell the truth.

As this is an election year, I assume you have more than a normal curiosity about the issues and men at stake in this campaign. Let me begin therefore by stating this: I am confident that the Nacionalista Party will win this elections, just it has won all elections since 1953. It will win for two simple reasons—it has a good program of government and it has men who are sincerely dedicated to the implementation of that program.

The Nacionalista Party has played a historic role in the birth and growth of the Filipino nation. In a time of subjection, it nourished the hopes of independence. In a time of confusion, it provided direction and purpose. Today, it is engaged in the mighty task of conferring solidity and substance on our freedom as a people.

I can think of no finer testimony to the health and vitality of the Nacionalista Party than the fact that it has lasted so long. That vitality springs from the Filipino people who have through the past half century found in the Nacionalista Party the appropriate vehicle for the realization of their goals and aspirations.

The Party has never betrayed that trust, keenly aware that those who do, meet with rough and fitting justice at the hands of the people.

In sad contrast to the vigor of the Nacionalista Party, the opposition parties already betray, so early in the campaign, the unmistakable signs of political anemia. It is curious, but perhaps significant, that neither party could find within its ranks the necessary supply of candidate to fill a decent senatorial fist. I suggest that where ambition exceeds capacity, it means only disaster at the polls.

The Liberals tried to remedy the, situation by importing talent, but unfortunately, the tariff was too high. They couldn’t beg a vote in 1953, and now in 1959 they could not even borrow a single candidate. Finally they did manage to complete their quota, but only by scraping the bottom of the barrel.

I strongly doubt that the bottom is good enough. Indeed, in a rare moment of candid self-analysis, a Liberal Party leader confessed, and I quote, “Since we (the Liberals) do not have a strong political organization . . ., the top leaders of our party should have picked superior candidates…. But as it is, we have lameducks, plus a couple of discredited individuals in our senatorial ticket. If,” he continued, “we cannot pick strong candidates, what’s the use of campaigning when we are licked before the start of the campaign”.

I symphatize with the gentleman, but personally I think he speaks with the very voice of wisdom.

As for the Grand Alliance, it is not an alliance, except for convenience, and it is certainly not grand. It is a pseudo party, a collection of displaced persons unable to find shelter in the parties of their original choice. There is only one reason for the existence of the Grand Alliance and that is to repair the sheltered self-esteem of its members.

The opposition parties have this in common—they lack a solid and comprehensive program of government. They seek election to office on the basis of grandiose but sterile promises. This accounts for the fact that as of this late date they can discover no valid issues against the Nacionalista administration. Since they can offer the people no practicable alternatives to the Nacionalista domestic program, it is logical to infer that they do in fact agree with the basic direction of the policies of the current administration. If that be the case, I would strongly advise the opposition parties to drop their candidates and line up behind me in support of the Nacionalista policies. We are in the midst of a tremendous national effort and all willing hands are welcome to help in the great task.

It is patent that neither of the parties of the opposition act from motives of principle. The animating spirit which impels them to win high public office is, to put it bluntly, the naked and vulgar thirst for power. However they may disguise their true motives, the truth will out. As the Liberals discovered at such fatal cost, it is not possible to hoodwink the people for all time.

It is strange that certain Nacionalistas now living with the Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance, without benefit of clergy, should find it so difficult to disaffiliate themselves from the Nacionalista Party. It seems to me that if they find the conduct of the Nacionalista policies so distasteful, as they profess to feel, the honorable course for them would be to resign. But in acting as they did, they have gained nothing while seriously compromising their integrity both as individuals and as politicians.

The allegation that as Nacionalistas they would be powerless to fiscalize the administration does not hold water. The Nacionalista Party discipline is tight but it has never been exercised to stifle the spirit of free and honest inquiry. The allegation therefore is baseless. The only s possible conclusion is that these Nacionalistas wish to have the best of worlds, belonging to one party while paying hypocritical lip service to the other.

So much for that. I should like to dwell now on the two principal charges aired by the opposition parties. The first is the familiar one of graft and corruption and the second is the state of the Philippine economy. In my frank opinion, the charges on both counts are pointless.

I am astonished that in the light of its record, the Liberal Party should be so vocal about the question of graft and corruption in public service. The trouble with the Liberals is that their memory is short; collectively they are afflicted with self-induced amnesia. Otherwise, how could they forget in the short space of six years that it was they, not the Nacionalistas, who elevated venality in public service to the level of principle; that it was they, not the Nacionalistas, who so ruthlessly pillaged the public coffers in reckless and cynical disregard of elementary human decency. Yet now they seek to make the Filipino people believe that they are bathed in the odor of sanctity. This is preposterous. They should take wise counsel and humbly continue to do penance until the memory of their sins is erased from the minds of men.

I challenge the Liberal Party to match the record of the Nacionalista administration in the effort to minimize and eradicate graft and corruption in government. In all candor, I can state that no administration in the past, whether Liberal or Nacionalista, has more vigorously prosecuted the campaign to weed out corrupt elements in the public service as the present administration.

The record is well known. Between August of 1958 to June of this year, the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency completed action on over a thousand cases involving various forms of malfeasance in office. Roughly over 4,000 more cases are in the process of investigation and study. The Bureau of Customs and the Department of Finance, as well as the ACCFA, have as you know been overhauled following the discovery of irregular­ities in those departments.

I might remind my critics that action on these cases came as a result of direct presidential initiative. Those who allege falsely the loss of revenues through theft and wastage might also be reminded that for the period of February to May 1959, the Bureau of Internal Revenue announced a record tax collection of 27.5 million pesos, a figure which far exceeds previous budgetary estimates.

These are merely a few of the numerous indications that the government is slowly but surely mastering the deep-seated evil of corruption. The malady is of long standing and is by no means peculiar to the present. It is a hangover of colonialism, afflicting most societies similar to our own. Recognizing the cause, and realizing that it may fatally corrode the structure of our society if allowed to go unchecked, I have through my various policies sought to refashion the character of our economic and political environment. I know that by this means, hand in hand with resolute and energetic action on corruption as it occurs, we can hope in a none-to-distant future to eradicate permanently the twin diseases of graft and corruption.

I turn now to the state of our economy. The specter of an economy in total ruin haunts and fascinates the opposition parties. The fact that the picture bears little resemblance to reality seldom gives pause to the fantasists of disaster. Since I assumed office several years ago, I have continually been assured that far from progressing the Philippines is retrogressing; that there is no money in the till; that one of the richest pieces of real estate in the world has been allowed to fall into rank decay; and similar other morbidities calculated to chill your blood. I can assure you that if these were even remotely true, we should all now be in the streets begging for grains of rice.

But let me present the facts. Over the two-year period from 1956 to 1958, the national income rose by a remarkable 13.5 per cent. Per capita income followed a similar upward curve. In 1953, the year of the last Liberal regime, per capita income stood at ₱308; in 1958, it had risen to ₱376. These figures provide incontrovertible evidence that the national economy is advancing. I would go further and say that the economy is not only advancing but advancing at a truly remarkable rate.

Equally undeniable evidence of progress confronts us in respect to the industrialization and agricultural programs. By the end of 1958, over 1,000 industries were in full operation, in contrast to the year 1953 when there were only 150 industries. Agricultural production, on the others hand, increased at the spectacular rate of 19.4 per cent between 1954 and 1957, a rate which the United Nations in a recent report described as the highest in the Far East. As a neces­sary part of the industrialization program, the development of power potentials, the extensions of railroad service, and the building of roads and bridges, have been continued at an accelerated pace.

Foreign trade, which is of vital importance to us, has also improved. Last year’s total exports showed an increase of F96 million over that of 1954 while imports, now drastically limited to essentials, fell by 12.1 per cent during the first three quarters of 1958.

I realize that material progress, however desirable, does not constitute an end in itself. It must be made meaningful in terms of the lives of the common people. The enhancement of a stable social order properly begins in recognizing the preposition that the fruits of progress must be shared by all segments of society.

In the implementation of this objective, the Nacionalista administration today vigorously pursues a program of social justice. The principal feature of this program is the effort to provide land for the landless. Between 1955 and 1958, a total of 152,961 hectares were allocated to over 23,000 families. At the same time, the government acquired in 1958 alone 16 landed estates in various parts of the country for eventual redistribution to tenants.

At the start of my administration, I announced that one of my fundamental objectives was the attainment of self-sufficiency in food, clothing, and shelter. I can now report that satisfactory progress is being made in this endeavor. Private investment in food manufacturing has increased appreciably, leading to the hope that eventually the country can make substantial reductions in food imports. The most significant development, however, is the fact that for the first time in our history we produced this year sufficient rice and corn for our needs. This means that we have started to think in terms of exporting rather than in importing these basic items of food.

I have gone into some detail in disclosing the record of my administration to disprove the allegation that the country under the Nacionalistas is on the brink of collapse. It is, of course, natural for the opposition to call the governing powers bad. To a Capulet, all the Capulets are good and all the Montagues are bad, and there is no disputing the matter. I do not care to dispute with them, but only to present the record of the last six years to the Filipino people themselves who are the final and legitimate judge.

The country today, far from tottering, has begun to stand on its own feet and move forward under its own power. This in itself is a grand achievement which no self-respecting people would exchange for a false prosperity founded on mendacity and subservience. We could have remained in the shadowy world of half free and half slave and been assured of our daily rations, but it would have been a shameful state indeed, doing extreme violence to our dignity and conscience. With your consent I have chosen the path of honor and virtue, and let us hope there will be no swerving from it.

I do not by any means minimize the problems confronting the country. But I do say that such problems are inherent in our current stage of development and the path we have chosen. They are problems which beset all the newly-born countries of the world. The test is whether such problems cannot be surmounted by bold, energetic, and imaginative leadership.

I am convinced that they can be surmounted. I am further convinced that on the basis of its record, the Nacionalista Party is the only party fitted to exercise that leadership.

But most of all, my friends, I am convinced that if the program initiated by the Nacionalista administration were to be reversed, it would constitute a setback from which we shall not recover in a generation. The miracle of our day lies not only in achievement in the face of great odds but in increased self-respect and national dignity. A profound sense of liberation is astir in the land, and the awakening energies, of our people are clearly evident in the vigorous and dynamic character of Philippine life today.

You and I must fight to keep that miracle going.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s address at the induction ceremony of officers of the Lions International District 301, at the Fiesta Pavilion of the Manila Hotel, on August 22, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35) , 7319-7325.