The following is the English version of President Garcia’s Labor Day speech:

SECRETARY CASTAÑO, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, BELOVED WORKERS OF OUR COUNTRY:

Today, the first day of May, the Filipino people salute our honored workers, laborers, and employees who are the real backbone and strength of our country.

As your President of our Republic, I will gladly accept all criticisms against me provided that I could give my all for your needs and your bright tomorrow.

But, paradoxical as it may seem, those who are better placed in life are the ones who cry most for assistance by the government, while the poor, unsung workers and laborers silently suffer so that they can give better opportunities for this administration to put our country in order and improve the economic life of the Filipino people. Thus, if we scrutinize the lives of those who complain most, we find that they are far richer than any of us and, what is worst, they do nothing substantial for the development of our country and people.

You will remember that I was the first to announce that our country is experiencing difficulties in its economic struggle, and I know that I have been bitterly criticized for this pronouncement. But I braved the ire of my critics because I knew that the whole nation would work with me, cooperate with me, and rally behind the Administration in a common effort to salvage the country from economic difficulties.

Of course, my countrymen, we are not alone in our present economic state, because the whole world is experiencing it, too. Even the richest countries in the world are suffering the effects of economic disequilibrium. And so, how much more for our country?

I am sure that you will agree with me when I say that we cannot solve our economic problems through heated discussions, much less can we seek the remedy half-hazardly. We are going to solve our economic ills slowly but surely.

My friends, in all sincerity and honesty, I must say that, whatever progress our country has achieved today, we owe it in great measure to the masses of our laboring class who are the most forgotten but who nevertheless give their utmost for the many aspects of life, who are willing to sacrifice for the common weal and glory of our native land.

That is why I tell Secretary Castaño, it is less important for me that the rich became richer than that the laboring class which constitute the greater, portion of our masses be afforded in our economic set-up a fair share in the blessings of life with improved economic stability and security.”

On this opportune occasion, I wish to thank all the laboring class of our country for all their assistance and support that they have given and extended to my administration. I am happy indeed to confess to you that other nations, including America, are surprised that, notwithstanding our present economic difficulties, we have no serious labor strikes—a condition that has never existed anywhere in the world. This, to me, is a good and excellent index of the good qualities of Philippine labor—that in times of national stresses this class is willing to take full share of our denials and sacrifices.

I also wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart when you—Philippine labor—bravely defended me against a magazine article of a country which happens to be close to our heart. For all your generous considerations for me, I can only promise and pledge that I shall do everything in my power to serve you all.

I have my high hopes that the brightness of your torches which you carried throughout the parade, will be the same brightness to light the glorious tomorrow of our Country.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Read this phonetically.