Extemporaneous speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines In proclaiming Puyat Vice-Presidential Candidate

Mr. Speaker, officers of the convention, delegates to the National Convention, ladies and gentlemen:

I HAVE been summoned back to this convention in order to perform one of the most difficult jobs ever assigned to me. Since this may well be the concluding day of our convention, I would like to say a few words about our convention, before I proceed to the discharge of the responsibility that had been assigned upon my shoulders by virtue of the resolution which you have just approved this afternoon,

As I have emphasized in my acceptance speech, this is the greatest democratic political process that has ever taken place on the continent of Asia (Mabuhay). The Nacionalistas of the entire nation have come in great concourse here in Quezon City to hold their convention in the world’s biggest domed coliseum. In most governments of Asia which I have just referred to, powers change hand not by force of the ballot or by the free choice of the people but in ninety cases out of a hundred, force had been used to eject force, and that ejecting force in turn is thrown out of power by a stronger force, the so-called coup d’etat.

But our Constitution, one of the most immortal documents ever made by a group of men, has categorically and wisely said that the sovereignty resides in the people, and that all governmental powers emanate from them. My friends, it is therefore the people that constitute the source of our power of government, and now, in accordance with our laws, we have to choose very soon the chief executive of the nation, the chief counsellors of the nation in the Senate, and all other members of Congress—the men who are to draft and to approve our laws. Since these men, my friends, must be elected by the people, it has therefore become one of the greatest constitutional processes to hold a national convention like this in order that the standard bearers of the party shall be properly chosen (Mabuhay).

I congratulate Speaker Romualdez who wielded the gravel with firm justice and fairness. The biggest convention ever held in this country has been conducted with all fairness to everybody and in the most democratic way in which every person who wanted to express his view was freely allowed to do so. During this convention order prevailed throughout despite the large number of delegates gathered at this coliseum. This convention, definitely is not only the best, it is the best conducted convention ever held. (Applause).

I therefore extend my warmest thanks to Secretary of the Party, Congressman Castañeda, who was the right hand man to Speaker Romualdez in the conduct of the convention, and to the officers who made this convention a success. I wish to give credit to others like Rep. Lagumbay, Secretary Santos, the most respected sergeant-at-arms, Secretary Castaño, who was the official announcer, assistant secretary, and marshall all rolled into one, and all the others who have lent their time and energy to the convention.

My friends, but all these officers of the convention would not have been able to do anything without the cooperation of the delegates themselves. (Applause). The delegates have come from northernmost Batanes to southernmost Tawi-Tawi, but they have come here with determination to choose the standard bearers and so, you have come, my friends, to [perform one of the greatest and most sacred duties you have as citizens, that of helping elect persons who are to be entrusted with the national interests and national affairs of our country. (Applause).

I want to thank each and every one of the delegates to the convention. And when you go back home to your respective community, I want you to carry this message to the people: the Nacionalista Party had chosen our standard bearers and they, as standard bearers of the greatest party that has ever existed in this country, are determined to carry out the program for the wellbeing of the Filipino people. (Long applause).

Now my friends, I would like to thank also the proprietor of this coliseum, Mr. Amado Araneta, the authorities of Quezon City, and especially the city police force who must be congratulated and commended for the wonderful way in which they performed their duties in keeping peace and order on the floor (applause).

My friends, now to my task. I have been assigned the delicate task of deciding the question of who will be the running mate of your nominee for president this year. By virtue of your resolution, I am to make a decision as to who should be the running mate of the President in the forthcoming political race. But allow me first to say a few words about the men who have contended for the vice presidential nomination. All of them are worthy of the position they aspired for. I said this to the press and I want to repeat it before this convention: the men who aspired for the vice-presidency are all men of integrity, men of high preparation, men of proven capacity to work, and men who have rendered service to the nation. And so, my friends, if it were possible for us to have nine vice-presidential candidates, we would have done so (applause).

My friends, unfortunately it is not possible to have nine vice-presidential candidates, and as I closely watched the progress of the convention, I noticed that the last two leading contenders who remained to the last minute with almost balanced forces, were the young politicos whom we can call meteoric stars in politics. A star that shot out from down South side by side with the solid North in the person of Finance Secretary Dominador Aytona. It is to the credit of the Bicolanos in particular and the Filipinos in general that a young man who started from the lowest rung of public service by dint of hard labor and fine performance in all the tasks [assigned to him has now risen to become one of the beloved men of our country.

Against him was pitted a man who is a veteran in politics, a man who has served the Philippine Senate since the year 1952, having been elected in the November elections of 1951. He was then a young man [when he ran for the senatorship of this country in the minority party, at that time, the Nacionalista Party. I happened to be the captain of the senatorial team to which Senator Puyat belonged and also former Senator Locsin.

Senator Puyat and I traveled throughout the Philippines. We went through the most difficult provinces, politically speaking, at the time when the province of Negros Occidental was under the dictatorship of former Governor Lacson. There were other dangers. There was Lanao which was ruled by political sultans who exerted much effort in the province so that we would have to face and fight against so many leases and flowers falling into the ballot boxes. There was even one of them who tried a novel way of campaigning. He went alone to the cemetery to pray there because at that time the souls of the departed also voted (Laughter).

My friends, between these two leading contenders, it is really very hard to decide, so hard, my friends, that this convention, after voting twice has not been able to decide, and now that the task had been assigned to me, I must face it. I must choose between the two who, as all of the others, have been my very good and close friends, but they have already been eliminated. Of course, I cannot forget my great friend, Don Quintin Paredes (Mabuhay), one of the outstanding political towering figures of the North and whose record as a patriot and public servant finds very few equals even throughout the entire world.

I cannot forget either the greatest living parliamentarian of today, the man who works from sunrise to sunset, the man who has been endowed by Divine Providence not only with a brilliant mind but with sturdy and good heart—I am referring to Senator Cipriano Primicias (Mabuhay).

Again, I cannot leave this platform without mentioning another senator, the scion of a great Filipino, a man whose brilliance every man recognizes, a man whose presence in the Philippine Senate has added lustre and glory to that body—I am referring to Senator Lorenzo Sumulong of Rizal (Applause).

I should mention here also one man who became a national figure during the heroic days of the guerrilla in this country, a man who had been wounded in the defense of his country’s freedom, a man whose courage, according to Bulakeños themselves, can be compared to a lion’s, a man who has stood with the party through thick and thin, a fearless crusader, I refer to Secretary Alejo Santos (Applause).

Another man who is very modest, a man who is so self-effacing, has also thrown his hat into the ring for the vice-presidency. This is rather a twist in his career because he is a doctor by profession and he is an aristocrat by disposition, and he has been married into the great, distinguished family of the former leader and founder of the Nacionalista Party, Don Sergio Osmeña. I am referring, my friends, to Secretary Elpidio Valencia (Applause).

Last but not least, I can not miss the name of one of the youngest members of the Senate, a young man whose career has just started and about whom we shall hear more in the days and years to come, a man of profound mentality and also with a heart that has always melted in love for his fellow men. My friends, he is a great intellectual leader, he is a fearless crusader for good and clean government. I am referring to Senator Arturo Tolentino (Applause).

Now, my friends of the convention, between these two last contenders, I find myself in the position of a beautiful maiden trying to decide between two handsome suitors. From my personal point of view, one man to me is just as good and as acceptable as the other. So, perhaps if I were a nice young lady, I might have both of them as my sweethearts (Laughter and applause). Unfortunately, however, our Constitution provides only for one vice-presidential and so I must make a choice on behalf of the convention which has asked me to do so. Since one of them was only short of about two and one-half per cent to make the required sixty per cent majority, I join my vote with this man as a vice-presidential candidate (Applause).

I want to repeat it, my friends, before we ask Senator Puyat to step forward, that the choice has been made not because I like Puyat better than Aytona. My dicision has been made respecting the opinion of the majority of the delegates from different parts of our country (Applause), a majority opinion in favor of Senator Puyat which was manifested in two [successive ballotings. I hereby pronounce and proclaim that our vice-presidential candidate of the Nacionalista Party for the 1961 elections shall be Senator Gil Puyat (Applause).

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Extemporaneous Speech of President Garcia in proclaiming Puyat Vice-Presidential Candidate. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(24) , 4413-4416.