Full text of the speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the 100th anniversary observance of Squibb and Sons

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM exceedingly happy to participate in today’s celebrations of the 100th anniversary of the founding of Squibb and Sons, truly a great milestone in the field of drug manufacturing medicine and pharmacology. It is my understanding also that today’s celebrations honor the monumental contributions of its great founder, Dr. E. R. Squibb. On both occasions I am privileged to share, for and in behalf of the Philippine Government, in the retrospection and rededication of their complementing significance for us here in the Philippines.

In the lives of people and their institutions, there are occasions which lend themselves exceptionally well for stock-taking, for review, for a penetrating glance backwards at the road that has been passed and the road that is still to come.

These occasions are marked with ceremony, with all the trappings, pomp, and finery that we have grown accustomed to witness. And in the pageant of afterglows that parades the celebrants, glowing tribute is paid to the builders and the planners whose vision and forsight made possible the realization of the dream.

You and I are well acquainted with the celebrations of which I speak. You and I have been members, if not participants, of these diverse occasions long enough to realize that in only a very small area can we truly find the man whose record of achievements, whose trail-blazing endeavors in pursuit of the universal goal to improve the lot of human-kind, give every promise of surviving the relentless onslaughts of time. Of his death in the last months of the nineteenth century, the biographer of Dr. Edward Robinson Squibb wrote that with Squibb and the century there died a way of life, a philosophy, a trend. This statement is probably not quite or completely correct. Certain of the philosophies which influenced the founding of the House of Squibb in 1858 remain to this day the standard traditions of the House that have maintained the high regard, respect, and reliance of the medical and allied professions. Foremost of these philosophies is the uniformity and purity of pharmaceuticals. Out of this magnificent obsession, the House of Squibb was built and stood solid and firm in reliability through its 100 years of expansion and progress,

I heartily congratulate E. R. Squibb and Sons on its 100th anniversary. Originally conceived on a humanitarian objective that imbues men in the medical and allied professions to which its founder belongs, it has outgrown its shell to assume a leading role in the lives of people and of nations. In this growth it has doggedly adhered to its very close partnership with the medical and allied professions as it discharged its role in the drug industry through research projects to discover new drugs and to improve existing ones, through strict quality control system to main­tain standards, and through wide distribution at prices within the reach of the masses. While its primary dedication is in improving the health of the people to which it has been giving outstanding contribution, it has at the same time contributed no little measure in enhancing the national economy.

Squibb-Philippines is a success story in its own right. In just a period of one decade, it grew up from an agency with an annual sales of ₱40,000.00 to a modern plant with a volume of close to ₱10,000,000.00 annually, giving employment to pharmacists, physicians, dentists, chemists, lawyers, veterinarians, accountants, and others of which, I am informed, there are 260. To a certain extent, Squibb Philippines is contributing to the strengthening of economic conditions in the country. It is helping in the conservation of dollars which otherwise would be utilized in the importation of finished products. It bolsters the economy of the nation in the veterinary line that it introduced to reduce mortality in the livestock population and to promote their growth and multiplication.

Figures and volumes are impressive gauge of success from a business aspect. Squibb Philippines’ success story has other impressive measurements in the benefits that its operations has engendered in the community. In times of disasters and epidemics it have given its just share in the protection of the health of the public in partnership with the medical and allied professions. In normal times it gives whole-hearted support of charitable work of government and private entities. One of the outstanding services which Squibbs Philippines has recently instituted—-the Squibb Clinical Seminar—would in effect bring post-graduate training in medicine to the doorsteps of rural doctors which would elevate standards of rural medical practice. This service would bring about incalculable benefits to the health and medical care of the rural population.

The Government has disinterested regard to the drug industry because it is aware of its vital role to the health and economy of the nation. This concern is exercised in practical measure by relating the needs of the drug industry proportionately to the total national needs that will ensure and promote a progressive and balanced national economy. To this extent, the drug industry will be given protection and encouragement. I feel, however, that I must emphasize the importance which I attach to the extreme necessity of exploiting and utilizing local raw materials to feed the drug industry. This concern does not stem from a nationalistic consideration alone. It is one of the cardinal essence of a sustaining and stable economy. Its additional significance lies in the fact that in the eventuality of being cut away from foreign sources, the country can stand on its own in meeting its needs for drugs and pharmaceuticals.

Research has always been an integral function of drug companies. Understandably, manufacturing and sale receive much of the investments. In an economy where competition is increasingly becoming stiff, survival can very well depend on the products of research. Squibb has not lagged being in pioneering research to discover new drugs. Together with the other drug companies in the country, it shall be afforded ample opportunity to undertake studies and investigations of local materials that have medicinal use and to put them out in a commercial scale. In this respect drug companies will be rendering a great service to the nation and, at the same time, expect a profit on their investments.

Dr. Edward Robinson Squibb was a Quaker and was possessed of those sterling characters that are scarcely existent in our time and in this generation. One of the sterling qualities which he had was his refusal to patent his inventions and discoveries because he wanted them to be of service to humanity.

But the larger heritage and possibly the mere enduring gift that Edward Robinson Squibb left, cannot be reflected in terms of physical and material objects. The great gift he left was the example of honest toil, his high moral standards, and his unwavering belief that before a man can help himself he must try first to help his brother. When he died in 1900, the Committee on Revision of the U. S. Pharmacopea stated: “Pharmacy has lost a Nestor; medicine, a leader; and the world, the noblest work of God—an honest man.”

I am confident that all this heritage of the good Doctor and his pioneering organization which now has become part of the founding charter of Squibb Philippines will continue to add to the progress of our country by stimulating the growth and development of our pharmaceutical industry, making full use of the bountiful yet relatively still unbroken reservoir of our own medicinal plants and herbs and, also, our technologists and scientists—thus giving vigor, vitality, and serve to our people and our economy.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Full text of the speech of President Garcia at the 100th Anniversary Observance of Squibb And Sons. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(30) , 7217-7219.