Funeral Oration of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Necrological Service for Ex-President Sergio Osmeña at Capitol Building, Manila

[Delivered on October 26, 1961]

MY COUNTRYMEN:

ANOTHER life of love is now only a blessed memory. It has passed beyond our horizon, beyond the twilight’s purple hills to that vast realm of silence we call death.

We are gathered in this historical hall, drawn together by a common and profound bereavement, to pay heartfelt tribute and bid sad farewell to one of the greatest men ever born to the Filipino race—Sergio Osmeña. In life, he was a gentle and beloved friend, a well-loved husband and father, a firm and wise leader, a peerless kind greathearted statesman, a broad-visioned and selfless patriot. In death, he joins the ranks of our illustrous immortals to become forever the pride and the inspiration of the nation he helped to build, served so well, and loved so dearly.

Sergio Osmeña was God’s rare and timely gift to the Filipino people at a critical hour in the life of the Motherland. He burst upon the national scene at the moment when our people, having suffered a humiliating and numbing defeat in war, were bewildered and lost, without pride in their past, indifferent to the meaning of freedom, and thoughtless and heedless of the future, Sergio Osmeña opened to them a new vision and direction and awakened in them a new purpose and a new hope and a new spirit. He led them back to the true road to freedom and fulfillment that Jose Rizal had marked well but from which they had unfortunately strayed away. He was a pioneer, a torch-bearer, a toiler when his country was down. In this historic task, it was as if he combined the great night of right and the cloudless mental vision that appearances cannot deceive, that flattery cannot blind, and threats cannot deflect. The historian of Philippine freedom therefore will be compelled to write the name of Sergio Osmeña on the Tablet of Eternity.

Sergio Osmeña took the helm of our national destiny with hands made firm by inspired wisdom. He bore the signet of Eternity. It was he who established Philippine-American cooperation on a plane of equality, mutual recognition, and mutual respect. It was he who interpreted America to the Filipinos and the Philippines to the Americans with rare insight kind understanding and faithfulness. It was he who turned mutual distrust into mutual friendship, mutual suspicion into mutual trust, mutual hostility into enduring amity. It was lie who gave America’s political program in the Philippines the flesh and blood and spirit that made of the Philippine Assembly a Filipino triumph in self-government and the precursor of eventual independence on one hand, and, on the other hand, America’s springboard to that great adventure in altruism which eventually gave the world an enlightened formula for the liquidation of colonialism and the liberation of all subjected races. The heroic Philippine-American stand in Corregidor and Bataan was a magnificent flowering of the seeds he had sown and the plant he had nourished with care and devotion.

In essaying wise and consummate national leadership, Sergio Osmeña also reached the height of statesmanship and patriotism. To the preservation of the political party that he founded and to the unity of the people he loved, he gladly sacrificed position and ambition and personal fortune. To preserve the oneness of the nation, he made great sacrifices, including political self effacement. Consequently, his three most glorious legacies to us were a vigorous and triumphant Nacionalista Party, a united nationally conscious Philippine nation, and a free independent Philippine Republic. For these three he gave his best and his utmost.

Sergio Osmeña was ever the model of gentleness and correctness and nobility. A sincere regard for the feelings of others guided his conduct. The nobility of his nature ruled his thoughts. The greatness of his soul suffused his deeds. He was mild in anger, moderate in joy, forgiving in defeat and noble in victory. To strangers he was considerate, to friends he was kind, to his family he was devoted and loving. He was as generous as harvestime, as hospitable as summer, and as radiant as the full tide of springtime. He was by all greatly beloved. He was respected for his greatness, admired for his accomplishments, and reverred for his integrity that rose like a great mountain peak, and there it stood firm as the earth beneath and pure as the stars above.

The one tragedy in the life of Sergio Osmeña was to have been the undeserving victim of the ingratitude of democracies at a time when his services to the nation were of the utmost need and his lifelong patriotic service fully deserved as crowning reward the first presidency of the Republic. Calmly and nobly and in admirable grace, he nevertheless accepted his share of the misled and peculiar temper of postwar electorates that; also toppled down the equally great Winston Churchill from the United Kingdom’s premiership. It affected not a whit his deep and abiding love of the people and the nation whom at every opportunity he continued to serve with the same devotion and dedication. Humble in victory, he was proud and unbowed in defeat. It is a great historical paradox that Osmeña emerged greater after his defeat.

Gentle friend and beloved leader: On behalf of our bereaved people, we bid you farewell. But in the night of death our faith sees a star, and our listening love hears the rustle of a wing. We feel your spirit will abide in the heart of the nation as long as liberty and freedom and democracy shall have meaning—as long as this nation, of which you have been one of its greatest architects, shall live and endure. Our grief is profound, and the grief of your beloved family far greater. But we shall all find comfort and solace in the realization that, in the freedom we have, in the prosperity we enjoy, and in the security and tranquility in which we live forever, yourself breathed into them your own life and your spirit. Farewell, beloved leader and gentle friend: May the glories of God’s Kingdom ever yours.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Funeral Oration of President Carlos P. Garcia at the Necrological Service for Ex-President Sergio Osmeña. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57 (45), 8125-8127.