Nationwide Radio and TV Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines

MY COUNTRYMEN:

I AM grateful for the opportunity of addressing you directly in the comfort and intimacy of your homes. The day after tomorrow, November 10, is election day. In the exercise of your sovereign will, you will again express through the ballot your choice of the party and of the men who will lead our country in the crucial years ahead.

Let me begin by saying that in casting your vote on Tuesday, you will not merely be deciding the short-term fortunes of a few political parties. In casting your vote, you may well be deciding the whole future course of the development of the Republic.

I do not doubt that you will make your choice wisely, just as you have in the past, and I am confident that you will do so in full knowledge of the issues at stake in this election.

I should like to emphasize this. What we need above all is a restoration of the sanity and balance that we seem to have lost in the fever of an election campaign. In all the long years that I have been in politics, I have never met with such a determined effort on the part of the opposition parties to unleash the dark and sinister forces which lie below the surface of civilized society. They have promoted intolerance and bigotry, engendered suspicion and doubts, invited despair, fomented prejudice, and enthroned ignorance. I cannot regard this as anything less than a massive and deliberate assault on our value as a free people. Far more than any ideology, it constitutes a clear and decisive threat today to our liberties and our way of life.

It may dismay us—and particularly you, the voters—to note that after half a century of careful training in the democratic processes, we should harvest a crop of little brown McCarthy’s strutting across the national stage in a cold-blooded effort to undermine the very bases of our beliefs and faiths.

Fortunately, they comprise only a minority. I am convinced it will never be said of the Filipino people that they permitted knowingly the spread in our midst of the malignant cancer of McCarthyism.

The most generous interpretation we can give the actions of the opposition parties is to say that in McCarthyism they have found the perfect refuge for intellectual bankruptcy.

You have only to examine the programs of the Liberal Party and of the Grand Alliance, which differ only in the unessential details, to realize how completely they have misconstrued the nature of our problems, and consequently how wide of the mark their proposed solutions are.

This is why they are so anxious to distort the meaning of the program of the Nacionalista Party. They realize that once this program is clearly understood by the people, it will emerge in its true light as the only rational solution to our national problems. Where the Nacionalista Party offers basic solutions to basic problems, the Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance can best offer only the deceptive relief of partial and sporadic reform.

But the stark truth is that in their main direction, the opposition programs actually repudiate the desires and aspirations of the Filipino people. The Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance are anti-nationalists. They distrust nationalism because it upsets their preconceptions about the character of Philippine society. They distrust nationalism because it means change, and they are rock-bound conservatives in mortal fear of the rushing tides of history. But most of all they distrust nationalism because they lack faith in the capacity of the Filipino people to mold their own future.

The cunning but transparent effort to thwart the people’s aspirations explains why the Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance are so obsessed with synthetic issues such as pro-Communism and anti-Americanism. By this time, you will have recognized these nonexistent issues for what they are. They are beneath contempt. You can tamper with opinion; but you may tamper with facts only at your own peril.

On these two questions, the record of the Nacionalista Party is above suspicion. I will remind the gentlemen of the opposition that it was the Nacionalista Party which outlawed Communism in the Philippines. It was the Nacionalista Party which took the initiative in rooting out and applying remedies to the conditions which bred unrest, instability, and dissidence. Finally, I will remind them that it was the Nacionalista Party which made it possible for the Philippines to join the SEATO in a defensive alliance aimed precisely at deterring Communist expansionism.

As for anti-Americanism, I can assert that at no time in the past the mutual esteem and regard of the Philippines and the United States for each other been higher. Having removed through friendly negotiations the causes of misunderstanding, our friendship now rests on a firmer and more enduring foundation.

The Liberal Party has levelled these accusations against the Administration, but it has chosen to ignore the fact that most of these ills are in reality directly traceable to them. As a result of the failure of the Liberal regime to heed the clamor for social reform, Communism grew in the Philippines. As a result of the regime’s heavy-handed policy of repression, the Communist movement flared into open and widespread revolt, threatening the very existence of our young Republic.

The unsatisfactory aspects of our foreign relations are also burdensome legacies from the Liberal regime. As a result of their weak and submissive policies, the Liberals assented to the inequalities which form the substance of the irritants in Philippine-American relations. Now, the Liberals are charging that my administration has failed to maintain that unequal relationship. I do plead guilty to that charge. For it is these inequalities which threaten the very foundation of that friendship. And it is precisely because we cherish this friendship and wish above all to keep it that my administration has sought to remove the unsatisfactory elements that threaten and weaken its existence.

Finally, the Liberal regime perpetuated the greatest single obstacle to Philippine progress, which is alien domination of the economy. The domination by aliens of our economic life gained impetus during the Liberal administration. In all their eight years in office, they did nothing to correct this evil. On the contrary, everything was done to stimulate and encourage aliens in Philippine business and industry, to the lasting prejudice of Filipinos. Now the Liberals accuse my administration of upsetting the status quo and causing great unrest and apprehension in the alien business community. I would consider this extremely regrettable if true, but I would rather have the alien business community upset than my own people doomed forever to humiliation and poverty in their own country.

Thus, the makeshift and shortsighted policies of the Liberal Party in the past have given rise to consequences which today imperil our progress as a nation and in many ways portend disaster unless checked by firm and positive action.

But the Liberal Party, like a muscle-bound pachyderm, refuses to learn and adapt itself to the ever changing environment. Its policies today bear the same ineradicable mark of the improvised, the banal and uncreative, and where they are not merely sterile, they are clearly productive of evil. Let no one dismiss the so-called doctrine of command responsibility as the mere phantasm of a disordered brain. It fits in too well with the repressive and reactionary character of past Liberal Party policies to be shrugged off so casually. For the clear implication of the so-called doctrine is the establishment of an authoritarian regime, since only under such conditions could it be effectively enforced. I would hate to draw the conclusion but I find it necessary to warn that a Liberal Party victory might well mean a repetition of Maliualu in a hundred little town all over the Philippines.

Nowhere is the lack of understanding of the scope of our national problem by the Liberal Party and the Grand Alliance more evident than in their proposed solution to the economic problem. As a magic formula for progress, they seek to revive the heretical and outmoded notion of laissez faire. To propose a completely free enterprise at this stage is like sending out an infant into the streets to engage in a free-for-all with the neighborhood gang. Government regulatory mechanisms in our stage of development exist precisely to encourage and help Filipino business to grow to a point where it can hold its own against powerful alien competition. They exist also to protect the interests of the masses from entrenched economic might. In other words, government participation in an underdeveloped country like the Philippines is a necessary precondition for nationalistic growth and development. It is not an end in itself.

To allow the operation of a completely free enterprise today will also mean in effect the preservation of the very condition which we wish to correct; namely, alien economic domination. Because of their larger capital resources, alien business interests in the Philippines would have an unfair headstart in the race for economic supremacy. It would be naive to suppose that we, who have only just started, could expect to overhaul that lead in the foreseeable future under conditions of free enterprise.

Realism is clearly not the strong point of the opposition parties. In spite of all the noises emanating from their direction, the Liberal Party is essentially a do-nothing party, and its satellite, the Grand Alliance, a party of do-nothing do-gooders. They operate in a kind of political vacuum in which programs and policies have no context and consequently have little relevance to the hard, commonsense world which Filipinos inhabit.

As a nation, we have reached a watershed. Many forces in our national life have been released which it would be dangerous to stem and impossible to stop. We want to be independent in fact as well as in name. We want to shake off the crippling legacies of our colonial past. Above all, we want to insure for ourselves and our posterity freedom from the ever-present blights of poverty, ignorance, and disease.

For far too long our progress has been held back. But today we are a country in a hurry; we wish to catch up with the modern world as quickly as our moral and material resources will permit. It is thus that our deepest aspirations as a people center on the overwhelming need for speedy national growth and development.

In seeking to attain this end, our chosen instrument is nationalism. In whatever form it may arise, nationalism is essentially the expression of a profound desire to change an existing condition which it is no longer possible to tolerate. Today, our problem is to remove a condition whose continued existence is a palpable menace to the healthy and unhampered growth of the nation.

I refer to the vestigial remains of colonialism in our midst.

Let us be candid and admit that thirteen years after achieving our independence, the remnants of our colonial past still cling like stubborn barnacles to our social structure. Colonialism is a pervasive fact. It is evident in the continued domination of our economy by aliens and equally evident in our failure, until the recent past, to assert fully our sovereign rights in our relations with foreign powers. Now, colonialism is the source of our gravest problems. Because of the colonial nature of our economy, our full economic development is retarded. In turn, this tends to perpetuate the unequal distribution of income, so that the all-important objective of closing the gap between the poor and rich continues to be beyond our grasp. As long as this persists, social instabilities, with their ripe potential for strife and dissension, will rise to the surface. Finally, colonialism is the ultimate cause of widespread graft and corruption.

When our problems are seen in this basic light, then all the pieces fall into place and questions and issues assume their proper importance in the scale of things. It is one of the peculiarities of colonialism that once it attached itself to a victim it clings with the strength and tenacity of a parasitic infection. Halfway measures, such as those proposed by the opposition parties, will be found ineffective. Such measures may mask the symptoms, but the infection will continue in a form as virulent as before.

To overcome colonialism, therefore, the Nacionalista Party has chosen nationalism as the only force capable of dislodging its firm hold on our social institutions, and which will remedy at the very source the cause of the festering infection. It is on the basis of this nationalistic orientation that the Naciionalista Party has formulated a set of policies intended to secure our welfare and well-being.

It is these policies that are now at issue before the electorate.

The Nacionalista Party proposes:

First, to complete our economic independence through the adoption of the Filipino First policy and similar measures;

Second, to establish our dignity as a free people by dealing with foreign powers on terms of sovereign equality;

Third, to achieve a balance economy by providing equal impetus to agriculture and industry;

Fourth, to promote social justice and the general welfare of the masses; and,

Fifth, to minimize, and if possible eradicate, graft and corruption in the public service.

If we are asked, what have we achieved in the implementation of these policies, the answer is: much, so much more than we are entitled to expect, considering that we are an underdeveloped country in the strong grip of a colonial past. The true answer, however, is this: we in this generation have made the basic decisions and reaped the initial gains, but the immeasurable rewards lie in the future and await our grateful posterity.

But the gains made under the Nacionalista administration are solid in themselves, as even our bitterest critics admit.

Remarkable gains have been made in agricultural production, which has increased by 35.1 per cent since 1954; in mining, by 50.2 per cent; and in manufacturing, by 73.7 per cent.

As a result of the implementation of the Filipino First policy, Filipinos for the first time since the institution of controls have gained the upper hand in the allocation of foreign exchange. In the first half of 1959, their share of foreign exchange amounted to 51 per cent of total allocations.

We achieved self-efficiency in the basic cereals, rice and corn, for the first time in our history.

We have also achieved the long-sought objective of a favorable balance of trade in the amount of $95.2 million in the first half of the current year.

Filipino participation in the establishment of business enterprises has mounted at a steadily increasing pace. Capital investment by Filipinos amounted to 72 per cent in 1953; during this year, it jumped to 81 per cent.

Notable gains have been made in restoring harmonious relations with the United States as evidenced by the favorable results of the bases negotiations.

Huk dissidence has been curbed, and covert Communist activity is under surveillance in implementation of agreements made through the SEATO.

As a partial solution to the problem of eradicating graft and corruption, the Nacionalista administration has instituted a vigorous campaign which has resulted, in the years 1958 and 1959 alone, in the conviction of over 4,000 out of a total of nearly 12,000 cases examined. This record is unparalleled. Widespread graft and corruption is a direct consequences of the colonial nature of our economy. Therefore, the basic solution lies in correcting the colonial condition through the instrument of nationalism.

Basic reforms intended to raise the living standards of the barrio population include the land reform program resettlement, and the establishment of the cooperative marketing associations. Equally basic is the recent decision for the dispersal of industry as a means of providing more economic opportunities to the rural population.

I am proud of the progress that we have achieved in the past six years of the Nacionalista administration. But I do not claim them for myself or for the Nacionalista Party. The credit for national progress justly belongs to the people. The true function of any administration is to create the conditions which liberate the creative energies of the people for the achievement of the goals which they have set for themselves.

I have done so and will continue to do so to the best of my ability. In making this pledge, I wish to assure you that the Nacionalista Party stands solidly behind me. There is no better guarantee of our word than the fact that for nearly half a century, the Nacionalista Party, more than any other party or pseudo party, has fought firmly and victoriously for our common aspirations as a people and as a nation. Just as we fought shoulder to shoulder in the protracted and sometimes bitter struggle to attain political independence, so today I trust that we shall assume the common burden as well as the common responsibility for achieving economic independence. When that victory is ours, then and only then can we stand in full pride and dignity as a truly free and sovereign people.

There has been much talk of disunity in the Nacionalista Party. I deny it, and I urge you to ignore it. When a party has survived as long as the Nacionalista Party has, it is not logical to expect that small disagreements could sunder it permanently. For the unity of a political party derives not from the idiosyncracies of its members no matter how much admirable, but from a community of ideals, goals, and principles. Today, the strength of our conviction in the justice of our cause and our issues in this campaign welds us together more firmly than ever before.

I should like to leave you with the thought with which I began. I said that in casting your vote day after tomorrow, you may well be deciding the whole future course of our development as a people. I have described the issues not only of my own party but those of the opposition as well. The principal point at issue is whether we shall adopt nationalism as the principal instrument for full national growth, or whether we shall retain the status quo and remain forever in the eternal half-light of colonialism. As an instrument for growth, nationalism demands that we liberate the economy from the grip of aliens, stand on our full sovereignty in our relations with foreign powers, and assure for our people, not a false millenium, but progress as this is achieved in the hard world of practical necessity.

On these issues, there is a definite division between the Nacionalistas and the opposition. Your choice therefore is clear whether to stay put with the opposition parties, or go forward with the Nacionalistas.

Good night and may God help you in making your choice.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Carlos P. Garcia’s nation-wide radio and TV address on November 8, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(46) , 9642-9649.