Oration of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At Necrological Services for the Late President Magsaysay

[ Delivered at Malolos, Bulacan on March 26, 1957 ]

WHEN our beloved President Magsaysay met his tragic death on a lonely, moon-bathed hilltop in Cebu, he was on board the airplane Mt. Pinatubo, named after a mountain in his home province of Zambales. After this tragic accident, when it came time to bring back home to Manila the mortal remains of this man beloved of his people, President Magsaysay’s last flight was made on board a plane named Bulacan. I see more than a meaningless coincidence in this sequence of events. I am convinced it symbolizes the President’s abiding love and concern for this province of Bulacan—a love and concern which he manifested many times in many ways, as has been recounted by the speakers before me and which was perhaps surpassed only by his deep feeling for his own home province.

Yet, so uniform and universal was President Magsaysay’s concern for the welfare of the masses of this country, so unsparing was he in his efforts to help all the people that there is no longer any province in the Philippines that can exclusively claim him as its own. I even doubt that we Filipinos can now say he belongs only to us. The tributes that have been paid to him by the nations of the free world and the sense of bereavement they have felt, are eloquent testimony that his life and his works have helped and af­fected them no less than they have dictated the course of our history. Truly he belongs now to all who love freedom; to all who uphold human dignity; to all who abhor total­itarianism and the oppression of the human spirit.

The torrential outpouring of an entire nation’s love and respect which we witnessed in President Magsaysay’s burial last week must still be fresh in the minds of all of us. To understand why he was so revered in death, we need only to recall what he accomplished in life. President Magsaysay brought to the government a quality which informed and in­spired its every act and policy. This quality was a sincere and passionate desire to lift the masses to the uplands of social, economic, and political dignity. It was an obsession to provide them with every opportunity to help themselves.

This quality was reflected in every aspect and activity of government. It was reflected in the budget, which dis­bursed the largest sums for those operations, such as educa­tion, health, and peace and order in the countryside, which touched most intimately the lives of the masses. It was reflected in the day-to-day business of government, which saw every office and official extend priority consideration to the needs and problems of the small man. For he who had less in life, President Magsaysay believed, must have more in law, more in government. It was reflected in every utterance, every act, every decision of the President himself, the highest magistrate in the government. All of us know President Magsaysay was prodigal in giving of his time, talents, and energies in the servie of the common people.

To say that President Magsaysay’s program for the masses indicated merely a paternal attitude towards his people or an emotional approach to government would be to misread completely its role in history. The program he pursued and prosecuted with such vigor was based on fundamental principles of government and practical political realities. This is hardly surprising, for Presidential Magsaysay was a fun­damentalist who believe in first things first and who was a hard-headed political realist. He knew the nation could not move forward as long as the majority of the people were mired in the stagnation of economic misery and want. He knew that the political integrity of the Republic could not be preserved of social unrest and dissatisfaction, for it would then become easy prey to alien-inspired subversion and infiltration. He knew that economic devel­opment depended on the creation of a strong and sizeable middle class that would provide a market for the products of the factories and industrial plants. He knew political stability required the political emancipation and awaken­ing of the masses.

No one can dispute the soundness of these principles in which President Magsaysay anchored his program of gov­ernment. I wish therefore to repeat what I had occasion to stay in Nueva Ecija yesterday—that I will carry on faith­fully and forcefully his program and policies, emphasizing as he did the improvement of the living condition of the masses. I will do this not only because I consider my administration a continuation of his own but more so because I also believe in the soundness, wisdom, efficacy of his program.

I realize that you, the people of Bulacan, earnestly desire that some monument or memorial be built to perpetuate the memory of our beloved President Magsaysay. So does the rest of the Filipino people; so do I. We can build such a monument—one that will outlast marble and granite and will endure to the end of time. The monument we can build to his memory is a Philippines strong, stable, and prosperous, from which the specter of want and hunger has been banished and in which opportunity has replaced stag­nation, hope, and despair. We shall build this monument— you and I—on the foundation he has laid—the social, eco­nomic, political, and spiritual advancement of the masses of our people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library