Speech of Honorable Carlos P. Garcia Senator of the Philippines

[Released on January 31, 1953]

PREGUNTAS DEL SEN. GARCÍA

Senator GARCÍA. I just wish to know if there is any concrete definition of “C” sugar. Is there any definite law, regulation, or order defining the so-called “C” sugar?

Senator TAÑADA. Yes, there is. In section 1 of Act No. 4166, “C” sugar is defined as follows:

“(4) ‘C Sugar’ shall consist only of such centrifugal sugar as may be manufactured in the Philippine Islands to be held as an emergency reserve to make up any deficiency in ‘A Sugar’ or ‘B Sugar’ or for marketing elsewhere than in Continental United States or the Philippine Islands.”

That is the law defining “C Sugar.”

Senator GARCÍA. So, it is that sugar which is reserved to meet an emergency?

Senator TAÑADA. Yes, precisely held in reserve to fill whatever shortage we may have to comply with our commitments to the United States and satisfy our local consumption.

Senator GARCÍA. Should we not understand it to be sugar held in reserve to cover any deficiency of individual sugar quotas, as has been interpreted?

Senator TAÑADA. That has always been the interpretation, but, lately, because of a certain application to export 30,000 tons of sugar to Japan, Sugar Orders Nos. 3 and 4 were promulgated. This was done in order to create, if possible, “C” sugar that could be exported to Japan. I really cannot understand this interest in creating “C” sugar for that purpose when we cannot even fill up our quota in the United States.

Senator GARCÍA. The gentleman says that the definition of sugar has been determined by law, and is embodied in Act No. 4166. Can I consequently ask that an order of any agency of the Government be held to be valid though in contravention of the express provision of that law?

Senator TAÑADA. Executive orders Nos. 3 and 4, or Sugar Orders Nos. 3 and 4, are, in my humble opinion, unconstitutional because an executive or administrative order cannot classify sugar when the law does not permit the entity promulgating that order to classify sugar.

Senator GARCÍA. NOW, Act No. 4166 implies that this sugar reserve, or what is now known as the “C” sugar, is held or owned by individual sugarmen, businessmen or millers and that, in other words, it cannot be considered as reserve sugar to fill any shortage in our national production.

Senator TAÑADA. I did not get the last part.

Senator GARCÍA. Act 4166 that defines “C” sugar refers to sugar which is owned by private individuals, dealers, businessmen and what not.

Senator TAÑADA. Yes.

Senator GARCÍA. And not reserved by the Government to answer for any shortage in our national quota. Does not the gentleman believe that this being “C” sugar, under Act 4166, which refers to “C” sugar possessed by individuals, the emergency mentioned here is in relation to private sugar and not to a shortage of our national quota in the American market?

Senator TAÑADA. That could be the interpretation, but my opinion is that this is reserved for cases of shortage either in our American, or domestic quotas.

Senator GARCÍA. Now, let us suppose that a certain central is allotted 200,000 tons, and that this particular central was able to fill its quota and had a surplus of, let us say, 50,000 tons. Within the purview of Act 4166 defining “C” sugar, would not the 50,000-ton surplus of this central be marketable to countries other than the United States?

Senator TAÑADA. That is our interpretation of the law, that this individual excess cannot be exported to countries other than the United States as long as our American and domestic quotas are not yet filled.

Senator GARCÍA. Is that the spirit of Act 4166?

Senator TAÑADA. That is clearly apparent in Act 4166.

Senator GARCÍA. I thank you. I just want to have a clear definition of this “C” sugar.

Source: Legislative Library, House of Representatives

Garcia, C. P. (1952). Preguntas del Sen. Garcia. Congressional record : senate , 3(4) , 32-34.