Radio address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the occasion of the 26th anniversary of the first elections held under the Philippine Constitution on September 17, 1935

[Delivered on October 2, 1961]

MY COUNTRYMEN,

TWENTY-SIX years ago today, the first national elections under the Philippine Constitution were held. In that election, Manuel L. Quezon and Sergio Osmeña were voted President and Vice-President respectively of the Philippine Commonwealth, which was still on November 15 of that year, 1935.

President Quezon and Vice-President Osmeña had been outstanding leaders of our country in the fight for independence. Because of their unswerving devotion to the cause of freedom and the Filipino people, the country swept them into the two premiere positions within its .gift by almost unanimous vote.

This is one significant aspect of that first election under our constitution—that men of unswerving loyalty to the cause of freedom and Filipino nationalism were picked to man the helm of our ship of state during the critical times ahead.

Another significant aspect of that first election under the constitution was that it was one of the of our people’s will through the ballot.

Ours is a democratic country committed to the popular will as the supreme authority in the choice of public officials. Periodic elections are the gauge of this freedom we enjoy to pick public officials of our own choice.

There have been instances, however, after our independence, when this freedom of suffrage, this right to vote, was endangered by unscrupulous men who wanted to perpetuate themselves in power. They made a mockery of free elections. They padded election returns. They made the trees, the birds, the bees, the animals; and even the dead vote. Not content with this they terrorized our people to make them vote against their will. They did not stop at maiming and killing in their brazen attempt to perpetuate themselves in power.

Those tragic times are happily over. President Magsaysay with me as his vice-president put an end to that infamous regime. The Nacionalista Party, true to its noble tradition of faithful service to our country, restored to our people their birthright of freedom. Since the Nacionalista Party re-assumed power, free elections became again the way of life of the Filipino people.

This is another election year. I have pledged time and again that elections under my administration shall be clean, honest, and free. Let this be an occasion for me to renew my pledge that I will not tolerate any attempt at subverting the people’s will. My thirty-six years of public service in which I have won all my political battles will not be stained at this stage of my life.

I ask you my countrymen to go to the polls and vote. Vote for the candidate of your choice. Vote for the man you think will lead our country ably and well. Do not allow yourselves to be blinded by passion and prejudice. Do not allow yourselves to be made the tools of demagogues. Vote and vote freely. I will safeguard your freedom. The sanctity of your ballot shall be untrammelled. Let us live together in freedom and prosperity as true and tested Filipinos. God be with us all.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Radio address of President Garcia on the occasion of the 26th anniversary of the first elections held under the Philippine Constitution on September 17, 1935. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(40) , 7132-7133.