Radio Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Appealing for support of the Austerity Program

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

DURING the past few days you have been reading and hearing about the different austerity measures adopted by the Government to conserve our international dollar reserves. While business understands the reasons and the implications of these measures—the common man, the housewife, the employee, the laborer, the farmer, and the masses of our people do not seem to understand them fully. In order to shed more light on this matter, I have decided to have a heart-to-heart talk to all our people on these austerity measures—what they are, why they have been adopted, and how long we shall have to observe them.

First, I would like to tell you what international reserves are and what they are intended for. Our international reserves consist of dollars and partly in gold bullion deposited in American banks, under the custody and management of the Central Bank, primarily intended to back up payments needed in our foreign trade and thus maintain the stability of the peso. Thus, when we export to the United States or to other countries, we increase our dollar or international reserves. Conversely, when we import from foreign countries, we reduce our reserves. Thus, when when import more than we export, our reserves diminish and the peso is weakened. But when we sell to foreign countries more than we buy, we increase our reserve and strengthen the peso in the world monetary market.

What happened for sometime during the last few years was that we bought from the outside more than we sold. There was, therefore, a gradual decline of our international dollar reserves. For instance, in 1954 our imports totalled ₱964.4 million and our exports amounted only to ₱810.3 million. In 1955 our imports amounted to ₱1095.2 million and our exports to ₱801.3 million. In 1956 our imports amounted to ₱1012.9 million and our exports to ₱902.2 million. This year, from January to October, our imports totalled ₱1037.0 million and our exports ₱729.2 million. From these figures it is obvious that the balance of trade has been unfavorable to us and, as a result, our international reserves went down to a point that allows no further drain.

Why did we have to buy more than we sell? Primarily because of our rapid industrialization. Since 1953 up to the present there have been established 784 new industries; such as, mining, textile, fertilizer, auto assembly plants, paper, power, and steel. To establish and keep going these industries, we need dollars to buy machines, equipment, spare parts, and the raw materials not produced here. All these are tremendous demands on our international reserves far more than we can accumulate in dollars from exports mainly of copra, oil, sugar, hemp, lumber, and minerals. The natural net result is what we have now—a low level of dollar reserves which threatens the stability of the peso.

This is the reason for the Government’s action in adopting austerity measures designed to regulate our imports and limit them only to essentials so as not to stop the operation of the new industries we have established—784 of them. Thus, we ask you to give up temporarily some of your personal needs, and sacrifice on non-essentials. This is all we ask.

We are also asking our people to cooperate in the effort to curb the “salting away” of dollars abroad. This is referred to as the “flight of dollars” which weakens our reserves, because these dollars are kept where they should not be. This is done by actually exporting more than the amount indicated in invoices. This practice is quite common in the exportation of copra, logs, and other items. Another malpractice which drains our dollar reserves in this manner is the underpricing of our exports and over-pricing our imports. We must stop these improper trade practices, and we appeal to the businessmen to cooperate with us in this matter if only for the selfish reason that an excessive depletion of the dollar reserves would lead to the collapsed of the peso and our foreign trade, and eventually of business itself. The wage earners, the laborers, the farmers, the housewives, and the poor will suffer immensely while the rich will grow richer and bask in the glory of their affluence and fortune. The social imbalance generated thereby may not allow the few rich to enjoy what they have, for long. A wise adage says, “an ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure.” The present measures taken by the Government are such a prevention. We ask you to understand and support these measures.

It must be evident to you that we cannot continue to drain our reserves for non-essential consumption goods which we do not now produce. It is understandable that this demand for non-essential consumer goods is based on the natural aspiration of people to live in the best manner possible and in comfort and luxury. However, I must stress the point that the demand for producer goods required for a healthy and growing economy must be provided for since its satisfaction would insure the success of a well-pased and well-regulated industrialization program. To satisfy this demand we now find that we must sacrifice at least temporarily the importation of luxuries and nonessential consumer and producer goods in favor of the essential commodities. The idea is to protect our industrialization program from any possible impairment or disruption. This will require voluntary austerity on the part of our people. In this case austerity only means the foregoing of the importation of non-essentials.

We, as a people, have demonstrated in the past how we could undergo great sacrifices not only in the defense of freedom but in our survival as a nation. I am sure that now, faced by lesser trials, we should be able to measure up to the transient exigencies of the occasion and prove once more our mettle as a people. I believe, therefore, that the essential element of success of the austerity program lies with the people themselves and their voluntary and wholehearted cooperation in the interest of the common weal.

As I have pointed out, the price of continued economic development towards eventual stability has to be paid for by the early adoption of measures of self-denial and discipline. I direct my appeal to you, my fellow-countrymen, to cooperate fully and unselfishly in this course of action which your Government has taken.

Frugality and greater saving on a national scale are what we ask since these appear to be the only reasonable way to keep a healthy balance between our demand for the limted supply of commodities and the money available to the country. This, we shall be able to consolidate and solidify the economic gains already achieved and resume our economic offensive without retrogressing in our program of development and expansion.

To serve as fundamental bases and provide the necessary guidance in self-discipline on the part of the Government, we have decided to adopt, and only after thorough deliberation, the following policies.

As custodian of our currency reserves and charged with the responsibility of maintaining monetary stability, the Central Bank has taken steps to halt further strain on our deteriorating international trade and financial position. I have called the Cabinet to a special session to consider this particular question and we have been assisted by the Monetary Board in our discussions. We must face the situation and confront the stark reality that, if we do not now adopt prompt and drastic measures directed at curtailing excessive demands for non-essential imports, we shall lose the gains we have to date made in our efforts at economic progress. The essence of these measures is to reduce the pressures on our international reserves. We must proceed on our determined march to progress, but this can be achieved only within the framework of economic stability. The price we have to pay is austerity both in our national and in our private lives.

(1) We are therefore committed to be more vigilant now, especially on the part of the different agencies concerned, in order that we may prevent undeclared overshipments of exports, underpricing of exports, and overpricing of imports.

(2) We are, within reasonable bounds, tightening the rules and regulations governing the barter trade, in a desire to plug our dollar leakages.

(3) We are directing the NAMARCO to limit its imports only to essential commodities and to stabilize prices for the common good.

(4) We are trying to reduce to a minimum the importation of rice which we believe should be produced locally in sufficient quatities to meet our needs.

(5) We shall undertake a reform of our domestic transportation system in order to save our dollars on gasoline.

(6) We are embarking on a revision of the tax structure so that the tax burden would be spared in a more equitable manner. The groups who have the capacity to pay will now have to shoulder a large share of the tax burden, thereby relieving some of the load from our low-income groups.

(7) Last but not least, we shall concentrate utmost efforts to intensify the production of food crops and achieve self-sufficiency in rice, corn, and other basic staples. This, as we have planned, is the responsibility of the Government.

On the part of the public, we sound an urgent call for the deferment of the satisfaction of less essential wants and desires. The over-riding principle shall be the observance of self-denial, the avoidance of conspicuous consumption, to the end that we may be able to overcome our present difficulties in the shortest time possible. While we cannot now be precise on how long these austerity measures shall be enforced, I can assure you, my countrymen, that these are temporary and that these shall be enforced only as long as necessary and not a day longer. This will be the subject of further talks and constant review of the situation with our business, industrial, and economic leaders.

In the past, our people have ably demonstrated that it is particularly in times of stress and adversity that the Filipinos have shown their finest hour. Our present foreign trade and financial position need not be a cause for undue alarm because after all the picture is not so dark when we consider that between the establishment of industries and production there is a lull which must be bridged by the courageous and prudent use of our dollar reserves. We are now in such a lull. After the lull, when these industries begin to produce, our exports will swell and our dollar reserves will regain a high level and strong position. When that time comes, austerity ends.

In the name, therefore, of national unity and for the sake of the well-being of our people, I appeal to all of you, my fellow countrymen, to support this program of austerity. With the aid of Divine Providence, we cannot fail.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s radio speech appealing for support of the Austerity Program, delivered at his Study Room, Saturday evening, December 14, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(24) , 8817-8820.