Second Austerity Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines

MY FRIENDS:

I AM happy to greet this mammoth multitude of the youth of the land including civic, business, and religious leaders. Your enthusiastic response to the country’s call to austerity fills me with the much needed inspiration and spiritual strength to carry on the difficult task of government.

As I look around me and see that on this historic spot are gathered the cream of our youth, I feel that I am fortunate in being able to address myself to the most potent representative group of what Rizal referred to as the “fair hope of the Fatherland.” On this momentus occasion I would like to appeal to all of you, and through you, to all our countrymen to rally behind the positive measures which I, with your cooperation, will undertake to stabilize our economy and lay the firm foundation for the real and lasting prosperity and happiness of our people. To achieve this, we shall together implement vigorously a positive program of action, hand in hand with the temporary austerity measures which have already been initiated.

I am pleased to learn that yesterday all schools, colleges, and universities throughout the country observed “Austerity Day” fittingly. I am particularly elated that the Department of Education has taken the initiative in circularizing all school superintendents, urging them to intensify the food production campaign in their respective jurisdictions. The circular directed that all vacant areas in school sites be planted to food crops or devoted to the raising of poultry and small animals. It added that school children devote more time to food production activities during their work education, practical arts, and vocational periods; and that these activities be carried on both in the school and in the home, whenever possible.

As these food production activities will be observed not only during “Austerity Day” but throughout the year, I believe that the step taken by the department can contribute concretely and substantially to the government’s austerity program. The Department of Education deserves credit for leading the way in the positive implementation of the government’s policy about austerity.

My friends, the austerity program has two phases: the first is the tightening of the belt, and the second is the flexing of the muscles in the supreme effort to achieve maximum production. But the whole program boils down to a way of life for all of us—a life of frugality, self-discipline, and industry.

When I launched this program last December 14, I explained to our people the causes which have contributed to our low dollar reserves, the reasons for adopting some temporary austerity measures to help tide us over to better times, and the need for practicing the virtues of self-denial, particularly in curbing our appetites in the consumption of non-essential and luxury commodities.

While in my first appeal to the country I dwelt mostly on the negative aspects of austerity, exhorting our people not to do this or that thing, this afternoon I shall stress the positive side of our determined efforts to normalize our economy and give it flesh an*i blood.

There is only one way to do this, and it is to produce more of our primary needs. On this point I wish to repeat what I said in my inaugural address:

“We must produce here, by and for ourselves, enough to provide for the fundamental needs of life—food, shelter, and clothing. The country now has the natural resources, the means, and the modern know-how to do it. We only lack the will to do it. Let us summon then from the spiritual reservoir of the nation the collective will and determination to make our country self-sufficient in foodstuffs, shelter, and clothing. Our freedom must be nourished from the wealth of our own soil and by the labor of our own manhood. This is the key policy of this administration in the field of economics. To this I give my heart and hand.”

But how can we produce more?

We are a country endowed by a Benevolent Providence with a land lush with fertile soil and rich with forest products and mineral resources. Our lakes, rivers, and seas are fabulously full of fishes. And yet it seems paradoxical if not ironical that in the midst of such overflowing abundance, we suffer scarcity even in cur essential needs like rice and fish, importing these items at the expense of our already low dollar reserves.

After a close study of this perennial problem of under-productivity which has afflicted our people since time un-remembered, I believe that we can solve it once and for all if through a united national will, we decide here and now to intensify and coordinate scientific and industrial research, harnessing the miracles of modern science to assist in producing food, clothing, shelter, and other essential necessities of civilized life so that these can be produced more cheaply and abundantly and sold at prices within the reach of the masses of our people. The target of such research program will be to utilize local raw materials to bring the quality of local products up to standard, to discover improved processes and more efficient methods of production, and to study the utilization of by-products and what now is erroneously called waste of production.

I believe that through this scientific approach we shall be able to increase production by utilizing the already existing production facilities, by expanding these facilities, or by a combination of these two methods.

Let us take as an example rice, our staple food. I announced recently, a short and long range program for self-sufficiency in this cereal. I outlined what the government would do to increase yield; such as, providing small farmers with free fertilizers and insecticides, making available certified selected seeds, intensifying the use of improved rice planting methods, and continuing the construction of more irrigation systems and feeder roads in the barrios.

To accomplish this program with optimum results, we shall have to seek the aid of science and research which are the handmaidens of progress. For instance, we should have easy means of determining which fertilizer is best suited to a certain type of soil, which insecticide is most effective for a particular plant pests, or what certified seeds are best adapted to grow in a given region.

These are only some of the practical aspects of scientific research which can be brought to bear on the effective production of rice. All rice experts agree that with the application of such scientific aids like fertilizers, insecticides, certified selected seeds and modern planting, plus the benefits of irrigation systems, our farmers will be able to quadruple their yield per hectare from 27 cavans, the present average yield per hectare, to 100 cavans of palay. This is not a mere wishful mathematical computation but actual production figures obtained in pilot and controlled farms and current in foreign countries.

It is not, therefore, idle talk to state that with the help of science we shall become not only self-sufficient in, but export-producer of rice. And when this has been achieved, our rice producers will be grateful that, having automatically reduced their cost of production, they can sell their palay much cheaper to the consumer and at the same time at a greater profit for themselves. To my mind, this is the best form of incentive which can be given to rice farmers.

Here are some pertinent facts and figures: We now produce 74,400,000 cavans of rice annually. We need 76,400,000 cavans for total consumption. We import the deficit at an average of 2,000,000 cavans a year. If we can double the present average yield of 27 cavans per hectare, we shall not only attain self-sufficiency in rice but we shall also be able to export some 60,000,000 cavans.

The case of rice can be duplicated in other principal products of our country. As we accelerate our scientific skill in producing or manufacturing our products, we correspondingly increase the bulk of production and decrease its cost, and consequently lower its selling price. And what is even more important, we will export more than we import and thus build up our international reserves.

But aside from increasing production, scientific research is most important in improving, standardizing, and controlling the quality of the finished products while at the same time utilizing the by-products for more gainful ends. A few of our products which will immeasurably benefit from the application of scientific research are rice, fish, sugar, coconut, hemp, ramie and other fibers, lumber, salt, and cottage industry products.

I wish to state in this connection that I have received information from the United States that there is a big demand for our cottage industry products; such as, hats, slippers, embroideries, handbags, tablecloth, and other items. However, owing to inefficient and sub-standard production, we cannot meet the demands, thereby losing thousands of dollars. To remedy the situation, I recently named a committee which will study the establishment in Manila of a national trading center to serve as a clearing house of our cottage industry products. This center will supervise the manufacture, standardization, and handling of the wholesale marketing of these products in the United States, Japan, and other countries.

My friends, you know very well that, to hasten the increase of production, we must give proper incentives to producers. For this reason, I have created a presidential committee which is studying and will recommend ways of giving incentives to producers, especially those whose products are for export. The committee is in the process of holding public hearings to get a cross-section of the views of the various economic segments of the country. When these recommendations are processed, I shall submit those which merit implementation to our Congress for the necessary legislation.

I am glad to tell you that our government already has the nucleus of agencies undertaking scientific research which greatly increase the production of our farms and factories. Such agencies are the National Science Board, the Institute of Science and Technology, the National Research Council, and the Philippine Nuclear Energy Commission which is now in the process of organization. Researches are also being done in the Bureau of Plant Industry and in the Bureau of Animal Industry.

However, these research agencies of the government have not yet produced the expected results. It is believed that this failure is due, to a large degree, to defective laws creating these offices and to lack of effective coordination and direction. We must therefore have a new and more aggressive leadership in scientific research and harness the established industries like sugar, coconut, mining, hemp, and fiber to put up and maintain their respective scientific research department with the assistance and encouragement of the government.

It is clear that we have been generously endowed by Nature with natural resources to achieve self-sufficiency in the production of our primary economic needs. We have the man power to till the farms and work in the factories. Our youth are fast acquiring the modern technology and know-how to man our agro-industrial enterprises. What we need is a fixed and determined policy of the government to weld together all these elements of production into a coordinated whole, working like a well-oiled machine. What we need is to revitalize scientific and industrial research and apply the results to production. But above all, we need the unflinching will of our people to produce more of our essential needs and cast away the colonial mentality of preferring foreign products to ours which may be similar in quality. Let us consume what we produce and be proud of it. Let us make this, part of our way of life. True nationalism begins with economic nationalism. However, we cannot live in a vacuum of isolationism in our international life. We can fill what other people lack with what we have in abundance and get from them what we lack by mutually beneficial trade.

As a step forward in achieving more production through the aid of scientific and industrial research, I shall recommend to Congress the integration of all government agencies undertaking scientific and industrial research and induce the industries to join with the government in a collective scientific effort for maximum production. I shall also recommend to Congress revision of laws which do not promote the achievement of this end.

To realize the primary objectives of this new office as envisioned, research projects should be thoroughly screened to insure wise and economical investment. No research funds shall be expended unless a research proposal and approval is submitted, to include among other things research plans up to and including the pilot plant stage. I appeal to all our industrialists to back up this program of integrated research with not only their moral but financial support. With the pooling together of all government and private scientific and research agencies, we shall be in a position to offer positive scientific assistance to industry. Several industries engaged in one kind of research may agree to pool their efforts with the assistance of government facilities to achieve a common result which will benefit themselves and the entire country. Let us harness the might and light of science to enhance our economy and happiness.

My friends, those are some of the positive measures which the government will push through to increase our country’s production of its principal requirements. We are fortunate that with the aid of modern scientific discoveries we shall be able to step up our progress in production in a shorter time than it would have taken us years ago.

Incidentally, I would like to state that I have noted many cases of unreasonable increase in the prices of prime commodities. People are prone to attribute this abnormal condition to austerity. But why should this blame be laid at the door of austerity program?

The increase in prices is a universal trend due to several causes from which we cannot escape. Although there may be justification in increased prices for some commodities, I earnestly appeal to the patriotism of our merchants, nationals and aliens alike, to refrain from making excessive profits at the expense of the suffering of our people. Let us not allow this to happen. I will take necessary measures drastic measures if need be, to protect our people from the concupiscence and greed of the heartless.

As I have already explained, austerity also means moderation, temperance, and thriftiness. It is, therefore, the Christian way of life and, as such, it is a life of faith and hope and love. Let us forever remember that the glory of the Resurrection was attained through the Sacrifice at Calvary. Let us always keep in mind that the Promised Land was reached after crossing the Sahara of trials, the Red Sea of hardship, and the Jordan of adversities. I know that the Filipino youth in many episodes of our history—like during the 100-year revolt of Dagohoy, the Revolution of 1896, the fight for freedom at the end of the last century, and the 40-year crusade for our independence that was heroically demonstrated on the battlefields of Bataan, Corregidor, Leyte, Lingayen, and a hundred other places, and culminating gloriously on July 4, 1946— have proved themselves capable of any sacrifice for the sake of country, freedom, and justice.

This time our youth are once again tested. Their national discipline is challenged. Their patriotism is once again placed under trial, this time not on the fields of battle but on the fields of production. I have full faith in our youth that they will emerge triumphant out of all these tests and trials. I have full confidence that they will rise equal to the challenge. Verily has Rizal said that our youth are the “fair hope of the Fatherland.”

I reiterate my appeal to the youth of our country not to dissipate their time in frivolities and wasteful occupations but to dedicate their golden hours in fruitfully productive pursuits. I ask our industrialists to go all out for scientific and industrial research and cooperate with the government’s research program. I exhort our farm and factory hands to intensify the tempo of production. I urge everyone to produce and make production a way of life.

Young men and women, at this trying time of our economic growth let our slogan be: HE SERVES HIS COUNTRY BEST WHO PRODUCES MOST.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). President Garcia’s second austerity speech delivered at the Independence Grandstand, Saturday afternoon, January 18, 1958. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(2) , 308-314.