PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE 50TH ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION AT SAN LUIS GYMNASIUM, BAGUIO CITY, THURSDAY, MAY 26 1957

MY FRIENDS:

DURING the last decade, developments in medicine have brought about revolutionary changes. They have affected the lives of individuals beneficently and have enhanced the progress and security of nations. Today, peoples all over the world feel safer and more secure from the ravages of disease; they have more confidence and hope of becoming well if attacked.

Cholera, smallpox, and the plague, which were traditional killers, are no longer the enemies of man—at least not in our country. Other mass diseases which used to exact heavy tolls in human lives are being satisfactorily controlled. We can now prevent or minimize the debilitating or deforming complications or after-effects of many diseases. We have the new drugs, properly called “wonder” drugs, and the skilled techniques that can bring relief or recovery from some diseases hitherto regarded incurable. A newborn baby has much greater chances to live through adult or old age. Life expectancy today is up to 70 years in some of the more advanced countries.

These developments are encouraging and heartening, assuring us that we are steadily winning the struggle for longer and happier lives for all mankind. But satisfaction with what has been achieved should not obscure what remains to be done. We have to keep our gains; this is imperative. But we have to continue building our defenses against the ever-present threat of disease and disability, not only to safeguard ourselves as individuals but also to promote the progress and prosperity of our country.

Immediately after liberation, when the late President Manuel A. Roxas assumed the presidency, he stated that public health in the Philippines had been set back twenty years. Today, thirteen years after that statement, we have fully recovered what we had lost and are now abreast with the latest developments and trends. However, in making a realistic assessment for the purpose of solidifying our defenses in health, it will do us well to find out where bur strength lies and where we are still weak.

Do we have enough physicians to serve the medical and health needs of our people? Are they adequately prepared and trained for the exacting demands of the profession? Relating the medical and health problems that we face to our economic resources, what attitude should we take towards the number and quality of the doctors that we turn out from our medical schools?

I feel we should rapidly take measures to produce doctors in the needed number and of the highest quality. Both from the short and the long term goal, quality should not be sacrificed for quantity. While numbers are needed, it is of the utmost importance to improve quality and to adapt professional training to the new responsibilities which physicians have to shoulder in the modern world. It would interest you to know that the Administration has proved its concern to strengthen the teaching of the basic medical sciences in the private medical schools by providing fellowships abroad to their faculties under NEC/ICA training grants. Under this grant, the deans of our medical schools were sent to observe conditions in medical schools and trends in medical education in the United States, and to confer with medical faculties abroad to enable them to acquire broader perspectives that would lead to the raising of standards in our own medical education. Fellowships have also been made available for studies in the medical and other peaceful uses of atomic energy.

Again let us ask—do we have a broad base to support the national health structure? Are the parts that make the base cohesive?

The principal elements that make up the national health are the public health services, the private medical practitioners, and the citizens in the community. Forming a tripod, they hold up the health of the nation. Any weakness in one leg will tilt the nation’s health. There should at all times be harmonious and cooperative working relations among these elements.

You are aware that we have been expanding public health services to meet pressing needs. This is a responsibility of Government. This responsibility it discharges by providing adequate health measures and services.

You all know that since the administration of President Magsaysay took over, the appropriations awarded yearly for our health services have been growing bigger and bigger. This has been inspired by a conscious policy to provide the means for the continuous improvement of the health and physical well-being of our citizenry. Our greatest wealth is, after all, our people, and we must therefore guard their well-being with all the means at our command. I pledge to you that as long as I am President there will be no diminution in the appropriations earmarked for the health of our people, and that on the contrary we shall keep increasing those appropriations at every opportunity consistent with our resources.

Of course, in an environment that recognizes and encourages private enterprise, we uphold the inherent right of every individual to have the physician of his own choice, and hold inviolate the trust and confidence of a patient in his own doctor. Because of the high regard which we give to this relationship, we are naturally averse to regimented, state-controlled, or socialized medicine. In this kind of atmosphere, private medical practice should flourished. We shall continue to respect this concept, but without at any time sacrificing or jeopardizing the citizen’s right to be provided with the basic health necessities by his government.

It is extremely important for private medical practitioners to maintain their position with guarded care. Ill-health, sickness, and injury cannot be regarded as commodities that can be placed on an auction block, irrespective of the patient’s ability to pay, it is incumbent upon the private medical practitioners to give the best and fullest medical attention and care in every single case.

I am happy to know that the medical association has undertaken a medical indigency project with the view to extending medical care, including the distribution of free medicines, to the truly indigent. This project speaks highly of the sense of responsibility and lofty motives of the members of the association.

This brings me to a consideration of the third leg that holds up and supports national health—the citizens in the community. The increasing awareness and interest of the people in their own individual health and the health of their communities stem from the realization that not only their lives, but the happiness and enjoyment of their freedoms, can depend on their remaining in a state of good health. The boons which medical science have given to them are too precious to be lost through indifference or neglect. Thus they are now ready and willing to assume the responsibilities and the obligations which the situation imposes upon them. More and more they are accepting that health matters not only are “of” and “for” them, but “by” them as well.

If our health defense is to remain strong, it should rest securely on the cohesiveness of these three complementary factors. It is imperative that the cohesion is maintained at all times, and that any difference of conflict should be resolved quickly and satisfactorily,

The extent to which medical science can advance appears to have no limit. The frontiers of knowledge have extended considerably since Galen founded your science and art. These frontiers have pushed to the discovery of wonder drugs and the development of highly skilled medical techniques, up to the splitting of the atom. We are now on the threshold of a millennium chat offers two—just two inexonerable alternative to mankind: life and happiness on the one hand; destructive and death on the other. The potentialities for the peaceful uses or annihilative action of the atom are becoming very clearly known. Man has it in his hands to choose one course or the other. We ask ourselves: which way?

Historian Arnold Toynbee has written: “The twentieth century will probably be remembered not as the one in which we had two world wars, or even as the one in which the hydrogen bomb was invented, but the one in which the idea that it was common sense for the nations of the world to use the new inventions to help raise the standard of health and living throughout the world was first accepted as a matter of course”. It is our fervent hope this acceptance will continue to pervade the future, and that we shall take the high road to unbelievable progress and well-being made accessible to all mankind by man’s resourcefulness and genius.

In closing, I should like to extend my thanks for the understanding, cooperation, and support of the medical societies and individual practitioners relative to the Administration’s program in public health. I should like to take this occasion also to extend the equal appreciation and thanks of the Administration and mine personally for the international assistance which we have received in the medical and public health fields both from government and private sources.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library