PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON RIZAL’S 96TH BIRTHDAY ANNIVERSARY DELIVERED AT THE INDEPENDENCE GRANDSTAND, WEDNESDAY MORNING, JUNE 19, 1957

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

WE are once more gathered on this hallowed ground to commemorate the ninety-sixth birthday anniversary of our national hero and greatest patriot, Dr. Jose Rizal y Mercado. In every public square throughout our Motherland and in the heart of every countryman, this fateful day is marked by renewed pledges of devotion to the ideas and ideals for which he died. Nothing we can say or do today can ever alter Rizal’s massive historic stature. Instead, therefore, of indulging in the always prideful task of enumerating his many well-known virtues and varied achievements, I should like to advocate on this, his memorable natal day, the birth of a new and constructive approach to Rizal.

Rizal does not belong only to our race. He belongs to humanity. I am confident that a greater and deeper understanding of his life and work will free him at last from the perennial controversies to which we have unwittingly subjected his memory, and establish him in his final exalted place, not only in our history but also in the history of all mankind.

Without wishing it, I am sure, we have made our national hero a controversial figure. We have done this by raising issues around him which should never have been made issues. Although our Rizal was not of common clay, possessed as he was of indomitable physical and moral courage, may it not be the part of love and reverence on our part to spare his memory as much as possible from the angry storms of factional strife?

I do not for a moment mean by this statement that the scientific research to which historical figures are forever legitimately subjected and the possible differences of find­ings and conclusions as a consequence should cease in the case of Rizal. By all means, we should continue by arduous study to increase our intimacy with the greatest son of our race. Yet, out of loyalty to our hero, should we not spare him from those controveries that, because of their very nature, can never be conclusive—controversies which, if kept up with factional spirit and bitterness, may eventually do more harm than good to his memory?

I believe that, as a people, we have now reached such a degree of emotional and social maturity that we can lead others to a new understanding of Rizal, an understanding so far and judicious that Spain, all Asia, and perhaps all America will finally accept it. If I may assume that this is possible and advisable—if a better approach, to Rizal than the path we have so far followed exists—then it remains for us to discover what and where that path may be. To find that path we should, I believe, adjust our attitude to Rizal in at least three ways.

One of these Ways is to adopt a more human and rational approach to our hero. To my mind, one of the richest sources of material for controversy about Rizal is the attitude of some of us of literally and fully believing everything that Rizal wrote, including those he put in the mouths of his fictional characters. It is, of course, part of our reverence for Rizal that we should believe in him and in his teachings, taking them as our national gospel. But even Rizal himself, during his lifetime, protested against the tendency, which he observed even then, of regarding as part of his own philosophy and belief, those statements and indictment uttered by the various characters in his novels. If the hero himself did not consider it fair to identify his personal attitude with those of his characters, then we can do no less than be discriminating as he wished.

On the opposite side, there are those who, for one reason or another, disbelieve in what he said or wrote. They would have the hero go back on his own teachings and preachings, especially those that created a profound stirring among our people.

Neither attitude, I believe, is correct. Instead of defying Rizal, let us humanize him. He was indeed made of heroic stuff, yet Rizal was after all, a human being. As a human being, he was posesssed of emotions and prejudices—he was fallible. But neither was he a man of shallow and changeable convictions. Possessed of a well nigh universal mind, perhaps the greatest intellect our race has so far produced, Rizal’s every belief was part of a thoroughly rationalized system of personal philosophy. If we recognize him in this light, we shall soon crystallize a more tolerant attitude that will eliminate the unnecessary conflicts of opinion and emotion over the thoughts and the deeds of our national hero.

Another part of a new, constructive approach to Rizal is, I believe, the understanding of his thoughts and ideas in their true historical contexts. He lived, worked, and wrote during the last decades of the nineteenth century; he sacri­ficed his life for his ideas and ideals sixty-one years ago this coming December. Since then, there have been important and even radical changes in our country and in the rest of the world.

The standards of life and morality three score years ago and today are as far apart as the distances between countries before the invention of the airplane. Then, western imperialism was strongly entrenched. Spain, Great Britain, the Netherlands, and France, to mention only the leading colonizers, held in subjection great parts of Asia, the Middle East, and Africa. Indeed, as late as 1898, the United States also suffered from a brief but violent attack of imperialism and wrested the Philippines and other subject countries away from Spain. Among western nations, indeed, the colonization of backward countries was regarded as one of the most enlightened functions of civilization, today imperialism, whether western or communist, is condemned in most of the civilized world.

Up to recent years, colonies could become independent nations only by defeating the mother country in a revolution, as the thirteen American colonies did when they successfully fought a Civil War against Great Britain. In recent years, however, led by America and with the Philippines as the first beneficiary colonizing countries have been gradually liberating their colonies, in many cases assisting them to establish independent governments. Since the nineteenth century, international morality in most parts of the world has certainly changed for the better.

Part of the justification of nineteenth-century imperialism, at least in the minds of the West, was the backwardness, social as well as economic, of the colonies. From the viewpoint of the West, this was also true of the Philippines, and we should be less than candid if we did not admit it as a fact. Even. Rizal recognized that, in education, in science, in industry, and in government, the Filipinos had still a long way to travel. The improvement in international relations has of course been made possible by the vast improvements in the domestic affairs of nations, including economic, religious, and political. Higher national morality has led to higher international morality.

Knowledge of the historical contexts is essential in the fair and just appraisal of Rizal’s criticisms of the shortcomings of his times. To try to weigh them today in terms of contemporary standards of justice and morality is to be unfair and unjust not only to the targets of the patriot’s indignation but also to Rizal himself. It is part of our respect and love of our hero that we should try to learn his feelings and thoughts behind his words and, without being more severe nor more lenient than he meant to be, faithfully adhere to his purposes and intentions. If we bear all this in mind when we try to understand the words and deeds of Rizal, we shall come nearer to his torments, to his dreams, and to his aspirations—we shall truly commune with our hero.

A thrid component of a new and constructive approach to Rizal is the evaluation of his ideals and deeds in terms of their positive and significant consequences to the history of humanity.

It has become trite to say that Rizal possessed indomitable courage and pure patriotism. He had known from the very start that to undertake the task that he embraced was to take his life in his own hands. It is common knowledge that he could have saved himself had he wished, but to him retreat was unthinkable; he exposed himself willingly and knowlingly to arrest and punishment. He regarded his life as little enough price to pay for the recognition of the liberty and dignity of his people and nation.

Perhaps this was because, as a great intellect, Rizal had faith in the supremacy of right and reason. He was evidently confident that since his position was essentially right, justice should and would prevail. His abiding faith in justice and reason was also evident in his opposition to violence and war and his preference for peaceful social and political reforms. He was not a man of revolution but evolution; he was the scientist and intellectual rather than the warrior and conqueror. His way of thinking presaged such latter-day institutions as the League of Nations and the United Nations.

By his agitation against oppression, Rizal became the initiator of our libertarian movement. His novels and other writings awoke our people to their degradation. Rizal having won the battle for their minds, Bonifacio sucessfully organized them for direct action under the Katipunan. Although, as Rizal had feared, the revolution failed, it started chain reaction that finally led to our liberation and the establishment of our Republic.

Rizal’s dominant spirit continued indeed to shape our destiny under the new American dispensation. During the first years of her Philippine trusteeship when America was searching her soul as to what to do with the Philippines, it was Rizal’s greatness of soul and loftiness of spirit that guided the U. S. Congress to the adoption of a Philippine policy pointed to the goal of ultimate freedom and independence.

When the U. S. Congress was considering the Philippine Bill of 1902, we in the Philippines were still disorganized as a people. We had just gone through a series of bloody wars, first against the Spaniards and later against the Americans. Although General Aguinaldo had been captured by Colonel Funston and the back of the so-called Insurrection had been broken, there were still bloody sporadic guerrilla actions against Americans in our remoter provinces. True it is that the Federal party was already in existence, but its leaders seemed satisfied merely to cooperate with America. So it is that when the most important legislation known as the Philippine Bill of 1902 was being debated in Washington, not only were we without any representation, as we later had through our Resident Commissioners and our frequent missions to the United States, but our good will in America was at the lowest possible ebb.

During the discussion of the bill, its chief proponent in the House of Representatives, Congressman Henry Allen Cooper of Wisconsin, found himself constrained to lament:

“Every day we hear men declare that the people of the Philippines are ‘pirates,’ ‘barbarians,’ ‘savages,’ ‘incapable of true civilization.’ This has been said by a very prominent gentleman within the last two days. Newspapers of prominence have repeatedly endorsed this view.”

So strong and bitter was the opposition against the bill, an opposition which evidently consisted of giving the Filipinos a bad name and hanging them, that oh June 19, 1902, exactly 55 years ago today, Congressman Cooper was forced to use Rizal as his trump card. Thus the spirit of our hero came once more to the rescue of our country and its future.

After briefly narrating the sad but inspiring life of Rizal, Congressman Cooper recited before a hushed House the English translation of My Last Farewell. And when the prolonged applause that followed had subsided, the Congressman spoke thus:

“Pirates! Barbarians! Savages! Incapable of civilization! How many of the civilized, Caucasian slanderers of his race could ever be capable of thoughts like these which on that awful night, as he sat amidst silence unbroken save by the rustling of the black plumes of the death angel at his side, poured from the soul of the martyred Filipino? Searching the long and bloody roll of the world’s martyred dead, and where—on what soil, under what sky—did Tyranny ever claim a nobler victim?

“Sir, the future is not without hope for a people which . . . has furnished to the world a character so lofty and so pure as that of Jose Rizal ….

“It has been said that if American institutions had done nothing else than furnish to the world the character of George Washington, ‘that alone would entitle them to the respect of mankind.’ So, sir, I say to all those who denounce the Filipinos indiscriminately as barbarians and savages, without possibility of a civilized future, that this despised race proved itself entitled to their respect and to the respect of mankind when it furnished to the world the character of Jose Rizal.”

It can perhaps be said that the final shape and passage of the important legislation of 1902, which gave the Filipinos their first opportunity to exercise self-government and thus prove their fitness for freedom, were as much due to the Spirit of Rizal as to American statesmanship.

But if Rizal is our national hero and a Philippine-American inspiration, he is also a benefactor of all Asia and perhaps of all mankind. This broader fame can be given due recognition and emphasis if we who are Rizal’s own people can be more agreed and unified behind his ideas and ideals.

It is time to establish the fact—and we Filipinos should make the greatest effort to do so—that Rizal is entitled to be recognized by all the world as the father of Asian nationalism. An eminent historian of Yale University, Dr. Ralph A. Turner, has declared that the assertion of Filipino dignity and love of liberty which Rizal courageously voiced in the early 1890’s constituted the first cry of nationalism in all Asia. If this is so—and it is patently so—then the freedom that has come to Asia after Rizal, resulting in the emancipation of some half of dozen countries and over half a billion human beings, owes its origin to his labors and death. Rizal labored and died not only for his people but for all Asians!

Thus Rizal was a far greater man and a far greater hero than most of us have so far conceived him. Of all our honored patriots, he loved and served most our Motherland. But in the perspective of universal human welfare, his humanitarian services were infinitely more than merely national. It was, in the truest sense of the word, international. His Spirit helped to guide American policy away from the road of imperialism to that of altruism. And his struggle for human dignity and human emancipation was at once the beginning of the struggle of all Asia, and eventually of all subject races, for human dignity and freedom.

The new constructive approach to Rizal will therefore greatly enhance his immortal memory and improve the friendship and amity that bind us with Asia and the rest of the world. His contributions to human welfare will become more in the definitive and integrated record of mankind. As we take ever greater pride in him and his memory, we shall also earn wider respect for our race among the other races of the world.

By sharing our hero with Asia and perhaps with Spain and America, we shall help to give new massiveness to his enduring fame. If in the process we can discover a basis of revering Rizal which others, including Spain, can accept as historically justifiable and fair, we shall at the same time erase much of the bitterness of our Spanish past, replacing it with a new bridge of kinship and understanding that will link our Republic with Mother Spain. And if our patriot and hero finally wins his rightful place in the his toy of western colonization and Asian struggle for dignity and freedom, he will also make our own race more worthy of the respect of mankind for having produced, to borrow Congressman Cooper’s felicitous phrase, the character of Jose Rizal.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library