Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines As we commemorate Magsaysay Day

[Delivered at the Luneta Independence Grandstand on August 31, 1957]

FELLOW COUNTRYMEN; YOUTH OF THE PHILIPPINES:

WE are honoring today, on this consecrated ground, sanctified by the blood of Rizal and numerous other martyrs of our race, the memory of Ramon Magsaysay.

Magsaysay took his place of honor side by side with the greatest of our heroes in the national pantheon because in significance and scope, the concrete deeds of his brief dazzling career as Filipino leader and savior of freedom enlarged and brigthened the immortal traditions of the Filipino race. Nay, Magsaysay’s achievements transcended the boundaries of geography and region, as well as the limits of time and epoch, to make him, and because of him the Filipino people, the inferior of none in dedication to mankind’s noblest ideals and pursuits on this earth.

Rizal’s martyrdom was among the first, and certainly the noblest deed of self-immolation, in the glorious name of freedom and human dignity in all Asia. Bonifacio’s revolution was certainly the first, and perhaps the most courageous deed of national sacrifice, in behalf of human freedom and dignity in all Asia. It was the particular mark of greatness of Ramon Magsaysay’s achievements that he brought to his people the substance of that freedom and human dignity which Rizal dreamed of and died for. He was the culmination of a long and crowded Filipino record of leadership in the fight for freedom in our region of the globe. He is the greatest freedom fighter of our time.

Ramon Magsaysay’s coming in the prime of his youth, like a dazzling meteor decending down Asian skies, or to change the metaphor, like a new St. George, destroyed the communist dragon in our beloved Christian land, and by this signal success saved our country from being forever enslaved by totalitarian tyranny. Time and circumstance, no less than his own matchless personal qualities, favored Magsaysay in the achievement of this historic and incomparable mission.

He was a man of faith—faith in the justice of God and in the superior values of freedom; he was a man of high courage, bordering on recklessness—the blood-dripping claws and the searing breath of fire of the communist dragon never for a moment disheartened or unnerved him; they merely roused his courageous fury; they merely provoked his uncompromising ardor until literally he burned himself out in the struggle. Magsaysay was a supreme leader with an enormous heart warm with affection and compassionate love for his fellowmen, especially the poor, the unhappy, the oppressed, the disinherited. He was the noblest apostle of the brotherhood of man, in the finest sense of that much-abused phrase which is the sense of Christian recognition of man’s divine nature, that indefinable essence in every human being which bids us to respect his rights and to protect the inviolability of his person and of his freedom of belief and expression.

Magsaysay understood the meaning of human dignity in practical terms more than any zealot reformer ever did. He knew that freedom was meaningless if its boons were not equally enjoyed by the poor as much as the privileged. He knew that human dignity is a charitable fiction applied to millions of the barrio folks who are always hungry, whose minds are groping in the darkness of ignorance and superstition, whose struggles cannot be removed from the ache and sweat of eking out the next meal for one’s children, whose wills are prisoners of heartless oppressors and parasites of society who benefit from his labors but share him nothing but crumbs from the larder which his labors had filled.

Magsaysay was never more furious than when he came in direct contact with the helplessness of the common man. His bigness of heart translated that fury into personal concern for the underdog of society. He cheered the poor with his smile, his handclasp, his embrace, and he did not stop there. He bent all the energies and resources of his administration to the amelioration of the poor man’s miseries and difficulties. He brought the vision of equality to the ken of the barrio man by treating him and dealing with him, as dedicatedly and as affectionately as he dealt with the privileged members of society. Often, he treated the barrio man even better than he did the man of wealth and social position.

This was the Magsaysay that captured the fervent love of his fellowmen in the rural areas of our country. This was the Magsaysay, who fully reciprocated that love and affection by deeds of devotion. Never did our rural areas receive the attention of the national government as vigorously as in Magsaysay’s time; never was so large a proportion of government time and national resources poured into the barrios for the development of these, and for the improvement of the poor’s living conditions, as during the Magsaysay administration.

This was the great legacy of Magsaysay not only to us but to all Asia. The poor man of Asia has been poor for centuries; he has been neglected, nay, spurned and sometimes deliberately forgotten for a long, long time. Like a powerful electric shock, galvanizing the millions and millions of underprivileged in Asia, Magsaysay came to give them a new shining hope, to rouse their wills to effort, to make them the focus and target of governmental action and service, to awaken or to revive their long-lost or long-repressed ideas of dgnity and freedom. This is the measure of the great achievements of Ramon Magsaysay.

My friends, let no one forget this: if Magsaysay did not succeed in stopping cummunism’s march in our country in the critical years of 1949 and 1950, everything that we had won since Lapu-Lapu, Dagohoy, and Diego Silang, all the great achievements of Rizal and our other heroes and martyrs, the fruits of Bonifacio’s revolution, the pain and hunger endured, the blood spilled and the lives lost on the battlefields of Bataan and the grim tunnels of Corregidor— all this, would have been wiped out and completely destroyed in meaning and in relevance. We would have been a nation suddenly without any worthwhile history, summarily transformed into brutish slaves worse treated than those who rotted in the dungeons of ancient tyrannies. For all the peoples of Southeast Asia, that would have been the common, dismal, and heart-rending fate. That is the measure of Ramon Magsaysay’s achievements as the Nemesis of communism in Asia, as the greatest freedom fighter of our place and time.

Magsaysay had other qualities and dimensions we should not forget. In recalling his labors and rendering honor to his greatness on this august occasion, the fiftieth anniversary of his birth, let us not be dazzled by his shining deeds as to overlook those qualities of his which make him even closer to our heart and to the wellsprings of our gratitude.

Magsaysay, like Rizal and Bonifacio, like the Del Pilars and the Luna brothers, like Aguinaldo and Malvar, like Mabini and the Guerreros, was the embodiment of the glory of Filipino youth.

He answered the supreme call of duty to the motherland as a young man; he entered public service after the war and after a matchless guerrilla record, still a young man; he had immense faith in the capabilities of the young; he loved his fellow young men because he knew, like Rizal knew, that the future of any nation lies in that nation’s youth, that “fair hope of the Motherland,” under all climes and in all epochs of history. And, like most of the great reformers and heroes of mankind, Magsaysay, to our lasting, inconsolable grief, to the immeasurable loss of the whole free world, died young; he died in the outbursting spring of manhood, in the phrase of the poet, “trailing clouds of glory” the like of which, in the words of another poet, “we shall not see again.”

Ramon Magsaysay was our colleague, co-worker, and friend. He lent us, he lent all of us, courage and inspiration at a time our wills were flagging, and we were losing hope for our people. He shared us his boldness and daring in times of great peril; he revived our determination in the depressing days of 1949 and 1950 when on the one hand, the Nacionalistta Party, the traditional fighter for the nation’s freedom and wellbeing, was an oppressed minority, threatened with ruthless mortal blows by a rapacious and power-mad majority in the saddle; and, on the other hand, there was the bloody claws of communism reaching everywhere, demoralizing and frightening even the most stouthearted, knocking at the very gates of our national capital. We, who have shared, though in humble measure, in the thrilling battles that Magsaysay waged against communism, will never forget that exhilarating experience, the privileged participation in a high mission of destiny.

We do not pretend to the superlative virtues of Magsaysay; none now living, among Filipino leaders, can hope to duplicate the God-given energy and the inexhaustible personal magnetism of Magsaysay. But there is something solid and lasting and indestructible which Magsaysay left us, to us who had the privilege of working side by side with him, in the multi-dutied mission which it was his destiny to undertake. He left with us a legacy of firm courage; he imbued us with a deepened devotion to the well-being of the common man, the poor; he imparted to us during his meteoric career a fuller grasp of the vision splendid of a Philippines that is God-fearing and prosperous and everlastingly free, of an Asia that will savor and enjoy the boons of human liberty as these have been known and enjoyed in more fortunate lands.

For that legacy, for that career vision of what we could accomplish by resolute steadiness on the trail blazed by this incomparable Filipino, we are the stronger even as ordinary mortals in the pursuit of the objectives he had set, in the labors of devotion to the common weal that he left unfinished. Because of his example we have an ex-haustless fountain of inspiration, and because of the wide pathway to freedom and construction that he has already opened to us, we now march with indestructible confidence and with reinvigorated energies to reach the goals he has marked for our nation. We carry on, undaunted, completing the numerous projects he had launched; we carry on, with his memory guiding and prodding us onward to push through the great reforms he had traced out for the redemption of our fellowmen in the barrios, for the achievement of their prosperity and self-respect, that they may at last regain in full measure the substance of their Christian heritage, the restoration of their human dignity.

We carry on, fearless and better prepared in the struggle, to preserve our way of freedom, to fend off and to overcome any threat of subversion to our democratic way of life; we carry on, dedicating every ounce of energy to the development of our economic life, to the resurrection of our national culture, to the spread of opportunities for education and health, knowing as we do that these are the material foundations of a people’s progress; we carry on, finally—to some closest to the duties of the day—with Magsaysay’s fierce devotion to the clean and honest ballot which is the real foundation, as it is the stoutest support, of all the political institutions of democracy.

Ramon Magsaysay is the greatest hero of democracy produced so far in Asia; it is to the everlasting glory and pride of our nation that he was a Filipino; it shall be our unshakable determination to make ourselves worthy of him, to be worthy of that blazing glory which he gave to the name Filipino, that we pledge our last ounce of energy, our last drop of blood, to the preservation and perfection of our democracy. This is the worthiest tribute we can render, my fellow, countrymen, to the memory, to the greatness, to the superb humanity of Ramon Magsaysay.

Thou, Oh departed leader, colleague, inspirer, and friend, whom we have gratefully and lovingly enshrined in our pantheon of national heroes, dost shower us today with the measureless compassion of thy great heart, dost steel our wills as thou were wont to do in life, that our humble feet and hands may not falter in our mission. God, grant you the repose of the good and, just. Ramon Magsaysay, we are carrying on!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library