MY FRIENDS:

EARLIER this year, I had occasion to address our countrymen during the kick-off ceremonies that signalled the start of the Community Chest fund drive.

I said then: “In wishing to pursue this year’s Community Chest fund campaign to a successful conclusion, we derive added hopefulness from the fact that there is among our people a fundamental sense of unity. It is this sense of unity upon which our national program of prosperity and self sufficiency depends. It is the same sense of unity upon which every other program must depend for success.”

In celebrating tonight the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the Community Chest of Greater Manila, it would be well to recall just for the record, the situation that prompted its creation.

Ten years ago, there was what we may call complete laissez faire among welfare agencies in the manner of raising funds for their operations. The result was that for the whole year round one agency or another was pursuing a fund campaign. Each agency had its own team of fund raisers; volunteer workers were called upon continually to serve in the different fund drives; and our people were continually plagued for contributions by one agency after another.

It did not take long for some civic-spirited citizens to realize that too much money, time, and effort were being spent for the purpose of raising funds for welfare agencies, that contributors were getting annoyed at the endless stream of fund solicitors, and that some of the welfare agencies, owing to lack of know-how and personnel, could not even raise enough money for operations.

It was into this confused state of affairs, that men of civic spirit among us, most noteworthy of whom are the four people we honor here tonight, conceived of the idea of establishing the Community Chest of Greater Manila, patterned after existing Community Chests in the United States.

The idea of merging the fund solicitation of eighteen welfare agencies into one yearly campaign caught the imagination of everyone, for the advantages were immediately discernible for everyone involved in the fund campaign. First, the donor gave wholeheartedly knowing that his one yearly donation would be funnelled into eighteen welfare agencies. Second, the agencies reduced the cost of fund-raising and were able to give the time that was before consumed in this activity to actual services. Third, the civic spirited people who yearly gave their time and effort without pay in the service of these welfare agencies were afforded the opportunity to concentrate on one big effort for all instead of wearing themselves out in a constant series of campaigns.

I want to restate here that the establishment of the Community Chest of Greater Manila was made possible owing to the fundamental sense of unity of our people. It was only this sense that made possible the realization by eighteen different agencies that their one recourse, if they were to give effective services, was to band together. It was also this sense that could impel them to work together and put up the massive fund raising machinery that the Community Chest puts up every year.

This sense of unity is even more apparent in the diversity of background of the people whom we honor here tonight— all for one reason—their personal services to the Community Chest. We have Mrs. Irene E. Murphy, a friend from across the seas, whose background is social services; Rev. George J. Willman, a man of God; Dr. Teodoro Evangelista, educator; and Senator Gil J. Puyat, statesman and economist.

The growth of the Red Feather services of the Community Chest during, the last ten years is a testimonial to the effectiveness with which these four people and their associates have pooled together their diverse talents for the success of their joint project.

It is this fundamental sense of unity, this effective pooling of diverse talents and resources so essential in success that I would want to see in the other programs that our people will undertake.

Nobody is so untalented that he can not contribute something to the national welfare. Every effort, every criticism even, has its role to play in the national scheme of things.

Our national life today, especially in the political and economic fields, is characterized by the elements present of the situation in which, ten years ago our welfare agencies found themselves-each one within his limited resources elbowing his way to success.

I therefore call upon all our people to heed our fundamental sense of unity and together to pool our diverse talents and efforts to the end that we shall establish on our land under the aegis of peace and prosperity a real treasure chest from which bounty will flow for everyone who works hard enough to deserve it.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech on the 10th anniversary of the Community Chest Fund Drive, Manila Hotel, December 4, 1959, at 7:30 p.m. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(49) , 10245-10247.