Ladies and gentlemen:

Nothing gives me a deeper and truer pleasure than to be with a gathering such as this which is representative of so many provinces from all over the country, I know that I am addressing a group that does its apostolate principally among our poor. I am keenly aware of the fact that what specially distinguishes this group is its constant and unselfish dedication to the needs of our mothers and children. I know for a fact that if there is any one organization in any locality or town whose services are greatly availed of by our people, it is the puericulture center. Next to the parish church in a town, a puericulture center is the daily Mecca of our people. It stands out as a beacon for the poor and the needy. It is also a constant reminder that the government is ever ready to cater to the needs of our less fortunate countrymen. It heartens me very much to see with how much faith and trust our poor people especially avail themselves of puericulture services. This is therefore my way of saying that you have so nobly conducted yourselves in the daily performance of your duties, such that you have won completely the confidence of our people. Such trust and confidence, so rarely given especially by our poor, therefore becomes their testimonial of faith in you. This is the highest award that can honor public servants like us. To you gathered here therefore I pay this tribute of faith in the name of the millions of grateful Filipinos you serve.

I am, indeed, deeply grateful to have been asked to be with you, for today we are also honoring an event we can be rightly proud of—the 48th anniversary of the puericulture movement in the Philippines and the first national convention of puericulture centers. It is to me highly significant that for the 48 years of our puericulture center history, it is only now that we have all gathered together at this first national convention. This fact could mean two things: it could mean that most of you assigned in different areas throughout our country have had little sense of oneness—each of your units being an independent entity in itself. It could also mean that having been so deeply absorbed in your work, you have not given serious thought to work for the organization and coordination of work on the national level as this convention demonstrates. I am more inclined to think the second reason is the truer reason. This 48th anniversary of the puericulture center movement affords us the rare opportunity to look back through the years and thus trace the growth of a human institution, and in the process we unfold the long years of dedicated service of generations of men who believe in certain lofty ideals. For a human institution, like the puericulture movement, is a commitment to service to, and love for, one’s fellowmen that can only survive through the years, as long as there are people who believe in its ideals and who live such ideals selflessly and generously.

It has been often said that the state of a nation’s culture is measured by the amount of care and respect it pays to the youngest of its race. It should be a great source of pride to us that our country has highly distinguished itself in its assiduous humanitarian concern for nursing mothers and infants. We can be rightly proud that our country has had a long and continuous history of a systematic program of maternal and child welfare. This is of course reflective of our primal dedication—the Filipino home. In an era that has acquired a new if sophisticated fright of a population explosion, we have kept intact as a people our deep concern for the care of our young. In an age when either human carnage, labor camps, or automation threatens, to make human life what Thomas Hood the poet laments:

O that bread should be so dear And flesh and blood so cheap”,

it is very reassuring indeed for us to realize that we have kept our values right. It honors us, that as a people, we still deeply believe that human life is truly a blessed gift from God, and that a mother is a sacred being entrusted with the Creator’s gift of a child. It is this beautiful reverence for life that truly demonstrates our Christian heritage. A nation that has not lost its reverence for life shall never know a debasement of soul.

Forty-eight years of the puericulture center movement demonstrates this very high value we put on human life. The future of our race is assured by the healthful conditions we provide for maternal and child welfare. This is the wiser economy to insure a nation’s progress in its manpower.

And yet this systematic program of our puericulture centers was not the product of two or five years or ten years. Consider briefly the long, continuous, and systematic history of our country’s attempts to insure child welfare. The earliest evidence of child welfare work in our country was the foundation during the Spanish regime of the Hospicio de San Jose. The mortality rate in the country during the early years of the American regime was 30 per cent, meaning 300 deaths for every thousand births. As a result of this, Congress in 1912 sought to investigate the causes of high infant mortality. In a nutshell, consider the progress achieved from the time that the first puericulture center was organized in Tondo in 1917 and for which was made in appropriation of ₱7,000 until the present. By the end of 1917 there were 21 puericulture centers; and by 1957 these had become 513. Today there are 571 such centers throughout our country spending ₱1,324,000.00 of which the government has spent ₱850,000.00 and the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office has spent ₱474,000.00 last year. This should help emphasize that our health authorities, lawmakers, social workers, and civic-spirited citizens have been faithful to their vision of a stronger Filipino race.

The sustained interest in spreading the benefits of the puericulture centers can be seen in the series of Congressional Acts that have given direction, to and support of, the program. The Osmena Bill saw the establishment of 21 puericulture centers; the legislative enactment in 1921 transferring the duties related to maternity, child hygiene, and welfare to the Public Welfare Commissioner; the Congress Act of 1933 transferring puericulture center work to the Bureau of Health; the Ochoa Bill or Act No. 704 providing for the establishment of municipal maternity and charity clinics in municipalities having less than 8,000 population—all these have been thoughtful legislations designed to serve the needs of our people. When finally in 1947 another reorganization placed the puericulture centers and municipal maternity and charity clinics in the Bureau of Hospitals of the Department of Health, the creation of a section of Puericulture Centers in the Bureau of Hospitals definitely recognized the expanded status of our program. It can be a source of pride that our legislators have recognized the importance of puericulture services. The WHO-UNICEF program of assistance also helped greatly in the expansion work of puericulture centers. And finally, let me say that the role of our private civic-spirited citizens, and you in your own faith in, and loyalty to this movement, have provided the mainstay of this movement.

We have set our sights high and we hope to achieve the ideal with the establishment of a puericulture center in every town and city throughout our fair land. This ambitious program will need 683 more centers. If it took us 48 years to establish 517 puericulture centers, I assure you that it will take us only half that long to put many centers we still need. I pledge my administration to pursue this program relentlessly. This is a crying need of our people. The rich can always pay for their medical services. But our people in our many towns and remote barrios, and even our poor here in Manila, have only our puericulture centers where they can go to for their treatment.

But aside from such direct medical services to mothers, children, and the ailing, let us strive to make our puericulture centers an educational and preventive institution, even as it is necessarily a remedial institution. With greater foresight and fully sensitive to the educational needs of our nursing mothers especially, we can make our puericulture centers an educational and cultural center. Let us plan out programs of lectures, demonstrations, listening hours that can help stimulate the thinking of the people we serve. I am sure much has been done along this line and this is the reason why you have won our people’s trust and confidence. Let us constantly aim to preserve for our people their sense of human dignity. Let us help them see that we public servants are out to help them let us make them see that it is the taxes they pay and their faith in us that enable them to have such free services as we can give. In short, let us make them see that they are an honorable people even as they partake of the government’s charitable services. I plead to you to make our institutionalized charity work gentle, humane, and truly charitable.

This is the Christianity that we bring into our work that is over and above the call of duty. And because I know that this is truly the spirit with which you discharge your obligations, I humbly come to honor you and to convey to you the gratitude of the government and our people for the zeal and dedication with which you have carried on at your noble tasks all these years.

On my part I can only reiterate my full support of all your programs. I shall do all I can to help make your work more effective. This is a good occasion—your 48th anniversary and your first national convention—to pledge ourselves mutually committed to do all we can to assure our country of generations and generations of robust Filipinos who shall carry on the traditions of our race, who shall preserve the honor of our people, and who shall constantly aspire for the glory of this Christian nation, small but brave and honorable.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech at the First National Convention of Puericulture Centers held at the San Sebastian College Auditorium on February 25, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(10) , 1762-1765.