PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE BPSIAA HELD AT THE RIZAL MEMORIAL STADIUM, SATURDAY AFTERNOON, FEBRUARY 20, 1960

IT IS with great pleasure that I have come to witness the opening ceremonies of the 1960 Bureau of Public Schools Interscholastic Athletic Association Meet, which is being held in Manila this year. The colorful parade of the athletes composing the eight delegations which will compete for honors in this meet was not only impressive; it was indeed most inspiring. And as I gaze upon this fine array of strong, healthy, and robust young men and women before me, I cannot but be thrilled by the realization of the fact that, assembled in this stadium, we have, as it were, the flower of Filipino manhood and womanhood upon whom our country can depend for the fulfillment of its dream of building in this part of the world a strong and progressive nation dedicated to the ideals of peace, liberty, and democracy.

I congratulate the Department of Education and the Bureau of Public Schools for having initiated and continued the practice of holding these athletic meets. Year after year, with the exception of the war period, these meets have been held regularly, so much so that they have practically become a veritable national institution. Of course, I am aware of the fact that this meet is but part and parcel of the splendid program of physical education which the Department has been carrying out consistently all these years. It is a laudable program and I am wholeheartedly for it. In fact, I would like to have every boy and girl in our schools take some form of physical exercises so that our youth will be able to build up their bodies and enjoy good health. I would like to see every school adopt and carry out a program of athletics for everybody.

But in addition to the requirement of physical education for all, we need specialized athletics for the select few who show promise of developing into star athletes who can be trained for national and international competitions. We must continually discover and train young talents, for the revival in modern times of the ancient Olympic festivals places upon our shoulders the responsibility of preparing seasoned athletes who will be able to uphold our national prestige in friendly competitions in the field of amateur sports. Our country has participated in these international [meets a number of times, and I feel that we have done fairly well. And if we made a creditable showing, it is because, through such contests as this which we are about to witness, we have created the atmosphere and provided the proper incentive for success in world competitions.

I am a firm believer in the value of these athletic meets. I am a staunch advocate of the development of physical strength, endurance, and stamina among our people, because I am convinced, that an. intelligent, hardy, and vigorous population is one of the strongest guarantees that our country can have for the continued enjoyment of its freedom and national security. That is why in 1958 I announced during the meet in Tagbilaran my approval for an annual instead of a biennial national interscholastic meet. I wish to take this opportunity to renew that endorsement.

However, it is not the development of physical prowess and skill alone that makes these annual meets commend themselves to public approval. They also provide an excellent medium for the unification of our people. Through these, people from all over the country are brought together. Athletes, parents, teachers, and spectators come together and inevitably exchange ideas and impressions. And since these meets are held in different provinces each year, our athletes and their friends have splendid opportunity to see and know these places and to get acquainted with their people. Out of such knowledge and such acquaintance will come better understanding and closer unity among our people.

Finally, I wish to remind the athletes that in the contests in which they are about to exhibit their prowess and skill, it is of extreme importance that they observe the rules of the game, for the main thing to remember in competitions of this kind is not so much the winning of the game as the way one wins it. Indeed, the most valuable lesson the athletes can learn from their participation in this meet is the spirit of sportsmanship, a virtue we also need in our national life. And so I charge the participants to play the game squarely and fairly. Be generous in victory and gracious in defeat. With these words, I close my remarks and wish each and every one of the participants all manner of success. Let the best man and team win.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library