Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the opening session of the annual convention of the Philippine Historical Association

[Delivered at the University of the East Auditorium, November 28, 1958]

PRESIDENT DALUPAN,

OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE HISTORICAL ASSOCATION, DELEGATES TO THIS CONFERENCE, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I COMMEND the Philippine Historical Association for its initiative and energy in organizing and sponsoring this convention. In a young Republic like ours the cultural values are often unwittingly depreciated. This is perhaps due to the long-range and intangible nature of culture, as contrasted to the concrete and immediate results of other endeavors, like trade and commerce. Yet, while the immediate objectives of society are not to be minimized, the long-range objectives often prove of far greater worth to a nation. A cultural event is far and above a circus or a carnival or a killing in the stock market.

In the writing of our own history we are at a relatively early stage. The efforts of this Association, therefore, to intensify historical studies and stimulate historical writing are not only commendable but also significant. Much of what passes for Philippine history is far from authentic. This is because the authorship is either foreign, and the scholarship obscured by political or social bias, or Filipino but suffering from resentment or anger or lack of scholarship. The objective of the association of rewriting Philippine history so as to render it more accurate and truthful is therefore one worthy of the support of everyone interested in a proper assessment of our past.

The work is obviously tremendous. Not only is the writing of history a difficult science but the problems facing the Philippine historian are massive. The original Greek word for history meant research, exploration, and information. This task would be quite simple were it not for many factors that can obscure the truth. The writing of history is both objective and subjective, and a good history is one in which the two are balanced. History may soar to the level of art and philosophy, and this is to the good; but its principal purpose after all is the solid establishment of facts and the precise exposition of the facts established. In short, history is the pursuit and expression of truth.

In the writing of history, therefore, there is no room for resentment whether present or past, for prejudice of any kind for mere speculation however plausible. The true historian—the Filipinos who are to follow the brilliant line of historians from Herodotus and Thucydides to Toynbee and Churchill—must be scholars possessed of energy to dig the facts whether they are buried in manuscripts or archeological objects; of equanimity and balance to raise above resentments and prejudices; of reason and logic to interpret and explain established facts correctly and lucidly; of imagination and vision to see the past and the future clearly in relation to each other; and of absolute honesty and integrity to transmit the facts of history with faithfulness and devotion as a precious national legacy willed to an endless posterity.

I understand that this convention preludes an international historical foregathering to which will be invited delegates from Asian and Pacific countries. Your plan is logical and commendable. The mistakes and shortcomings of the present convention, if any, will afford lessons that will serve you in good stead in planning and getting out the bigger convention. Your success and your achievements now will naturally be precious capital for the international undertaking. I hope it will render substantial contributions to historical research and writing as well as to the cultural growth and mutual understanding of the nations and peoples comprehended.

The International Historical Convention envisioned by you indicates your appreciation of an orientation which Philippine history badly needs. There is a wealth of materials on our country’s historical association with the West. The nearly 400 years of Spanish rule and the nearly 50 years of American tutelage are well documented. Although many of the existing historical works concerning these periods may not be of high scholarly order in the sense that they are more subjective than objective, the source materials are enormous in volume and accessible to our searchers. It is, therefore, reasonable to assume that if we have the historians gifted with the abilities and capabilities demanded by the task, the writing of historical works related to these periods is only a matter of time. It is almost inevitable that some of our historians will produce the works that will finally present and interpret the facts of the Philippine-Spanish and the Philippine-American periods.

The situation is entirely different with respect to the facts of Philippine history before the coming of Spain. In this period we need militant historians—historians who will have the energy and patience to deduce and reconstruct the facts from obscure evidences, most of which are to be discovered by the assistance of related sciences like archeology, anthropology, paleontology, and others. Part of the history of that period is undoubtedly to be found in the annals of our neighbors in the East. Not only had our ancestors had intercourse, both commercial and cultural, with other Oriental peoples but their historians have surely recorded some findings and observations concerning the Philippines which are valuable clues to our past. Your projected international historical convention is therefore valuable, at least potentially, as signalizing a new interest on the part of our historians in the historical materials that may be available in our neighbors in Asia. I am certain that in this task you will have the support of all individuals and of all countries that understand the place of history in human civilization.

You may have observed that I have often urged our people to follow a logical order in their effort 1b attain advancement. In this connection I have offered the slogan, “First thing first.” In accordance with this slogan I believe that you will do well to concentrate all your efforts to making a success of the present convention. Although it is a good idea to keep the forthcoming international convention in mind, you should, for the present, marshal all your efforts, all your energies, and all your wisdom in making this present convention a resounding success.

This is also, my sincere wish; I am in hopes that this convention being sponsored by our leading historical writers and teachers, will leave a record of enduring as well as memorable achievements. I am certain that this gathering will itself write history.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the opening session of the annual convention of the Philippine Historical Association. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(35) , 8049-8051.