PRESIDENT CARLOS P. GARCIA’S SPEECH DURING THE INAUGURAL PROGRAM OF THE 6TH NATIONAL CONVENTION OF FILIPINO BUSINESSMEN, IN BAGUIO CITY, AT 9:30 A.M., MARCH 3, 1960

Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen:

I AM happy to be with you today. This convention of Filipino businessmen from all over the country is a clear manifestation of the gathering strength of Filipino nationalism. It attests to the maturity of our business leaders gathered here who compose the vanguard in the nation’s determined march towards economic independence. I am grateful to the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines which is sponsoring the Sixth National Convention of Filipino Businessmen here in Baguio City in cooperation with the Baguio Chamber of Commerce. Their efforts are lending active support to the course which my administration has set for the development of a national norm of conduct and behavior consistent with our dignity as a sovereign and free people. As such they are a distinct contribution to the cause of the Filipino-First movement.

The Filipino-First movement which you are spearheading is of tremendous significance to our life as a people. Led as it is by citizens like you who belong to the middle and entrepreneur classes of our society, it is militant, dedicated, and inspired. Our people have embraced it and are already afire with the desire to help push it through to its logical goal, which is nothing short of complete economic freedom. By complete economic freedom, we, of course, mean freedom to chart a course for the development of our economy with reasonable assurance that the fruits of such growth would spread from the top of the business and social pyramid down to its base among the rural population in our countrysides. We mean the right to pursue such a course of action and implement whatever policies would insure the exploitation and development of our God-given resources and manpower and preserve and further enrich our national patrimony which we shall bequeath to our children and our children’s children to the end of time.

This economic independence is the most cherished prerogative of the young developing nations of the world which, like the Philippines, emerged politically independent after World War II. To achieve this independence at the shortest possible time, it is imperative that we draw inspiration from the nationalistic tradition of our race from whose womb strode forth such great nationalists as Lapu-Lapu, Dagohoy, Bonifacio, Rizal, and Aguinaldo, and many other stars in the grand constellation of Filipino nationalism. Great causes call for great leaders and God who has not failed other nations will not fail us. From among you He will annoint the leader who will guide you to the Promised Land of our Economic Independence. The upsurge of nationalism throughout Asia and Africa is a movement global in proportion which will irrevocably roll on until its cycle is completed. Only God can measure the cosmic creativeness of this nationalistic saga.

This common desire finds expression in the various political and social ideologies that are identified in Asian society today. They range from the democratic precepts to socialism and communism. But the goal is the same. It is to shake off the yoke of alien domination in business, trade, commerce, and industry. We are fortunate in the Philippines that ‘the nationalist movement so forceful today is being pursued within the framework of a democratic society, unlike in other places where the fight of the common people for economic survival is being exploited by the enemies of democracy for their own selfish ends. That is why confidence that friends of democracy will understand the true meaning and direction of the Filipino-First movement. It seeks to elevate to dominant proportion the participation of Filipinos in our own national economy within the framework of our democratic tradition. It is directed against no alien group. It is inspired by the great principle of social justice on the international plane. The Filipino-First movement can not and must not be equated with any ideology that works against the accepted tenets of democracy. It is, as some sympathetic visitors in our shores have understood, aimed at securing for a greater number of our fellow-citizens the blessings of our rich natural resources and of our democratic way of life. It is not exclusivistic; on the contrary it bears the stamp of Filipino hospitality.

I would like to believe that because of the inherent justness and fairness of our aspiration to become economically free, more of our foreign friends who have been with us for years are beginning to understand the motive force behind the ; Filipino-First policy. There are indications of increasing sympathy for the Filipino-First policy. I am certain that this changing attitude has been brought about largely by the assertive determination of our people and the present Administration to carry into fruition the Filipino-First policy.

It is well that our alien friends should attune themselves to the changing mental and moral attitudes of our people. Those of them who have come as friends of our country and who are sincerely interested in contributing their capital and know-how to the greater good of the nation have no cause for alarm. They have our assurance that their rights as guaranteed by our constitution and laws shall be respected. Our traditional sense of fairness and world-renowned hospitality forbid us from resorting to unjust treatment of foreigners just because they are foreigners. But like all other Filipinos, I am concerned with the conduct of those outsiders who come to our shores not imbued with the high purpose of helping build our nation. These people, my Mends, are part of those who are behind the irregularities and anomalies that are responsible for draining our dollar reserve and weakening the moral fiber of our citizens both in and out of the government service. Your government is aware of their activities and is taking proper steps to bring all these criminally liable before the bar of justice. Those caught will be punished to the full extent of the law. We shall see to it that their nefarious practices intended to circumvent our major economic policies or to frustrate our national efforts are unmasked and severely penalized to make them realize the futility of such activities.

It is time we showed the world that we can run our business affairs as well as others. While we do not mean to exclude foreigners from the legitimate pursuit of business enterprises in our country, we have reached the point where we will no longer tolerate their dominance in our economy. We have matured as a people. The experience we have gained in the exercise of our sovereign prerogatives as a republic since 1946 has strengthened the confidence of our people in our ability to pursue the concepts of self determination farther in the economic field. The thousands of new and enterprising Filipino businessmen who have fired the imagination and elicited admiration from their compatriots are a living testimony to our capacity to attend successfully to our business. I dare say that this newly acquired confidence which feeds upon the realization that political independence without economic freedom is at best a mere illusion, is the cornerstone upon which we are building a new nation of competent artisans, traders, industrialists, farmers, and technical men and women.

My friends, slowly but surely the dawn of a new day of real and substantive economic independence is breaking in our Eastern horizon. As I have pointed out in my message to Congress on the state of the nation we touched a few peaks in progress highway in 1959, among which are: (a) We not only have achieved for the first time in the 20th century self-sufficiency in food, but also have already garnered sizeable surpluses in rice, corn, and Virginia tobacco; (b) we chalked up for the first time in postwar history a favorable balance of payments; (c) we have considerably increased our foliar reserves after paying $84 million of our foreign loans and other obligations; and (d) we considerably stabilized the financial and monetary position of our government. Other achievements I need not mention on the assumption that Philippine business has digested the message even more thoroughly than some congressmen have done.

Some ambition-inspired, fault-finding critics of the Administration attempted to dismiss these as fantastic claims, a mirage not based on reality. It is unbelievable how criticism could go down so biased and perverted as to deny our people the capacity to grow. Compared with the considered judgment of competent observers from abroad, the opinion of our critics would look like a betrayal of our country’s record of achievement.

As instances, I take the liberty of extracting some highlights from the report of the IMF mission that recently came to review the Philippine economic situation. Here are some of their observations: (1) In the national income and production there were significant gains in the Philippine economy during 1959. The combined index of the physical volume of production for agriculture, mining, manufacturing increased by 6%. These increases in output were considerably larger than those in 1958. Of particular importance was the increase of 15% in rice production and 19% in corn production. (2) Manufacturing production during the first six months of 1959 showed an increase of 11% compared to the same period in 1958, and this upward I trend is expected to continue through the last half of the year.

On balance of payments and exchange reserves, the IMF mission said: “The payments position showed a significant improvement in 1959. Import payments in 1960 are scheduled at $532 million which is 11% higher than those in 1959. In 1959 international reserves increased by $64 million. This is the biggest increase in any year in the postwar period except in 1950.”

So much for the IMF observations. Here is the report of the U. S. Department of Commerce published in its official weekly recently: “The U. S. commerce department says the Philippine economic outlook for 1960 is brighter than prospects were at the beginning of 1959.”

At the same time, says the department, the Philippine economy in 1959 showed “steady, moderate improvement over that of 1958, and for the first time in the postwar period actually registered a commodity export surplus both in terms of total trade and in trade with the United States.

“These conclusions were drawn in the annual review of the economic situation in the Far East, printed Friday in the department’s publication Foreign Commerce Weekly.’

“The impact of Philippine fiscal and monetary measures was beginning to be felt in full by the end of 1959.

“Favorable growing conditions augur well for continued high yields of cereal and sugar crops. Prospects for continued high prices of copra, abaca, and minerals are good.”

My friends, in the light of the highly encouraging conclusions about our economic achievements emitted after a careful observation and consideration by highly competent experts in the field, we have every reason and incentive to march onward and forward to new frontiers of progress and development under the magic touch of the resurgent Filipino nationalism heedless of the Jeremiahs or the prophets of doom and disaster.

The imperatives of economic survival place a heavy responsibility on our shoulders. A large portion of that burden rests with you as leaders in the business communities which you represent in this convention. The pressure of population which increases at the rate of close to three per cent annually, the problems of unemployment and underproduction, the difficulties attendant to industrialization—these are some of the major obstacles that stand in our way. The dimensions of these problems are enormous. They have ramifications in our political, economic, and social structures. They involve imponderables such as the magnitude and nature of foreign capital willing to come in partnership with Filipino entrepreneurs, tremendous financing requirements for the establishment of basic and medium industries. But, no matter how gigantic these problems may appear, we find consolation in the fact that in the exercise of our sovereign prerogative to chart the course of the national economy we have so far been fairly successful, and I am proud to say that as long as the “Filipino businessmen will continue in their romantic, daring, and self-confident spirit under the inspiration of the Filipino First policy, the future of prosperity and happiness will be ours.

Let us therefore now and always unite behind the Filipino First movement and redeem our land from foreign economic domination for bequeathing a free economy to this generation and the generations of Filipinos yet sleeping in the Womb of Time. Let us build the House of the Nation on rock. “And the rains fell and flood came, and the tempests blew and beat against that House and it fell not because it was built on rock.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library