PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT A CIVIC DINNER SPONSORED BY THE PHOENIX PRESS CLUB AND EXECUTIVE CLUB IN THE THUNDERBIRD ROOM OF THE WESTWARD HO HOTEL, AT 7:30 P.M., WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, PHOENIX TIME (9:30 A.M., THURSDAY, JUNE 25, MANILA TIME)

MY FRIENDS:

PERHAPS it occurs to you to ask why I came to Arizona. Well the answer is that I like to learn a few things from Arizona which I believe will be most useful to me in administering the national affairs of my country.

But that is only one of the many reasons. The altitude and the expanse of your plateaus and the towering mountain ranges and the breath-taking contours of your plains and valleys all seem to conspire as it were in making a visitor to your beautiful state simply enraptured and captivated. And your wonderful climate, with its even temperature, low humidity, and plenty of sunshine, makes this place a bewitching vacation land. The diversity of your topography with the changing pattern of the landscape as you move from one part of the state to the other, together with the deep intervening canyons and gorges, land color, beauty, and grandeur a traveler can never forget.

Nowhere in the world has such a combination of soil, water and power, and man’s ingenuity and industry made living richer and fuller as in your state of Arizona. I understand that an older civilization now extinct made use of water by a system of canals on the Salt and Gila Rivers. Your modern state has continued this dependence on the use of water; your modern dams and reservoirs have not only watered your rich plains and valleys but also made some of your deserts bloom. Your Roosevelt and Hoover dams are by-words in irrigation and reclamation all over the world. But not content with these and many more reclamation projects, utilizing irrigation water and electric power from your mighty rivers, you have also tapped your underground water sources and, by pumping, have made water available where you are now cultivating rich farm lands and orchards.

In my brief visit to your state, I have been impressed with the beauty of your nature and sturdiness and resourcefulness of your people. But as I stand before you today, I cannot help but reminisce about the parallel history of your state and my country and the development of self-government and statehood and the problems of agriculture and industry with which your people were faced and which my people are now facing.

These parallel strands of historical, political, and economic development become more vivid as I try to understand the remarkable combination of soil, water, and power which your people have so impressively brought about and the political and economic organizations which the founders of your state have demonstrated and your leaders now continue to administer with such efficiency and practical results. The rare combination of agricultural and mineral resources with water and power, under capable economic and political leadership, have made your state what it is today. We of the under-developed countries have here an example to look up to of what could be done with the natural resources of a region using man’s ingenuity, industry, and vision.

The parallel strands of historical development which bring my country close to your state are rather fragile and tenuous. But these tiny strands of memories are there nevertheless, making me feel at home with a familiar culture but under different surroundings.

Between 1526 and 1540, when the Spanish intrepid explorers, Jose de Basconales, Cabeza de Vaca, Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, and Hernando de Alarcon, were trying to reach the Arizona plateau from Mexico and exploring the upper reaches of the Colorado River, other dauntless Spaniards on their sturdy galleons sailed to the Philippines to explore and conquer. Following the footsteps of Magellan who reached the Philippines in 1521, only to die in the hands of resisting natives in the Island of Mactan, the intrepid navigators, Loiasa, Saavedra, and Villalobos, reached our southern island, of Mindanao in the years between 1526 and 1543. In the next two decades, while the Spaniards were strengthening their foothold in New Mexico and what is now part of southern Arizona, the Spanish explorers, Legaspi and Urdaneta, reached Manila and consolidated the hold of Spain in the Islands of Luzon and Visayas.

In recent modern history, I noted with satisfaction a memorable date in your history, February 14, 1912, when President Taft signed the proclamation that made Arizona the 48th and last state, to be admitted into the Union. President Taft, as you may remember, was beloved to Filipinos, for he served as the first civil governor of the Philippines under the American administration, between 1901 and 1903, and was the forerunner of self-government in the Philippines. It was under Governor Taft’s administration that the Filipinos had their first training in self-government and also their first introduction to educational and land reforms which opened for all Filipinos the opportunities of public education and of earning a living on equal terms in all the trades and professions.

The year following the admission of this state to the union saw the passage of the Underwood Tariff Act (1913), superseding the Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act of the United States, which granted unlimited free trade between the Philippines and the United States. This Act ushered in a new era in Philippine trade and economic development, for since then our export industries developed by leaps and bounds under the stimulus of a free United States market. With this trade development came the rapid growth of free and democratic institutions in the Philippines.

It appears to me, therefore, that while your state grew under the wise guidance and efforts of your leaders and citizens and your democratic institutions developed in the midst of your own peculiar conditions of climate and society; our developed under the benevolent and altruistic tutelage of the United States. Our culture and civilization continued to grow under more than 300 years of Spanish colonial rule, and for the last 50 years, under American administration. The former left us a heritage of the Christian faith and western culture super-imposed on our Malayan backgrounds. Fifty years of benevolent American rule gave us popular education, popular government, and modern technology. With political independence from the United States in 1946, the Philippines is now out to win its economic independence and stability by meeting its own problems in relation to those of other peoples and nations.

II

To me the most impressive development in your state is that of agriculture. Although only a very small portion of the total area of the state is under cultivation, practically all the farm lands are under irrigation. Arizona agriculture is irrigation agriculture. I understand that of your 1.2 million acres of cultivated farmlands over 95% is irrigated. Many people said that even the uncultivated lands must be as rich as those now under farms, but the problem is lack of water.

What you have done with your fertile farm districts such as the Gila Valley, Salt River Valley, Casa Grande Valley, and Yuma Valley are the results of irrigation. But your irrigation water has not only literally made your deserts blossom; they have also saved your farmers from crop failure. Where water storage and wells had removed the hazards of pioneer agriculture, you have now modern dams and impounding facilities that regulate the flow of your streams. All these have assured your farmlands an adequate water supply which for practical purposes mean avoidance of crop failures. With your sunshine and more or less even temperature, an assured water supply not only means assured farm production but also a stable agriculture for your state.

The spectacular advances in agriculture in Arizona could not have been what it is today if it were not for the development of irrigation water from the Roosevelt Dam (completed in 1911), the Yuma reclamation project (1912), the Coolidge Dam on the Gila impounding irrigation water and power (1929), the Hoover Dam on the Colorado, (1936), the Bartlett Dam and Horseshoe Dam on the Verde River, These reclamation and irrigation projects stabilized the area under farms, increased production, and consequently brought about a rapid increase in population, and made possible the present modern cities and towns. On the plains and valleys, the combination of soil and water and man-made irrigation would not have been enough to make the state of Arizona what it is today. I understand that the production of new crops and the control of pests and diseases have been supported by the findings of many years of research. Agricultural research supported by the state made possible the use of better varieties of crops, better control of pests and diseases, improved use of water, and the utilization of modern machinery and equipment. In these improvements, the role of the College of Agriculture and its experimental farms in the river valleys played a significant part in undertaking essential research projects. I was also told that in September, 1953, the University’s College of Agriculture dedicated a modern research building with the necessary laboratories for the study and research in the problems of irrigation, of improved agriculture in Arizona.

III

Another most impressive aspect of your state which caught my attention is the development of power for the farms and for the mining and manufacturing industries. The Colorado River alone, I understand, could develop over five million horsepower. With the construction of the Hoover dam and other electric generating plants on the Colorado, you have not only prevented a serious flood menace, but you have also controlled the river flows so as to minimize serious damages through silting of the river valleys and the washing away of valuable farm lands. I am told that the most imposing of these structures on the Colorado River is the Hoover dam completed on March 1, 1956, reputed to be the highest dam in the world. It now stores more than 30 million acre feet of water and has a capacity of some 4.3 billion kilowatt hours per year. This tremendous power system has electrified the farms of Arizona. They have also provided the necessary power for the mining and fertilizer industry as well as for light manufacturing industries all over the state.

Although other states would offer more locational advantages such as local markets, easily accessible raw materials, more adequate labor supply, more local capital for investment, more attractive freight rates, and so on, there seem to be good reasons for the development of manufacturing in Arizona. For one thing, there is close proximity to military installations, particularly in southern Arizona. Intensified government activities during the war gave encouragement to various kinds of light manufacturing industries under contract with the Federal Government. At best the policy of decentralization has played an important part in the development of manufacturing in Arizona. Perhaps the most important factor is your favorable climate. I understand you have today a large reservoir of labor supply, particularly professional and highly skilled workers; hence, the continued development of electronics manufacture, production of plane or plane parts, tools, building materials, manufacture of foodstuffs, and clothing manufacturing.

IV

These observations, I must admit, give me an insight into some of the problems that we of an underdeveloped country have to face in bringing about stability and prosperity for our people. First of all, taking a cue from your own development, we must undertake long-range planning in the development of our river valleys and plains, particularly in the use of water. Although we have developed a large hydro-electric power in Luzon and another in Mindanao, we have a long way to go in harnessing our rivers and streams so that irrigation water and electric power may be made available to our farms and towns. The Central Plain of Luzon alone, not to speak of the alluvial plains in the islands of the Visayas and Mindanao, would require intensive planning to tap our rivers and underground water sources so that these large areas of cultivable land could produce increased yields in terms of more grain, vegetables, fruits, and livestock per acre. Not only these, but to develop the light industries dependent on the use of domestic raw materials, cheap electric power must be made available to the enterprisers in our towns and barrios.

In the second place, the construction of dams and power projects, of flood-control structures, and of tapping underground streams must involve the expenditure of large amounts of money. As your state has experienced, large proportions of these expenditures have been contributed by the Federal Government, but the local tax payers have also to do their bit for their construction and eventual development. In my country, I realize that we must develop new tax sources and improve our present tax system, besides using the capacity of the government to borrow directly from the people through the sale of government bonds, if we are to finance the irrigation and hydroelectric power, systems that are essential to our agriculture and industry. We must also develop the machinery of local government to handle the administration and financing of local irrigation systems and the development of the various structures for controlling floods, siltings, and normal soil erosion.

In the third place, as you have amply demonstrated here in Arizona, the combination of soil, water, and power does not by itself make successful enterprise. There must be trained entrepreneurs and efficient organizers who more than anything else make agriculture and industry nourish and enable the mines and forests to yield returns in terms of human welfare and happines for the citizens.

In closing, I wish to assure the administration, the faculty, and the student body of the University of Arizona that today has been for me a most fruitful and edifying experience. In conferring upon me this degree which I hardly deserve, you have doubly honored me in that in paying tribute to your viable and dynamic political, social, and economic institutions, I have gained further insight into and appreciation of, our country’s basic problems. I have no doubt that we can in no small measure borrow, and even adapt, from your own examples the ways and means of solving our manifold problems for the happiness and welfare of our citizens. I am going back to my own country rich in the memories of this special occasion and with the fond hope that our parallel development may in some distant future buttress one another in the defense of a common cause and in safeguarding our cherished freedoms and the democratic way of life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library