PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE 61ST ANNIVERSARY OF THE BATTLE OF PINAGLABANAN, DELIVERED THURSDAY AFTERNOON AUGUST 29, 1957, IN SAN JUAN, RIZAL

MY COUNTRYMEN:

IT is a more of deep pride for me to join the peo-people of San Juan in honoring the heroes of Pinaglabanan

San Juan is the cradle of Philippine revolutionary history. Your sons took the vanguard of our people’s struggle for freedom. The first actual combat between the Spanish troops and the Filipino revolutionary forces took place in your town. And again against the American forces, the first shot was fired here.

Then, as if to follow a pattern of heroism and bravery, a beloved son of San Juan—Lt. Jose M. Artiaga—died a hero’s death at Yaltong, Korea, during the darkest hours of the Korean war.

To me, the magnificence of Lt. Artiaga’s death was not by accident of war. The valor and heroism he displayed did not spring from the armed might of the organization to which he belonged.

Lt. Artiaga lived and died like a true son of San Juan— worthy of its proud history. His life and his death were part of the Spirit that triggered the “Battle of Pinaglabanan” sixty-one years ago today.

The history of the Philippines has been enriched by the magnificent deeds of people like the brave men of Pinaglabanan. In our quest for freedom, our people spared nothing to make their aspirations a reality. It is for this reason that Filipinos are always found wherever a battle for freedom is being fought.

Today, as we pause to honor the heroes of Pinaglabanan, I would like, for a moment, to draw your attention to thousands of other heroes who have made this country what it is today.

These heroes never carried guns, nor took to a bloody battlefield, though history records that they too were ready to pick up a bolo if need be in defense of their country.

I refer to the farmers, the laborers, the teachers, the social workers, and the thousands of other civil servants who have all dedicated their lives to the service of their people. ,

The farmers who work in scanty clothes in all kinds of weather to prod the reluctant earth to produce the goods that make you and I live; the teachers who labor in unsung anonymity in some remote barrios to bring the light of knowledge to our rural population; the social workers who penetrate our hinterlands under the most difficult condition to bring succor and comfort to the millions of our less fortunate brothers; the lowly clerks and other civil servants who are content to be relegated to some dark corners in an office to do the routine but necessary work that allows this government to function—these and others are just as much entitled to our attention and gratitude. Without them no country can survive; without them no government can exist.

A nation is a composite of all kinds of heroes. It thrives on the sacrifice, the industry, and the dedication of all the people who have a stake in it. This is not a nation of soldiers alone; nor of teachers alone; nor yet, of farmers alone. It is a nation of many peoples sharing the same ideals.

As we gather to commemorate the famous Battle of Pinaglahanan, it is meet that we ponder the virtues that fired these brave people of San Juan to glorious deeds of heroism. These simple people had no interests to protect; no fortunes to guard;—all they had was a consuming desire to see their country free. To attain their aspirations, these heroes of San Juan abandoned their worldly goods, sacrificed their families, and placed their all in the service of freedom. Who are these heroes?

They were no outstanding statesmen nor brilliant scholars or economists; they were the simple people who loved freedom and who loved it deeply enough to fight for it and die for it. They had only dedication, industry, a sense of mission, and a love of country that transcended all material considerations. These were the heroes of Pinaglabanan.

Today, happily for all of us we are not being asked to carry guns and to do another battle; to give up our worldly goods or even to leave the warmth of our homes. We are only being asked to keep this country strong and to make it worthy of its glorious past.

The call today is for men and women of stout hearts, willing hands, and a burning desire to make their country prosperous and free. To make this country strong, we must stand together and work together. All of us should be ready to give up something of ourselves for our country.

For my part, I pledge all the resources of government to promote the happiness of our people. I believe that government has no business to exist if it cannot enhance the general welfare.

The challenge of Pinaglabanan rings much clearer today. The opportunities for sacrifice and heroism that sparked our heroes sixty-one years ago to deeds of valor are all about us. Countless opportunities for service, for sacrifice, for real dedication await men and women of this country today.

If we truly love the heroes of Pinaglabanan and believe in the ideals for which they fought, we must not falter in our desire to preserve our country. Nor yet fail the heroes of Pinaglabanan!

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library