PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE BUSINESS WRITERS’ ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES AT THE MANILA HOTEL, FEBRUARY 21, 1958

MEMBERS OF THE BUSINESS WRITERS’ ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

AT NO other time in the history of the world have the destinies of nations and peoples been forged by influences and events outside their borders more than they are today. Side by side with the stirrings of awakening nationalism in many lands, we also find a growing consciousness of internationalism. This is true in the economic sense as well as the political.

We in the Philippines, probably more than any country in Asia, realize that our progress as a nation is closely linked to cooperation, friendship, and commerce with the citizens and businessmen of other countries; and that’ such relationships can be preserved without prejudice to our aspirations and political sovereignty. Let us say that just as they have something of value to give us, we believe we have something of value to offer them in return. In an economic relationship, as in any other field of human endeavor, mutual trust can only redound to mutual benefit.

I have chosen to stress this point, because my subject tonight is one which is vital to the economic advancement of the country, and yet may still be so easily misunderstood or misrepresented. I speak of foreign investment.

In economic terms, foreign investment may be defined as the accumulation of capital in a country derived from foreign sources. We find foreign investments in the Philippines spread through a cross-section of the economy—in basic industries such as mining, logging, agriculture, fishing, and manufacturing, as well as transportation, trade, building construction, and the professional services.

Foreign investments, including reinvested earnings, made up about 10 per cent of our gross domestic investments from 1950 to 1956.

The question naturally arises—why should we have foreign investment? Does not the entry of foreign capital create competitive difficulties for the domestic capitalist and tend to draw sectors of the economy under foreign control, leading to some loss of national sovereignty and dignity? Nationalism is a noble sentiment, and one to be proud of. But true nationalism does not reject external assistance on reasonable terms, especially when there is a scarcity of domestic capital to push through a rate of development that would ensure the economic well-being of the country.

We are an under-developed country, and like any of our Asian, African, and Latin-American counterparts, we are prone to what economists call “a vicious circle” of capital poverty. The main source of funds for domestic investment springs from individual savings, which in turn come from individual incomes. When the capacity to save is low, because of low individual incomes, there would indeed be little capital available to channel into manufacturing and trade. Without adequate capital, very little growth in productivity can take place, and this in turn would inhibit the improvement of incomes. Thus, the circle completes itself. Unless this circle of poverty is broken, stagnation or even regression would tighten its stranglehold on the economy as population continues to grow without compensating growth in production.

To complicate the picture, there are strategic economic sectors such as mining and pioneer industries where initial heavy outlays of capital and application of particular technological skills are needed over a period of time before profits or production can be realized. It is not surprising to find domestic private capital inadequate or hesitant to finance such ventures, which nevertheless would provide a necessary base for further industrial undertakings. In such cases, it would be logical to look for financing from abroad, derived from the savings of other people with higher incomes.

Our present needs and the manner in which we respond to them will, to a large extent, determine our future rate of development. Left to ourselves, we do not at present have the capacity to mobilize enough capital from our own resources to sustain the rate of economic development necessary for progress towards eventual self-sufficiency. We should not be reluctant therefore to seek and welcome bone-fide foreign investors who are willing to stake their capital in the development of our industries in anticipation of fair and reasonable returns.

Our country possesses vast natural resources and great economic potential, sufficient I am told, to support four times our present population. However, unless these resources are tapped and put to use, they can do no good for any of our people. The Surigao deposits, for instance, have an estimated potential yield of about $2 billion in mineable nickel alone, plus $1 billion in iron, manganese, and cobalt. Capital is the key that would unlock these latent resources and transform potential to reality. I am sure you will agree then that foreign capital coming in to supplement our own funds would be a boon rather than a hindrance to progress.

It would therefore be proper to appraise the investment climate existing in the Philippines today, with the object of improving it consistent with consideration of national interest and the legitimate expectations of the investor. Private business as well as the government should explore means of attracting additional foreign investments, especially into fields where they would generate the greatest benefit to the country in terms of production, utilization of domestic resources, creation of job-opportunities, and dissemination of technological skills.

We must not remain passive to the possibilities at hand. For instance, I believe that there is a real desire among highly developed countries to expand international investments, loans and assistance in underdeveloped areas. In fact it is estimated that international investment, excluding government grants and transfers, is averaging about $2,000 million a year. However, we must compete with other capital-short countries for a larger share, by fostering an investment climate which would be reasonably attractive to foreign capital consistent with the risk involved and our need for such capital.

I think that conditions in the country today are generally favorable for foreign investment. We believe in the principle of private free enterprise, and our political atmosphere is orderly and stable.

Flow of foreign investments would, in a way, replace government financing which sometimes generates inflationary repercussions. New foreign investment brings with it its own foreign exchange requirements and its technical and administrative “know-how”. However, we must also realize that the foreign capital we accept also commits our international reserve to the periodic remittance of profits abroad and the eventual repayment of the principal.

Under our system of controls, the foreign investor is allowed to remit abroad 25 to 100 per cent of his participation in the net profits of a firm annually, depending on the priority level of his business, which is based on its contribution to national income and employment, to the strengthening of the country’s balance of payments position, and to the supply of essential commodities for the economy. Remittable profits in one year run to as high as 60 per cent of total foreign capital invested. Compare this to the 10 to 20 per cent range of profit remittance permitted by other underdeveloped countries. Furthermore, the investor may repatriate or transfer his original capital back to his home country. This is guaranteed after five years from the operation of the industry involved, at the rate of 20 per cent a year.

American investments, in particular, are afforded additional advantages. Under the Investment Guaranty Program of the I.C.A., currency convertibility of their profits and capital is insurred, and they are protected from the risk of loss through expropriation, confiscation, or war. Under the Laurel-Langley, parity rights in land ownership, exploitation of natural resources and business privileges are also given.

It must be reiterated here that economic controls such as these governing remittance of profits are in effect out of temporary necessity. The Government has many responsibilities to discharge, such as labor employment and that of allocating whatever foreign exchange resources the country can pool in the most equitable manner consistent with overall economic goals. A wise use of foreign investment will help in mere employment for labor in the acquisition of industrial know-how, in a mere accelerated economic development and in many cases strengthen the confidence of nations in our government. At present, our. unemployment is high and it is not yet possible to satisfy all the demands for foreign exchange made upon our international reserve. However, the concerted efforts now being exerted during the period of austerity we have proclaimed should lead to the bolstering of the reserve to levels where the controls may be lifted without jeopardy to orderly and continued development. I reaffirm that these controls will be removed as soon as we can safely do so. We may not be rich in foreign exchange, if foreign exchange is measured in terms of gold and dollars. But if foreign exchange is measured in terms of marketable and varied resources awaiting development, we are blessed with abundance.

There are many other circumstances which the investor would find favorable. We may mention that Philippine corporate taxes are still among the lowest in the World, and over and above this, tax relief is available to investors, in the form of exemptions under Republic Act 901 for “new and necessary industries.”

The Government has also undertaken extensive social overhead projects such as networks of first class and feeder roads, bridges, port and air terminals facilities, and hydroelectric plants to supply power for industry at low cost. For some of these projects, the Government has tapped international financial institutions. When the Biñga hydroelectric plant is in full operation in 1960, an additional 100,000 kilowatts will be available for use in Luzon. Two other big projects, the Ambuklao dam and No. 2 Unit of the Maria Cristina Plant can turn out a total of 125,000 kilowatts. There are 7 other smaller power projects supplying some 30,300 kilowatts.

Several basic industrial projects have been launched by the government to bridge the gap, into which private capital hesitates to venture at present, between heavy primary industries and secondary industries and for these projects we shall avail of all possible foreign credits and assistance to minimize the pressures an our international reserves. Examples of these are the Iligan Steel Mills which have just been completed for the production of merchant steel bars, and the pig-iron smelting plants in Iligan, Panganiban, and Angat. Such plans form important links in the chain of steel industry integration which enables the country to process its own native ores instead of exporting them raw.

All of these things I have mentioned contribute to a healthy atmosphere for investment and a base on which private capital can build its firms and factories in reasonable’ security.

I feel it proper at this point to say something about the mutual responsibilities between the foreign investor and the host country. Without adhering to the strict formality of a written contract, there are nevertheless certain ethical obligations which the investor owes the country, and which the country in turn, owes the investor.

Probably the greatest fear of the foreign investor is the risk of nationalism and expropriation of property by the government. As far as the Philippines is concerned, such fears is groundless. We Filipinos believe in love of country and the right to chart our own national destiny under a democratic form of government. We also believe in upholding our dignity as a nation, by living up to any commitment that we may freely enter into. The most important guarantee to the foreign investor is that when he chooses to employ his capital in the Philippines, he can expect fair and equitable treatment.

The investor in turn has certain responsibilities to the country. For instance, that of making a sincere effort to understand our people and the manifold problems facing us in our struggle for economic progress; such as, labor employment, wage fairness, stability of international reserve, and fair returns for natural resources used in the case of those allowed by the Constitution to utilize them. It is only right that he should seek to make a reasonable profit, and enjoy it here or abroad. Like any Filipino citizen, he would enjoy the protection of our laws, but also be liable for its penalties if he should break them.

While expecting profit from his venture and risk-taking, the foreign investor must at the same time endeavor to accomplish tangible good for the country by channeling his capital into productive enterprises which fill a real need in the economic framework. In order to encourage capital flow to essential economic sectors, the government has established a priority system which makes it possible for the foreign investor to remit abroad a larger portion of his profits than would be allowed less essential enterprises.

I particularly call on foreign management to look to the technological, entrepreneurial, and wage advancement of their Filipino employees. They are co-workers in the success of the enterprise, and deserve due recognition and compensation. All too often, the foreign corporation that decries and fears, nationalism seeks to reserve for itself complete ownership of the overseas firm as well as monopoly in its administration. Without realizing it, that corporation itself practices an insidious kind of nationalism.

On our part, the government can improve the climate for joint enterprise by assuring investors that excessive restrictions will not be imposed, and by making clear and valid definitions on the status of foreign investments in the country through a codification of the different laws and regulations covering such investments into one body of investment law. However, I realize that this investment law should not be a rigid statute, but must possess a certain flexibility which would provide for liberalization as changing economic conditions warrant.

But just as the foreign investor expects our investment law to be governed by reasonableness and common sense, we must expect his actions to be guided by the same rules.

Mutual trust and performance must go hand in hand. Agreements and commitments are not only to be made, and confidence avowed. Agreements must be kept, and actions must confirm that confidence. In this, I affirm the readiness of the government to do all that is reasonable to assure the congenial atmosphere in which foreign investor and Filipino businessman can effectively work together in the development of our resources. I call upon both to exercise what is best in the spirit of nationalism and internationalism. The immediate mutual benefits that can be garnered will be well worth the effort, and on a larger scale we shall all be brought so much closer to the goal to which we have long aspired—self-sufficiency and a measure of prosperity in an atmosphere of competitive but orderly free enterprise.

Nationalism and foreign investment on a collective basis are not necessarily incompatible. The latter under a climate of fairness and square deal and understanding can be harnessed to achieve the ultimate goals of the former. This America has done and this we can do.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library