PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE 10TH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION OF THE DEATH OF PRESIDENT ROXAS, APRIL 15, 1958, AT CLARK FIELD, PAMPANGA

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, OUR AMERICAN FRIENDS, MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

ON this solemn celebration of the 10th anniversary of the death of President Manuel Roxas, it was thought fitting and proper to do it here in Camp Clark, for this is the place, 10 years ago, where he drew the last breath of his earthly life. And this is the place where he said in fiery eloquence his last speech in the advocacy of enduring Philippine-American friendship. This is the hallowed place where his American friends marshalled the best of science in an effort to retrieve from the cold grip of death one of America’s greatest and most sincere friends, President Manuel Roxas. It can, therefore, be said that he died in the arms of Filipinos and Americans who fought together to win the war for liberty and democracy and are standing together to win universal peace, freedom, and abundant life. Thus, as Filipinos and Americans jointly pay tribute to Roxas on this occasion, we rededicate Philippine-American solidarity tested in the crucible of war and constantly re-attested in the pursuits of peace.

What place does Roxas occupy in Philippine history? It might be too early now to render a definitive answer to this question. Let history have the perspective of time to do that. But, as one of his contemporaries, I feel that I owe it to history to make of record my opinion about Roxas, the man and the public servant.

Of Roxas as an orator and parliamentarian, I can attest, having been a member of Congress during his long incumbency as Speaker of the House of Representatives, that he had few equals in this country and abroad. Earnest, fiery, intense and colorful, prodigal in poetic rhythm, and rich in imagination, his orations fell like a symphony on the enraptured throng. He produced gemlets that sparkled with wit, and lines wet with tears. His paragraphs were iridescent as the rainbow and in every word were the pulse and breath of life. While at times he weakened his speech by an extravaganza of details, he never failed to lay the solid foundations of his thesis with care, adroitness, and art, from which he rose with magic skill and élan to the majestic peaks of eloquence. Patriotism and love of freedom were the signet of his glory. His last dying words were for freedom and democracy. He was a consummate artist in speech, who, as he willed, could be volcanic as Mayon, or lyrical as a perfect day in the flowering frenzy of May. He could be mellow and tender as the moonbeams overflowing a world of slumber, or fiery and iridescent as the famous sunset of Manila Bay.

As a nationalist statesman, he left an indelible impression in our history. For more than a decade, as Speaker of the House of Representatives, he contributed his best to constructive legislation in the Philippines. It was at this period of his life that he became a popular idol as Philippine spokesman in the United States for our supreme aspiration for independence. As President of the Philippine Senate for a year immediately after the war, he measured up to the most difficult situation in the midst of the wreck and ruin, the death and debacle bequeathed us by the last catastrophic war.

As a constitutionalist, Roxas played a brilliant and leading role in the drafting of our Constitution. This is a contribution to the building of our nation which will keep his memory ever green through the surging centuries of our national evolution and devolution. As a lawyer, his broad and profound mastery of the anatomy of the law, and his intimacy with the great streams, the currents and the tides of constitutional authority are legacies that he bequeathed to the nation through our Constitution. Among the intellectual constellation that shone in the Constitutional Convention, Roxas was one legal luminary who was most familiar with constitutional precedents that now rise as the peaks and promontories, the headlands and the beacons, of the fundamental law. This he also bequeathed to us as part of our constitutional patrimony by giving to that Immortal Charter solidity, breath, scope, vision, and retrospection.

He was also an economist of recognized ability who strengthened the Cabinet of the immortal President Quezon. As Secretary of finance, he was mainly instrumental in charting the economic policy of the Commonwealth, fashioned to embrace even the economic planning for the then advening Philippine Republic. As an economist, perhaps the visionary and the romantic in him carried him to adventures too daring for time-tested, experience-proven sound public economy. But, after all, the path of progress and growth has always been adventurous.

As President of the Philippines that should have been the crowning glory of his career, perhaps it is too early now to make a just appraisal. Let history have the perspective of time before rendering definitive verdict. His administration was built on the broad, grand, and splendid plan, but time and the times deprived him of the chance to carry out these plans. He had his weaknesses and human limitations like any other mortal, for even greatness is moulded out of common faults. The difficult and even perilous circumstances of his times, the total collapse of our economy after the war, the moral breakdown left us by the war, the rising tide of man’s cupidity and greed whose waves swelled even into Malacañang, all these and many others made his administration: a truly difficult task. But whatever you say of his achievement or of his failures and misfortunes, it can never be justly said of him that he faltered or wavered in the midst of almost insurmountable adversities. Afire with faith and aflame with determination, he nobly fought the battle of life until death crowned him with glory. To his eternal glory, even his unkindest critics admit that he performed a gallant and courageous leadership that won admiration from friends and foes, both here and abroad.

But Roxas the man was, to many of us, greater than Roxas the orator, the statesman, the soldier, or the economist. He was generous as autumn in the fullness of harvest, and hospitable as summer in the floodtide of joy. He was a loyal steadfast friend, a chivalrous enemy, and a magnimous victor. His heart was open as the gates of day and his rewards to friends flowed freely. Indeed, much of the condition that brought criticisms against him was due to his love and attachment to his friends, some of whom took undue advantage of his ever abounding generosity. Paradoxically, this was his virtue as a man that was his weakness as an executive. Of men like him hath Shakespeare once said: “He that loved not wisely but too well.” He was a man of many paradoxical qualities, for as a fighter he was one through and through; yet, he had intellectual hospitality, tolerance, and broadmindedness. In fight, he was valiant; in victory, noble. He was a dreamer, a master planner, a romantic soul, the kind of leader who would build upon the physical truth a spiritual reality. And yet, he was human and, therefore, realistic—so realistic that in his pardonable weak moments as a realist, he allowed the interest of politics to override the higher interest of statesmanship. But for his sin none in the tribe of political Magdalenes is entitled to throw at him the first stone. He knew the human heart, its tides and currents, its calms and storms, and like a modern Sinbad he sailed emotion’s troubled sea. A loyal and devoted husband, a kind and affectionate father, a true Filipino citizen and patriot, his death was truly an irreparable loss to the country.

As one of the architects of Philippine foreign policy, Roxas stood for the maintenance and constant improvement of Philippine-American friendship on the basis of equality and mutual respect of each other as sovereign countries. As a soldier-statesman, he fought side by side with Americans during the Second World War, It was in these times of perils and momentous decisions that he came to know better the American as a true and loyal friend. After the war, as first President of the Philippine Republic, it was his lot to lead the herculean task of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country. He asked for American help and assistance and these were given generous measure by America out of the abundance of her love. In post-war era when the Philippine Republic started to build up its national defense and the United States as leader of the free world was preparing and planning for the global defense of democracy and freedom, our two countries entered into a mutual defense pact, as a result of which Camp Clark was established as a military base. This is one of the last official acts of President Roxas of further cementing Philippine-American partnership. It can therefore be justly said that among Asian statesmen of the time, Roxas stands out as one of America’s greatest friends.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library