Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Business Writers Association of the Philippines (BWAP)

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, March 22, 1961]

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

MORE than thirty years ago, a man who became the poet laureate of this MIDDLE EAST COUNTRY, wrote these words.

Pity the nation that wears a cloth it does not weave, eats a bread it does not harvest, and drinks a wine that flows not from, its own winepress. . . .

Thus with incisive insight this (Kahlil Gibran of Lebanon) poet summed up a verity of life full of economic as well as philosophical implications. Perhaps he was speaking of his own country and his own time, but he could very well have spoken of all countries which suffer the basic weakness of dependency upon others for their existence.

The problems of dependency and deficiency have had long historical roots in the underdeveloped countries of Asia and Africa. Many of them newly emergent from the shadow of foreign dominance, found themselves thrust into the backwash of world competition left to their meager technological and financial resources, to eddy far behind the industrial and advanced nations. The rising expectations of their peoples soon pressed to the limits of these resources, and extraordinary measures had to be taken to push out of the restrictive confines of underdevelopment and poverty into the broad new frontiers of self-sustaining economic growth more worthy of free nations. Economic development then became the prime aspiration and common consuming effort of these countries, including our own, with self-sufficiency as the immediate good, and prosperity, the ultimate end.

We have met with remarkable success in our effort. I need not elaborate on statistical magnitudes in this regard; the record is open for all to see. From an economy prostrated by war, with production and trade facilities largely in ashes, we have witnessed the transition to an economy self-sufficient in the basic needs of its people and able to trade with the world from a position of growing strength.

We have seen our economy stoutly weather off at least two serious financial crises which could very easily have wiped out the gains of any development program through ruinous inflation. We have watched the growing network of social-overhead” or “impulse” facilities, such as transport, communications, and power which are necessary pre-conditions to the establishment and operation of other facilities. We have witnessed the intensification of production activity in both agricultural and industrial lines, with the mushrooming of factories and plants in commercial centers, and their increasing dispersal to the rural regions. Last but not least, we have been aware of the growing experience and maturity of government and private business in the task of economy-building, the all-important intangibles vital to the sustenance of progress.

And now, we find the country at the threshold of a return to free enterprise, with the government preparing to relinquish the controls it has exercised over the past decade as an instrument of economic development. This in itself is eloquent testimony to the stage of progress the Philippines has achieved, that the government should now get ready to entrust the responsibility for allocation of resources to the market forces, and the continuance of development to the businessmen and industrialists of the private sector.

We have reached the penultimate stage before the threshold is crossed and full decontrol becomes a fact. The widening of the free market area last March, second to embrace about 75 per cent of all foreign exchange transactions, brings us one step closer to a unitary exchange rate which shall be responsive to the exigencies of the market. However, during this stage there are several things that must be accomplished if the threshold is to be safely spanned and the return to free enterprise completed without the dislocation of the economy and the disruption of development. Of late, you have been well apprised of the duties and responsibilities of the private sector in effecting a successful transition. Let me now discuss then the other side of the coin, the measures that have been taken or are yet to be taken in the public sector before the final stage of the decontrol program can be terminated.

The imminence of full decontrol will necessarily cause the government to shift emphasis from direct regulation to more subtle instruments of supervision. Henceforth, the channeling of economic activities into desired lines will have to be accomplished by inducement and moral suasion rather than by the force of edict. Policies of attraction through tax incentives, tariff protection, or even subsidies for highly desirable projects will play larger roles in encouraging the flow of resources to strategic areas of economic endeavor. Otherwise, the government will seek to minimize its intervention in the course of ordinary business.

The public sector’s fiscal operations will be a particularly sensitive factor during this transitional decontrol period and thereafter. Greater caution will be necessary because any imprudence in fiscal policies would immediately have an unsettling impact on the free peso-dollar parity. An excess of expenditures over revenues would trigger an inflationary situation at a time when the economy is particularly vulnerable. Expansion in money supply at a rate that outstrips increase in domestic production would pressure the country’s balance of payments with a high effective demand for imports. There being no controls to insulate the international reserves, a deterioration in foreign exchange resources would be inevitable. This would weaken the position of the peso vis-a-vis other currencies, a condition which would reflect itself in the free market exchange rate.

Fully cognizant of the danger, this Administration therefore pledges to do its utmost to maintain the sound fiscal performance which has characterized the last three years. The Administration shall not hesitate to utilize all its power and influence to keep this pledge, which has now become the cornerstone of our policy in the public sector.

With the disappearance from the scene of the exchange control system, fiscal and monetary policies will therefore be adopted to promote the selectivity in economic goals hitherto enforced by the controls. For instance, the controls have carried out such objectives as maintaining a production-oriented import pattern and insulating the international reserve from excessive demand. Now, the tariff on the fiscal side, and credit policies on the monetary side, will bear the brunt of influencing the pattern of import, production, and income distribution. They will also be charged with providing temporary protection and preferences to economically desirable industries which may require a little more time to adjust fully operations to a free economy.

The basic measures will mostly require congressional action. In the meantime, however, I am doing what we, within our powers in the Executive Branch, could possibly do to traverse this transition as smoothly as possible. I have directed that the margin be reduced by the Central Bank from 20 to 15 per cent to mitigate the impact occasioned by the widening of the free market under the third phase of decontrol on local producers and consumers.

I have also approved the redirection in our credit policies to meet the current and future monetary requirements of a decontrolling economy. While the selective “Portfolio Ceilings” are still being maintained for certain reasons, all other credit restraints have already been removed. The Central Bank has liberalized its rediscounting facilities and open market operations, and has cut down reserve requirements on demand liabilities to only 16 per cent, the lowest in its history. As it is now, there is hardly any restriction on credit expansion, save the financial limitations of the banks themselves. In line with our policy to attract foreign investments and in order to make available more funds to the productive sector, the reduction from the 75-100 per cent level to only 16 per cent, like other demand deposits of the required reserves against blocked fiduciary deposits, is being considered. This should effect an unfreezing of funds formerly required to be held against the blocked accounts. Another factor which should contribute to the easing of the monetary situation is the increased income flow of exporters under decontrol.

The impact of these measures is only beginning to be felt. As of now the scarcity of available funds still requires that portfolio priorities established by the Central Bank be continued. However, steps have been taken to strengthen the distribution of network of the country, by liberalizing credit for Filipino distributors dealing in domestice foodstuffs, placing loans for this purpose under Priority I. The matter of distribution is a crucial one for the economy. For instance, the lack of an adequate distribution network may be a significant cause for high prices in consuming areas even while regional surpluses may exist elsewhere. Public works projects, other development projects, and further appropriate credit measures will therefore be accelerated to augment the flow of money to the rural regions and improve the transportation aspect of distribution, especially by linking producing areas with consuming areas.

The Administration is taking other practical steps to increase the domestic availability of capital besides the monetary and fiscal measures. For example, full support will be extended Filipinos willing to avail themselves of the foreign loans and capital now being offered the country. As a consequence of the remarkable pick-up in our economy, international financial institutions, such as the World Bank, have expressed their readiness to assist us at this time. It is my deep satisfaction to state that the great private banks of the United States and other financing institutions have indicated their desire to extend credit facilities to us or invest in the Philippines if fair terms and climate of investment can be guaranteed by the Philippine government. An Office is therefore being created in the Central Bank specifically to extend technical assistance to investors, both foreign and domestic. This Office will help Filipino firms prepare project studies and draw up loan applications satisfactory to the foreign credit agencies. Pending enactment of a foreign investment law by Congress, this Office will also assist foreign investors with informational and counseling services. This Office will be the international investment window of the Central Bank, so to speak, which extends initial processing service for prospective foreign investors in this country. And when the foreign investment bill is enacted into law, this Office may be charged to implement the law.

We have also worked out measures to blunt any unreasonable price rises. Adequate foreign exchange will be made available to the NAMARCO for importation of essential commodities and to other pertinent agencies for importation of staples. This is of prime importance in order to ensure that commodity prices remain within reach of the masses and that speculative hoarding be prevented.

In the area of economic planning, some reorientation towards a decontrolled private enterprise system must be accomplished. With the economic situation growing more fluid and complex as larger decisions are left to the market forces, and the scope of the government’s control over resource allocation narrows, the need for sound and sustained planning becomes more marked. An overall plan is needed to give broad direction and guidance to the diverse operations of the economy in the interest of orderly and continued development.

Though we have made remarkable advances in the last decade, we have still a long way to full development. Our resources of investment capital and technological skills are limited in the face of all the possibilities. Consequently, these resources must somehow be applied to the particular uses which would gain the optimum overall benefit. Without planning, resources might very well remain idle, or be applied haphazardly. The job of the economic plan would be to highlight desirable projects from among competing projects, and extend them the necessary preferences in the competition for acquisition of resources.

But I must strongly emphasize that these measures which the Administration is taking, are not adequate to insure the country’s continued progress when full decontrol has arrived. They must be bolstered up and complemented by bold and decisive legislation. I therefore urge the speedy enactment by Congress of the following complementary measures—the measures—the revision of the tariff, the repeal of barter, the foreign investment bill, and a substitute measure for the exchange margin fee.

To perform properly its function under the new conditions, a revision of the Tariff and Customs Code is indicated. Recent studies on the distribution of present tariff rates among the different commodity categories have shown little correlation to essentiality. Neither are some rates adequate enough to extend protection to deserving industries. A tariff revamp will therefore be considered by Congress with the aim of making the system more responsive to the needs of a decontrolled economy, and the increased competition of imported goods under decontrol.

While the revision of tariff rates is in process, we have adopted some “stop-gap” necessary measures to afford immediate, through temporary protection, to local infant industries which will later fall under the mantle of tariff security. Such a measure is the restriction of certain commodity imports, particularly those at present under the “Unclassified Items” category, and produced locally in sufficient volume. This category is being broadened to include some items now outside of it, but whose banning would be imperative to eliminate direct competitive threat to particularly sensitive domestic industries.

Congress will also have to consider the repeal of barter: If the Philippine peso is allowed to seek its own equilibrium rate, the reason for barter than ceases to exist. I must point cut that, should barter continue, a unified exchange rate would be extremely difficult to achieve, and the success of decontrol would be jeopardized.

Above all we have to pass a foreign investment law really intended to attract friendly foreign capital to the country. We have to admit that our own capital formation being small as yet, it does not have the capacity and the courage to go into highly speculative ventures like oil mining, or ventures that require heavy initial investment and very slow in producing profit like iron, silver, nickel, basic metals mining, or any mining for that matter. In these and several other fields of ventures to develop and utilize our natural resources as fast as we can, we have need of the assistance of foreign investment. We have vast natural resources to develop and develop right away. Let us not be perros del Hortelano, that refuse to eat and at the same time prevent others to eat. Let us also not lose sight of the fact that foreign investment here constitutes our own beach-head in foreign countries for our own foreign trade expansion and diversification. Let it not be forgotten also that a law for the attraction of foreign capital will not produce any positive results unless the foreign investor is assured of a favorable climate, a fair and just treatment, and a reasonable guarantee that the investor can enjoy the fruits of his ventures to the equitable measure established by generally recognized principles of international law.

With the eventual attainment of an equilibrium rate of exchange, there will no longer be any reason to impose extraordinary cost restrictions on imports, especially after the revision of the tariff. Yet, the government must make up for the substantial loss of revenue entailed by repeal of the margin, owing to the necessity of financing the expanding needs of the country, as well as countering the price rises consequent to decontrol. Existing sources of taxes are already being burdened as much as could be reasonably asked for. As it is, many business firms are already being subjected to a cost-price squeeze, and the recent price rises due to decontrol are having an eroding effect on the personal incomes of the people.

It seems only fair to pass on the incidence of new taxes primarily to the main beneficiaries of decontrol. For most of them, the rise in the exchange rate has represented a pure windfall. Tapping a part of this windfall for fiscal purposes would not only make up the required revenue to replace the margin fee, but would provide a powerful anti-inflationary or counter-cyclical weapon. It would also constitute a simple act of social justice. It being the eternal cosmic law at work—that those who want to reap must sow.

This then, my friends, is the broad outline of the Administration’s program for the final stage of decontrol. However, the apparent acceleration of the decontrol program seems to have generated some speculation and injected an element of uncertainty into the business climate. Let me erase any doubts or confusion that may have arisen, by making this announcement: It is the Administration’s considered decision to maintain the third phase of decontrol for as long as it takes to enact the basic legislative and executive measures which constitute the necessary complements to the monetary measures. There can be no full decontrol until this is accomplished. There shall, be no full decontrol unless and until the transitional measures have been taken and found fairly adequate to stabilize the national economy for complete freedom from controls.

We are at a promising, though challenging period in our national affairs. We must grant that the transition from control to decontrol will work some difficulties on us. But these are passing and transitory, and are the sacrifices we pay for freedom. Also, there are those who question as to whether we can surpass or at least sustain under free enterprise the high rate of development achieved during the decade under controls. This can only be determined by the manner in which the different sectors rise to meet the challenges now posed before us. But as far as my administration is concerned, I have full faith and confidence in the vision, determination, guts, and pluck of the Filipino that I am fully convinced that our achievements in the economic field during the decade of the sixties will dwarf even the spectacular achievements of our National Recovery from the last World War.

Fellow countrymen, for fifteen years we have held the leadership among new independent countries in the field of economic development in Asia and Africa. Let us keep that leadership not for vain glory or national pride. Let us keep that leadership to prove that the democratic way of life, with freedom as its magic tool, is the real way to the redemption of the masses from misery, crime, disease, and ignorance. Democracy is the way of hope and love and abundant life.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech before the Business Writers Association of the Philippines (BWAP) on March 22, 1961, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(14) , 2470-2476.