Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the delegates to the Second Regional Conference of UNESCO National Commissions in Asia

[Delivered by Education Secretary Jose Romero at the WHO Building, Taft Avenue, January 18, 1960]

MADAM CHAIRMAN, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN OF THIS CONFERENCE, MY FRIENDS:

IT IS with real pleasure that I take this opportunity to extend to all of you a most cordial welcome to the Philippines.

It is also with real pleasure that I take this occasion to express the wish that your stay in our midst will not only enable you to achieve the high purpose which brings you here but will also enable you to gain some insight into our thinking and our character, because we Filipinos, as a nation and as a people, are truly one with you, now more than ever, in your endeavor to promote peace with justice and freedom for all mankind.

I wish to make it of record that we deeply appreciate the selection of Manila as the site of this Second Regional Conference of National Commissions for UNESCO in Asia We feel gratefully in debt to UNESCO for this signal honor and we feel doubly honored because the highest officials of UNESCO have generously chosen fit to journey to our shores and take part in the deliberations of this conference

To each and every one of you, I say in all sincerity* “please feel at home,” because we would be unhappy if your sojourn amongst us should not be pleasant and fruitful.

I have been given to understand that the basic purpose of this conference is to study the problems of Asian countries educational, scientific, and cultural, and to determine what in the program of UNESCO can be carried out by its Asian commissions working together.

That is a simple description of the task before you, but we are not deceived by the simplicity of the definition. We are aware that the task itself embraces numerous problems of a complex nature, calling as it does, for instance, for closer collaboration among Asian countries in the educational, scientific, and cultural spheres of activity and, indeed, for international goodwill and understanding.

None can be more conscious of the fact than us Asians that great masses of people in vast areas of our enormous territory, even to this dawn of the nuclear age, are still bereft of even the minimum requirements of modern civilized existence.

It is true that we have great wealth in natural resources. We have great wealth in our Asian fields and forests, in our mountains, in our seas. But our needs are equally great. We sadly lack a proper conditioning of our human resources. We need more and more of education, fundamental as well as advanced. We need expert counsel in many fields of human activity. We need amplification and development of technical skills. We need to advance a great deal in the scientific field.

Yes, ladies and gentlemen, we need all this because we need more and more of food, clothing, shelter, and health facilities for our ever-increasing populations—because we need the wherewithal to give a better life to our undernourished millions.

I, therefore, find it most gratifying to address such a gathering as this Second Regional Conference. I say this because I know that UNESCO, as a vital instrumentality of the United Nations, represents, basically, an organized effort of civilized men to assert human rights, and in the greatest possible measure, to substitute enlightenment for ignorance, and well-being for misery and want.

I also find it gratifying to witness such a gathering as this because as a Filipino and as an Asian I am deeply conscious of the need for Asians to be less and less strangers to one another and to know one another more and more.

This forum, I hope, should offer a splendid opportunity for us Asians to look at one another at close range and to open our hearts and minds, as it were, to one another so that we may the better appreciate and understand one another. In so doing, we shall perhaps revitalize our consciousness of a common historical and cultural heritage and strengthen the bonds among us that have been forged by ancient tradition and immemorial time.

But perhaps I disgress too far. If I do, it is because I find it compelling to equate the problems that we Filipinos have with the problems of our Asian brothers, and I like to think that if these problems are going to be solved, it will primarily be the task of the Asians themselves to provide the ultimate solution. I say this with due respect to our Western friends who are sincerely solicitous for our welfare. To these friends we extend a warm, fraternal hand.

With this last thought in mind, permit me to return to my original sentiment—that it is to me most gratifying to be able to say a few words to this distinguished gathering, a gathering of distinguished individuals dedicated to the task of finding solutions to the manifold educational, scientific, and cultural problems of Asia. This a conference that should be a source of hope for every underprivileged Asian and indeed for every underprivileged individual anywhere; a source of hope, I say, because it means a further step toward the elimination of human bondage to environments that breed poverty, hunger, and ignorance.

In conclusion, I would like you to bear with me as I dwell briefly on what we in the Philippines have been doing and have been trying to do, within the limits of our resources, to promote the aims and objectives of UNESCO, both by our own efforts and in conjunction with other nations.

In this country we have a legal provision for compulsory education for a period of six years. These six years embrace our elementary school period.

We have a rapidly increasing population and this means that more and more schools have to be provided for our children. At present we spend about one-third of our national budget for education.

In this country we also have a law providing for the building of public libraries all over the land.

We have developed in this country, as you probably recall, the community school system, which promotes democracy at the grass-roots level besides providing fundamental education and instilling in the minds of the people a sense of social responsibility. I understand that this community school system, as we have developed it here is being adopted elsewhere in the world.

We have organized here a National Science Development Board in line with a policy to keep abreast of scientific developments and secure for our people the blessing that emanate from the latest scientific achievements. We expect to train more and more scientists in the years to come. We have, in fact, a unique law which provides for the annual selection of children gifted in things scientific for the best possible training.

Culturally, I am happy to say that we are finding great delight in rediscovering for ourselves the beauty, the charm and the symbolism of our native songs and our dances, both those that have been handed down to us from ancient times by our forbears and those that we have evolved in long years of contact with Western civilization. Perhaps some of you have heard of our student dance group that have captivated many an audience in many parts of the world.

Last but not least, I would like to mention the establishment here of the Asian Youth Institute. We are grateful for having been given the seat of this institute, which, properly nurtured, should develop into a mighty instrument for the promotion of social responsibility and international harmony.

As Asians, we Filipinos are thankful to UNESCO for its manifest interest in the welfare of Asia.

And on behalf of my people, I can say that UNESCO can always count on our support, however humble it may be, for all its efforts to reduce human suffering and ignorance, for its staunch advocacy of human rights, and for its endeavor to instill in the minds of men that it is within their power to achieve peace and prosperity and a truly fraternal civilization for all the world.

I repeat, therefore, that I wish this conference unqualified success. And again I say, please feel at home in our country, and if ever you should desire to come here again, you may be sure that our warmest welcome shall await you.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). President Garcia’s speech before delegates to the Second Regional Conference of UNESCO National Commissions in Asia, delivered in the morning of January 18, 1960, by Education Secretary Jose Romero at the WHO Building on Taft Avenue. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(4) , 717-720.