PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH DELIVERED IN QUEZON CITY, MONDAY AFTERNOON, AUGUST 19, 1957

Distinguished Guests

And dear countrymen:

I am deeply pleased to be with all of you today in celebrating the birth of the great hero of our race, the father of our freedom, and the first President of our nation, Manuel L. Quezon. Therefore, as President of our nation today, I ask that we honor his memory and principles so that our freedom may be strong and prosperous!

FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

On this the 79th anniversary of the late President Quezon, the most brilliant leader in our triumphant fight for independence and now crowned by the Muse of Immortality as the “Father of the Philippine Republic”, the whole nation offers to his memory the most beautiful flowers of a thousand fragrance culled from the very heart of the people’s Garden of Love and Gratitude. We celebrate this day, the 19th of August, to recall with patriotic pride his deeds, his valor, his devotion to, and sacrifice for, our beloved native land, his triumphs and his heartaches, his indominable will, his inspired eloquence and all the high qualities of manhood that elevated the character of the nation. We also celebrate this day to drink from the fountain of his heroic and inspiring life, new courage and greater dedication to the eternal ideals of freedom, justice, democracy, and human dignity for which he fought with all that he had and all that he was.

My friends, I find this occasion most opportune to reiterate with greater ardor a tribute I paid to his memory before the Congress of the Philippines. I said then and I say it now that:

“Manuel Quezon, the statesman, with the possible exception of Rizal, was the greatest born to the Malayan race.”

As President of the Philippines, it is hard to tell which to admire more—whether the rapidity of his conception or the speed of his action. The undebated truth is that he had a power of execution in a high degree that rarely combines with the philosophical circumspection of a deep thinker that he also was. The thinker and the doer in him were so ideally combined as to produce the greatest statesman that lived radiantly and led dynamically. Indeed, if each of the statesmanly achievements of Quezon were inscribed on a leaf, we would need all the wilderness of glorious Bataan. If each of the statesmanly thoughts and ideas of Quezon were inscribed on a rock, we would require the mountain ranges of the Himalayas to contain them all.

As a member-founder of the Nacionalista Party, he was a partisan that fought for his party as no one else did. But when the interests of his party and those of his country came to the parting of the ways, he never hesitated a moment to terminate his party loyalty. In other words, his politics ended where his statesmanship began. He was a patriot rather than partisan. He would be true to his country oftener than loyal to his party. As statesman, Manuel Quezon went deepest in thought, farthest in vision and quickest in action, and so, as a leader, he was reliable as the attraction of gravitation.

But the glories that he attained as a parliamentarian, the fame and renown that he acquired as a consumate politician, the enduring laurels that he won as a statesman, all glimmer into insignificance before the radiance of his greatness as a man. He was generous as autumn, warmhearted as summer, and splendid as a perfect day in the flowering frenzy of May. He understood human nature and, therefore, loved man. His loyalty and attachment to his friends have long become a legend here and abroad. His gallantry and chivalry towards women have endeared him to the womanhood of our land and captivated and ravished the imagination of the youth and flower of the nation. That was why youth stood by him always.

His fights to improve the lot of the lowly and the poor constitute glowing chapters in that thrilling saga of his struggle for the realization of social justice in the Philippines. It was his cherished dream to send the sunbeams of contentment and happiness into every hut and heart. He had a subtle understanding of human weakness and human frailties and so by means of his executive clemencies he tempered justice with love. He dipped his insight into the mechanics of the human heart and the dynamics of the human soul, so that he could see the heroic and the noble though covered by the rags of poverty; and find the beast and the villain though concealed under the drapery of purple and ermine. No father was more loving and beloved. No husband was more devoted, at the same time more colorful, than he; no friend more steadfast, more generous, and more reliable. No man was braver, truer, or nobler.

I could have ended right here. But I would like to add that in our pre-occupation for charting the course of our Ship of State amidst the Sargasso Sea of international rela­tionship, we can turn to Quezon for light and fortitude. The great leader even from the silence of death still speaks. So I deem it timely to retrieve from the dust of -oblivion some records of the thinking of that great Filipino patriot on the relationship which our Republic should establish and maintain with the other countries of the world.

As you will remember, the great Quezon invariably spoke out frankly, fearlessly, and unequivocably his views on vital national issues. He did so on Philippine foreign policy. For instance, in his last visit to Japan shortly before the last world war, with that Quezonian brevity and lucidity for which he was famous, he said in a banquet given by the highest officials of Japan in his honor, the following:

“It is our desire to be on good and friendly terms with Japan and with all the countries of the world but our special aim would be to maintain very close association with the United States even after the termination of the political ties between our two countries.”

In the same visit to Japan in a conference with the Japanese foreign minister he reiterated “that the Philippines owe much to the United States and that we are bound to give her special considerations if she should want them, so long as her wishes do not conflict with our national interests.” In 1939, when the second world war broke out in Europe, President Quezon assured President Roosevelt that “if the United States would be involved in the conflict, the Filipino people would fight side by side with her to the bitter end.”

When we recall that Quezon as the outstanding leader of militant nationalism in his time coined the immortal fighting slogan, “I prefer to have a Philippine government run like hell by Filipinos to a government run like heaven by Americans”; when we remember one of his first speeches as a young Filipino Resident Commissioner in Washington where he said “We will unhesitatingly prefer to be poor but free than be rich but subjects;” when we recall his gallant and bitter fight against the late Governor Wood and the anti-independist forces way back in 1925; when we recall how he hated and scorned obscurantism, subservience, sycophancy, and the bartering of honor, dignity, and conviction for a “mess of pottage”, it would appear crystal-clear to us that his pronouncements on foreign policy must have been the crystalized conviction reached after deep, conscientious, and luminous deliberation on the line of foreign policy.

Furthermore, the fact that he reiterated this fundamental concept of foreign policy in many state papers and speeches; the fact that his successors to the presidency, Osmeña and Roxas, who were also olive-crowned leaders in bur epic fight for freedom, have adopted this very concept as a cornerstone in the structure of Philippine foreign policy, convince us beyond peradventure of doubt that wisdom and experience and vision indicate that this would conduct the Philippine nation along the path to national security, economic stability, and perpetuation here of the democratic institutions and the democratic way of life. That this is the way to the attainment of peace under a regime of liberty, justice, and democracy.

To me, it is important to know the right historical perspective through which this central foreign policy concept should be viewed. Quezon as we all know was the greatest Filipino exponent of the eternal basic principle of the equality of men and nations—the principle which constitutes the brightest gem in that Immortal Charter, the American Declaration of Independence. With all the fire of his passionate soul he demanded for the Filipinos the same God-given inalienable right of all peoples “to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness”, another transcendental principle in the American Declaration of Independence, which constitutes the essence of democracy. Quezon was the Philippines’ greatest Lincolnist in believing that only a government of the people, by the people, and for the people shall never perish from the earth.

So, when President Quezon advocated maintaining close ties of friendship with America, he definitely meant that such close friendship and partnership must be on the basis of equality and mutual respect of each other’s sovereignty and national dignity. He could not have stood for less. He meant partnership with American the unrelenting struggle for the triumph of the principles of freedom and democracy and peace, all of which principles were written in astral fire in the American Declaration of Independence which he considered the political bible of the modern world.

In his second inaugural address delivered at the great bastion of Corregidor at the start of the Pacific War, Quezon said:

“No matter what sufferings and sacrifices this war may impose upon us, we shall stand by America with undaunted spirit, for we know that upon the outcome of this war depend the happiness, liberty, and security not only of this generation but of the generation yet unborn. This is the most momentous period of our history. As we face the grim realities of war, let us rededicate ourselves to the great principles of freedom and democracy for which our forefathers fought and died. The present war is being fought for these same principles.”

On this celebration of Quezon Day, therefore, we do not merely do it by exploding firecrackers, singing the national anthem, and playing of brass bands. We can better do it by trying to emulate his life of mighty love and by rededicating ourselves to the great principles of liberty, justice, and democracy and economic stability for which he fought and because of which he advocated close relations with America, the recognized champion of these same principles and now the leader of the world in the crusade for peace—not peace resting on power and might of any one country or group of countries, but peace built upon the indestructible foundations of love, liberty, and justice for all nations and peoples.

I am very grateful to all of you and may God bless us.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library