GENTLEMEN OF THE PRESS:

TWICE within a forthnight have I had the occasion to face an assemblage of the press boys—the first one in Tokyo and the second tonight—and I have been constrained to agree with an observer’s remarks that if this goes on for the rest of December, I shall have noticed that this month was not the coldest month but rather the hottest in the year. I have been told that the local press blows hot and cold at intervals—but as I see it, it has been blowing mostly hot. I would add, however, that your spontaneous applause for me tonight warms me to my heart.

My friends, information media serving the rural areas of our country had been taken for granted in the past. Many of the metropolitan dailies more often reach only the chief towns and municipalities of the provinces, and circulates among a limited subscribers therein. The situation is often aggravated by the fact that in some towns and municipalities, newspapers and news magazines are delivered several days past their date of issue. A recent survey made by two researchers underscored the glaring fact that the Philippine rural population was “hungry” for information about the work and plans of the government. The survey further indicated that magazines, newspapers, and other reading material were passed from hand to hand and people often congregated in the houses of the few fortunate ones who owned radios to hear the latest news.

I am glad to note, however, that the suburban and provincial press lately has grown in number and that the total combined circulation of more than 190 daily, weekly, monthly, and quarterly publications in 53 provinces has reached the 850,000 mark. While indeed, this figure may still be below the desired level, indications point to its steady growth. I strongly feel that within five years, more and more of our rural areas will stand to benefit from the projected increase in the number of provincial publications.

My administration, ever desirous of informing our people throughout the length and breadth of the country about the work and actuations of the government, has bolstered the presidential press office with the establishment of a provincial section to serve solely the needs of the provincial press. Today, more news material are being channeled to the rural areas, and as a consequence more of the people in the rural areas are better informed.

The potentialities of the provincial press emphasize the tremendous responsibility that the editors and news reporters of the provincial papers have in their hands. The provincial press is the main artery of information between the outside world and the rural areas. It is a link between the minds of men who inform and those who would be informed of the truth. The printed word could be a physical link more so than the spoken word. Information through word of mouth can be distorted and so can the printed word. But the difference lies in the latter’s permanent character

Often enough, we hear of rural folks swearing as gospel truth a canard handied about by critics of the Administration who would sow hate and distrust among the people. The adverse effect of such malicious information systematic ally voiced by the so-called prophets of disaster could only result in confusion and dissension among our people and therefore, could pave the way for agents and provocateurs of a godless ideology in another attempt to lure away our citizens from their chosen way of life. Once in 1949 these agents nearly succeeded in their diabolical plot to wean them of their side. This should not happen again.

A people, uninformed, are prone to believe anything passed to them as legitimate news. But a well-informed people will readily discern the truth from a bare-faced lie.

Indeed, the provincial press has a grave responsibility in its hands and this calls for the highest integrity in the men who run it—from the publisher down to the reportorial level. By integrity, we mean the strict adherence to what is factual and true and the maintenance of a free and strong press. A news item slanted to serve the interests of one man, or an editorial designed to enhance the ambitions of an interested individual—compensated by political favors or promises of political opportunities are manifestations of servitude. Servitude is not freedom; it is a sign of weakness When this happens, then the press is no longer free.

We have here in this country one of the freest and strongest press in world today. It is a distinct achievement in the sense that not all the press in the world are free. Those behind the iron curtain, for instance, cannot claim this distinction. There are others within the orbit of the free world but which are not totally as free as ours. Our press has remained free and strong mainly because the men behind it have jealously guarded that sacred principle, and the Administration has respected such a principle. To quote a famous man (Colton): “The press is not only free, it is powerful. That power is ours. It is the proudest that man can ejoy. It was not granted by monarchs; it was not gained for us by aristocracies; but it sprang from the people and, with an immortal instinct, it has always worked for the people.”

The provincial press, serving the greatest area in our country, is the backbone of public opinion. Its collective strength places it in a unique position as educator, informant, and guardian to millions of our people. In recognition of this fact, I invited your representative to join be in my recent state visit to Japan.

My friends of the press: such is the weight of the burden which you must shoulder in your chosen profession. An accurate report can serve not only your interests as reliable pressmen but, what is more important, the welfare of our people. An inaccuracy can have disastrous effects to the country.

These are the basic principles of good journalism as I know it. I am sure that a repetition of these principles can not be complete without this observation that there are always two, sides to a story. Any good journalist, true to his profession, knows that to report only one side of a story is not only being unfair to the individual concerned but he is guilty also of one-sided, baised, and prejudiced reporting.

In closing, I wish to assure each and everyone of you that the freedom of the press in our country will be maintained and respected during my administration. This I promise.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library