Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the induction of officers of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Winter Garden of the Manila Hotel, August 11, 1959]

OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE PHILIPPINES LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I WISH to congratulate the newly elected officers of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines. Most of, them are known to me, and they are all my good friends. To me they represent the type of business leadership that has enabled our country to expand its economy in the face of difficulties. In fact, they typify the enthusiasm, the vigor, the courage, and the ability of Filipino businessmen, members of this Chamber, who are continually proving to the free world the soundness of free enterprise.

It is a source of great confidence for me to know that this representative group has approved only recently a resolution indorsing and standing four square behind the economic policies that I have laid down. I look upon this manifestation of trust as a fountain of inspiration from which I may draw strength. Indeed, I thank you gentlemen from the bottom of my heart for this exemplary gesture that will have its effects not only upon my humble person but upon the entire country and people.

It is also a source of great confidence for me to know that I have you as partners in the monumental job of developing our economy and improving the living of our citizenry. For the task of nation-building is not easy. A complexity of problems must be met and solved—problems so vast in scope that only the joint efforts of all sectors, particularly of the Government and private business, can provide adequate solutions to them.

This is the setting in which I would like to discuss briefly certain matters of vital interest to you and our people. These are problems which call upon Government and business to join hands not only in safeguarding the economic freedom of our people but in achieving greatness.

I am certain that now that the storm over the recent stabilization measures has passed, we can set our sights towards a higher plateau of productive progress and join hands in the partnership of work necessary to reach that goal. It is the duty of the business world and, besides, it is in its own interest, to realize the extent of its mission and to understand the importance of its role in this great task of development with stability.

The Chamber has successfully become the cohesive force in uniting the ranks of Filipino businessmen. Public authorities, therefore, can depend on the constructive comment and advice of the businessmen. Hence, the business community may expect my administration and our Government to exhibit more and more reliance on the advice of the businessmen and industrial leaders in fostering the common goals of the national and economic progress within the context of the public welfare and higher policy. Over the past few years, in the pursuit of development, the government has created an atmosphere in which private Enterprise is extended preferential treatment and facilities the form of industrial and rural credit, tax concessions and subsidies, aids to domestic marketing, protection and encouragement through tariffs, and trade and exchange controls, together with the encouragement of Filipino entrepreneurs. The response of the private sector to these policies has exceeded expectations. There has been a heartening upsurge of investments and industrial activity.

For this reason, we have forged ahead remarkably well spite of the inherent weaknesses of underdevelopment, Aggravated by world-wide waves of alternating inflation and recession. The gross national product has risen from ₱10.03 billion in 1957 to ₱10.46 billion in 1958, or an upsurge of ₱430 million. The national income in 1958 likewise exceeded the 1957 mark by ₱414 million for a 4.7 per cent improvement. Within the national income, we find that percentage wise, the income of private corporations garnered the biggest improvement, recording an increase of 18.2 per cent over that of the previous year. In contrast, income of public corporations gained by only 6.5 per cent, while non-corporate business registered a 4.1 per cent rise.

I think it is noteworthy to point out that corporate income in 1958 advanced more than four times faster than personal income; while on the other hand, taxes on this corporate income increased only one-fifth as fast as taxes on personal income. Corporate income aggregated ₱416 million in 1958 as against ₱352 million in 1957, while corporate taxes stood at ₱101 million in 1958 and ₱98 million in 1957. Philippine corporate taxes are among the lowest in the world. This fact, taken with the circumstances of tax exemptions; industry-biased dollar allocations, controls over competing imported commodities, and relatively liberal credit facilities for industrial purposes, create a favorable environment for the development of domestic business operations.

As a matter of fact, the returns and investment in the various economic sectors of the country have been fairly high during the past ten years.

Local studies revealed that average percentage returns for every peso of investment in selected sectors stood as high as 100 per cent in mining and quarrying and electricity, gas, heat, water, and sanitary services, and above 50 to almost 100 per cent in construction and manufacturing from 30 to 50 per cent in most other lines.

In ordinary business practice in most countries, a 14 to 20 per cent annual return on investment would be considered very good.

Over the past few years, and particularly during the last few weeks of controversy over the margin bill, critics have accused the government of being so obsessed with the problem of inflation and low dollar reserves that it has neglected to push some positive measures, despite the very positive gains recorded by the economy which I have just cited as being a result of public policy. The government has been charged as being one-sided in its efforts to achieve currency stability at all costs. Yet, what these critics did not understand is that economic development cannot be sustained over a period of years at a satisfactory rate without stability. Any country that pursues development hand in hand with inflation and currency instability will only discover that it is building up a colossus with feet of clay, which will topple into ruin at the slightest change in the economic wind. The influence of currency stability or instability on investment and capital formation is no far-fetched economic notion. It is as real and vital to the prospective investor as profits are to the entrepreneur. For instance, if people had no confidence that the value of the peso would remain reasonably stable in the years to come, they would rather spend it on consumption today than save and invest it in the hope of enjoying its fruits at some later date.

The social injustice and economic dislocation that would be wrought by inflation and monetary instability are well-known facts. Yet in spite of this, the government is often .left alone to carry on the fight against these problems. At times bitter criticism has come from the very people who could check these problems best in their own sectors if they exerted a little less self-interest and a little more civic-minded understanding and cooperation.

I am well aware that to many of you, the coming months will be ones of adjustment as the effects of the retrenchment and stabilization measures, particularly, the 25 per cent margin on foreign exchange, make themselves felt. But then, some sacrifice will be exacted from every one of us, whether we be in the government or in business, whether we be producers or consumers; We must be prepared to pay a price to enable our country to achieve its long-run objectives of economic independence and development, where free enterprise may be given its fullest play, and where a stable peso will mean higher incomes and better standards of living for all.

In the case of the businessmen, the price he we have to pay will take the form of higher costs and probably lower profits. I realize that profit is the motive force of all business; that it is the life-blood of enterprise. And I uphold the principle that the businessmen, the enterpriser, the producer, must not be begrudged his reasonable profits. However, I must underline the word reasonable and I would like to emphasize that he also is a key member of society, and as such, has responsibilities and duties towards his fellow-man.

The members of this body are bona fide representatives of the business community and well realize what some of those responsibilities are. I, therefore, feel confident that when I appeal to your civic-spiritedness and foresight, and urge your utmost cooperation with the government in its present fight to keep prices down in the public, interest, my words will not fall on deaf ears.

The business community cannot and must not be content with the reaping of short term and windfall profits from their operations. After all, the legitimate businessman is not a “fly-by night” operator. He looks forward to many years of profitable activity. He, therefore, has a vital stake in the successful implementation of the stabilization program which will in the long run provide him with the environment conducive to the expansion of his business. The expectations of high and easy profits cannot continue to be pushed, therefore, without dire social implications which would in the end result in the liquidation of a free enterprise economy. If we are to sustain our development, what is now needed is bold entrepreneurial initiative for larger and efficient projects—imagination, planning, organization arid above all a long-term perspective. This would mean lower costs and reasonable profits.

I have been vested by Congress with powers of direct price-control as a last resort to keep prices from spiralling out of the reach of the common tao. However, these powers need never be used. As a matter of fact, I would rather that they remain idle as a testimonial to the maturity, and sobriety of our business groups. Government fiat can never be an effective substitute for sincere and voluntary cooperation on the part of business.

I, therefore, reiterate my desire to have you, the leaders of the business community, as partners with the government in the successful implementation of the stabilization program. We have seen our country through periods of crisis before; let us now bend all efforts to see her safely through the present problems which perhaps represent the greatest threats to her continuing development. If we must have a grand alliance, let it be the grand alliance for an economic Katipunan. Let us cast away the narrow-minded individualism which has plagued past efforts to achieve economic emancipation for our people; let us forge ahead with a concerted and a determined and an increasing devotion to the common weal.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech delivered at the induction of officers of the Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines held Thursday evening August 11, 1959, at the Winter Garden of the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (33) , 6661-6664.