LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I THANK you for the invitation to speak before you tonight. This is an annual occasion to which I look forward to principally because it affords me the opportunity to break bread with members of the Fourth Estate. To the awardees go my warmest congratulations for the honors which have been conferred upon them and which I am certain they have so well earned and richly deserve.

Looking around me tonight, I am happy to see such a cosmopolitan and international group gathered here, amidst a festive atmosphere of fellowship and goodwill. Before such a gathering, I believe it most appropriate to speak on the relationship between Filipinos and citizens of other countries in the Free World engaged in the task of building up a strong and progressive Philippines through cooperation in the agricultural, commercial, and industrial phases of the economy.

Any assessment of international relations in economic pursuits must perforce consider the the basic fact of nationalism. The movement of nationalism, the awakening of national consciousness, is a very real force today, not only in the Philippines but in every newly independent country the world over.

These countries have recently emerged from a colonial status to political freedom, and now seek for themselves the economic development which will buttress that freedom and gain for their respective peoples the realization of age-old aspirations for adequacy in the basic necessities of life.

They are attempting to accomplish in a very short span of years, and with very limited resources at hand, what the industrial and advanced nations took decades to achieve. They are attempting to tap their latent natural resources, establish and expand productive facilities, develop and diversify channels of trade and finance, and mobilize the energies of their peoples in the drive for progress.

Economic development in the face of limited financial resources is a supremely difficult task, and one that requires the concentration not only of a nation’s physical strength but also of the hearts and minds of its people.

It is but natural that nationalism becomes the cohesive force that binds together the diverse and varied strands of a country’s life, including the pursuit of economic activities, into that unity of effort required to achieve common objectives and goals.

In the Philippines we find a positive embodiment of nationalism in the Filipino First policy, which seeks to enhance greater participation of our citizens in the activities vital to our economic well-being, such as ownership and control of the means of production. However, we do not regard this policy as an exclusivistic movement to shut out foreign participation. On the contrary, the government recognizes the value and assistance of foreign capital and technological aid in our development. I have, time and again, emphasized this fact in public statements.

I would like to point out that most underdeveloped countries have come to accept the fact that external assistant can play a potent role in the acceleration of economic progress. Matching the ardor of nationalism is a consuming desire for development. In the beginning many of these countries pushed ambitious programs for rapid development, even though handicapped by low levels of savings and lack of investment capital. To pay for these programs, they freely resorted to deficit financing and credit expansion. These moves led to inflation which rapidly depleted the underdeveloped countries’ foreign exchange holdings, in the face of the cyclical instability of world demand for their traditional raw-material exports. As a result, controls had to be imposed over trade, exchange, and investments which, at times, became so complex as to be beyond the capacity of instability and uncertainty which accompanied the feverish prosecution of development plans thus defeated the purpose and proved to be an effective obstacle to the rapid attainment of the objectives.

Today, we find many countries drawing the lesson from their past experiences that the pace of progress can be painfully slow in the absence of substantial foreign assistance.

Far-sighted leaders in these countries realize that the tremendous potentials in human and natural resources that lie within their borders can be initially unleashed only with vital technological skills and supplementary investment capital from external sources. However, I must also point out that while they are willing to look abroad for partnership and assistance in the prosecution of economic development, they will not do so at the expense of their national integrity. They do not want the domination of their economies by alliens, as it was in their colonial past. Rather they look for partnership between citizens and foreigners on the basis of mutual understanding and mutual benefit.

The Economic Survey of Asia and the Far East for 1959 stated that the “attraction of foreign loans, grants, and investments, both on government and private account” was an important policy line for all the countries in the region, and for some of them the most successful one.

Incentives to foreign private investment have been offered by such countries as Iran, India, Pakistan, Burma, Vietnam, the Federation of Malay, the Republic of China, and Thailand. Such moves include exemption privileges ‘from import duties and income taxes, specific guarantees against nationalization, freedom to remit profits, facilities for the repatriation of capital, and rights to ownership of land. In 1959 Burma passed its Union of Burma Investment Act, which granted non-nationalization guarantees and freedom from import duties to foreign investors for specified periods. Closer to our shores, Taiwan has adopted a liberal foreign investments law which provides for a wide array of attraction including tax exemption privileges, full profit remittance privileges, dollar retention privileges, and facilities for capital repatriation.

These developments emphasize the desirability of codifying our own policy on the attraction of foreign investments to participate in Philippines economic development at the earliest possible date. In view of this, I have once more urged Congress to pass a Foreign Investment Law. We already possess the basic incentives. Profit margins are high compared not only with those in most underdeveloped countries, but even the advanced countries as well. Our political maturity and stability is a tested fact. Our economy is steadily progressing under a program of agro-industrialization which sees the development of new enterprises and new markets every day. Our introduction of a program to decontrol foreign exchange and imports has brought in a new elements propitious to foreign investments. Even at the present early stages of decontrol, foreign investors get the “free market rate” upon entering, and are able to remit their profits and amortization at the same rate. The flexibility in our foreign trade and exchange system should make conditions more favorable to incoming external capital.

What is needed now is a definite codification of our program covering foreign investments, their obligations and our concessions. The objective of such a codification would be to eliminate any element of uncertainty in the business climate as regard foreign investment activity. The foreign investment law should therefore considers three basic ingredients. First, the scope of economic activity open to foreign investments; second, the obligations and guarantees to be offered foreign investments in general; and the special incentives and guarantees to provide special attraction into fields which we want to promote and where the entry of foreign investments may be highly desirable, such as those requiring large capitalization and considerable technological resources; and third, the designation of the government body to act on all matters pertaining to foreign investments.

There may be certain fields where the participation of foreign investments would have to be either limited or completely debarred owing to interests of security o national policy. Such activities would include enterprises in which national defense and security are concerned or where the lifeblood streams of national survival are predominantly present. In the economic fields where special attraction is desirable, such as the highly complicated industries ancillary to steel, basic chemical industries requiring advanced and costly technological processes, or highly specialized extractive industries, special inducement could be provided to foreign investors. Other incentives in addition to the general guaranties of non-nationalization, non-confiscation, profit remittance, and reparation at the prevailing exchange rate may be offered. Such privileges and protection may take the form of some tax exemptions, assistance in land and building acquisition, and other incentives that will be studied by our National Economic Council. However, these concessions will only be made available to those firms with a certain minimum of foreign capital. Outside of these specified fields, foreign investors should be fully free to enter and conduct their business operations in conformity with the general policies of our Government and in a manner not detrimental to the interest of the country.

While the administration looks with favor on foreign equity capital on the basis of joint participation with nationals on strictly conditions without any political strings attached tc it, there can be no hard and fast rule in this matter.

The Philippine Government will not object to foreign capital having control of a concern for a limited period, if it is found to be in the national interest. Similarly with regard to the point that Filipinos be tried to replace foreign nationals, our Government would not object to the employ­ment of foreigners when Filipinos of the requisite qualifications were not available. Aside from these conditions, the foreign investors will be subject to ordinary regulations and restrictions applicable to business in general, however, with the broad guarantees of non-nationalization and non-confiscation. Remittances of profits and capital repatriation though will be subject to the prevailing foreign exchange position of the country.

It should be made uneqivocably clear that the Philippines welcomes the contribution of foreign capital and technoligical skills to the economic development effort. In closing, may I repeat that while foreign investors are welcome, even more welcome are those who enter into joint-ventures of partnership with our own citizens in the establishment and operation of a business or industrial enterprise. This should not be surprising, since in the context of our social and political philosophy, this is the form of organization which best brings out the human values of teamwork and cooperation. A joint venture which brings together both capital and managerial resources from both sides is an arrangement conducive to mutual respect, mutual understanding, and mutual benefit. A type of joint venture which may be particularly suited to Philippine conditions is that of the technological assistance contract by which Filipino capitalists may avail themselves of the skills of foreign specialists in their fields of enterprise.

For the present, while enactment of the Foreign Investment Law is pending, new foreign investments fall under the selective policies governing the establishment of new industries now being implemented by government agencies; such as, the National Economic Council, the Central Bank, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. However, once a new enterprise secures official approval, it should be accorded every facility and support to ensure its success. When all is said and done, we hope to see the emergence of a business environment in this country competitive with the best anywhere in the world.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the Stanvac Award Dinner at the National Press Club, Saturday evening, January 28, 1961, where he was Guest of Honor. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(6) , 1027-1031.