FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

AS WE CELEBRATE today the 12th anniversary of our independence, we gratefully raise our-hearts to Divine Providence in fervent prayer of thanksgiving for the guidance and protection He has given our independent republic. As our republic survived through the eventful years crowded with trials and adversities, we gain more strength and faith and look forward, to the future with hope and confidence that the Almighty will continue to shower upon us the abundance of His blessings.

We have reason to look back with satisfaction that we emerged successfully in the gigantic task of national reconstruction and rehabilitation. With the collective determination of our people, the Philippines has risen from the ashes and ruins of the last world war. During the last eleven years we have completely restored peace and order in the countryside and have quelled a rebellion that once threatened the life of our republic. We have won back the faith of the masses in our democratic institutions and our democratic way of life. And now, we are engaged in an equally great endeavor of building up a strong national economy capable of affording down to the humblest citizen of our country a fair measure of economic security and stability and full employment of the entire man-power of the nation.

Thus our theme on this independence day is “Economic Stability Through Increased Productivity.” To attain this objective we need every hand of labor, every peso of capital, and the industry and initiative of every Filipino. The movement is national in which every and all citizens have a role to play. Our vast natural resources must be developed and utilized for the prosperity of the nation. Our best contribution to the security of the free world is the economic stability of the Filipino people rooted in freedom, social justice, and democracy. These are the reasons for my trip to the United States of America from which I have returned safely to our beloved Philippines only yesterday amidst the rejoicing of our people.

It is therefore timely and proper that on this 12th independence day anniversary I avail myself of the opportunity to render a report of my mission to the United States. July 4 is the common anniversary of the American Republic and ours. More than that, the launching of the Philippine Republic was a joint Philippine-American undertaking.

As you well know, Mrs. Garcia and I went to America on a state visit upon the kind invitation of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. We gladly accepted the invitation not only because of the honor it meant to our nation and people, but also because of the opportunity it afforded us to further strengthen the bonds of Philippine-American friendship, discuss mutual problems, and present our economic problems and aspiration. It is a pleasure to be able to report to you that the American Government and the American people have been warm and cordial in their generosity and hospitality; that the American Government, through President Eisenhower and Congress, are deeply interested in our problems; and that we can count on American material and moral assistance. The Philippine-American solidarity on the basis of sovereign equality, mutuality of interest, and community of ideals has been reaffirmed.

It is perhaps natural that the attention of both the public press and the public itself has been more easily drawn to the financial aspects of my mission than to the spiritual. Dollars are of course more tangible and more concrete than friendship, cordiality, and faith. I personally feel, however, that while the American financial commitments are indeed important, the strengthening of the bonds of Philippine-American understanding and amity will in the long run be of greater significance to the welfare of our government and people. May I humbly add that by using the problem of Asian peace and freedom as a backdrop for the presentation of our own problems, I also helped to draw American attention to the inherent mutuality of American and Asian problems.

Upon the conclusion of my talks with the highest American officials during my three days’ stay in Washington, President Eisenhower and I issued a communique. I feel that my report to you will be incomplete unless I include this important document, it being the authorized official report on the results of those conferences. The communique reads as follows:

I

“The President of the United States and the. President of the Republic of the Philippines today concluded the valuable discussions they have held over the past few days on matters of interest to both countries. These talks centered chiefly on United States-Philippines relations, but they also included an exchange of views on matters of international significance to both countries with special emphasis on Asia.

“During his three-day visit President Garcia addressed a joint meeting of both Houses of Congress, and he and members of his party conferred with the Vice President, the Secretary of State, individual members of Congress, and other United States government officials. After leaving Washington President Garcia will visit other parts of the United States and will meet governmental, cultural, and business leaders.

“The two Presidents reviewed the long history of friendship and cooperation between their countries and they expressed confidence that their respective peoples will continue to benefit from this close association in the future. Moreover, they recognized that similar cooperation among the nations of the free world had been effective in recent years in preventing overt aggression in the Far East and elsewhere in the world. The two Presidents pledged themselves to maintain the unity of strength and purpose between their countries and the other countries of the Western Pacific in order to meet any threats to peace and security that may arise.

“The two Presidents reaffirmed their adherence to the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter. They recognized that through dedication to that Charter the nations of the world can progress toward the attainment of the universal ideal of peace with justice based on the dignity of the individual. With this objective they will continue to support and encourage the activities of the United Nations Organization.

“They noted that great progress has been achieved under SEATO in the strengthening of the Free World’s defenses against Communist imperialism in Southeast Asia. They concurred that in the light of the continued threat of Communist military power in Asia, SEATO’s defensive capability must be carefully maintained. Toward this end the United States will continue to assist in the development of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, in accordance with mutual security programs jointly approved with the Republic of the Philippines.

“They reviewed, in this connection, the important role played by the Mutual Defense Pact between the Philippines and the United States. They agreed that the aggressive intentions and activities of Communism in the Far East and in Southeast Asia render the maintenance and strengthening of these defensive arrangements an absolute necessity. President Eisenhower made clear that, in accordance with these existing alliances and the deployments and dispositions thereunder, any armed attack against the Philippines would involve an attack against United States forces stationed there and against the United States and would instantly be repelled.

“In the spirit of these alliances, and with particular reference to the problems affecting the military bases operated by the United States in the Philippines, they expressed mutual confidence that these questions would be resolved to the satisfaction of the two countries, having regard to the principle of sovereign equality and the vital requirements of an effective common defense.

“II

“The two Presidents reviewed progress toward economic development made in the Philippines over the past several years and examined the current economic problems with which that nation is faced. Economic discussions were also held between Philippine officials and representatives of the State and Treasury Departments, the Export-Import Bank and the International Cooperation Administration. The Philippine officials outlined a long-term program for economic development. In view of the inability of the United States to anticipate accurately financial availabilities and relative requirements beyond the next twelve months, immediate emphasis was placed on meeting the initial requirements of the Philippine program.

“For these initial requirements the Export-Import Bank informed the Philippine Government that it will establish a new line of credit of $75 million for financing private and public development projects in the Philippines.

“The Philippine Government was also informed that, subject to congressional action on the additional appropriations being requested, the Development Loan fund would examine specific projects submitted to it to determine whether they would merit development loan fund financing in an amount not to exceed $50 million.

“III

“In the course of their talks, the two Presidents were deeply aware of the special significance of their meeting as the heads of state of two countries, one of which through the revolutionary process and by mutual agreement obtained its independence from the other. They realized that, in the context of present events, their meeting would provide a valuable object lesson on the relations of mutual respect and equal justice most appropriate to two countries, great or small, which share a common faith in freedom and democracy.

“IV

“President Eisenhower and President Garcia concluded that the understandings reached, as well as the personal relationships established during this visit, will contribute significantly to the mutual good will and friendship which traditionally support Philippines-United States relations.”

(Sgd.) C. P. GARCIA

(Signed) DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER

As you see in this communique which, by the way, was signed by President Eisenhower and me at the Philippine Embassy in Washington, an initial development loan fund of $125 million was granted us for the first year or so of our three-year economic development program. But in addition to this amount which I personally consider sufficient to meet our initial requirements, we were promised favorable consideration of the loan application for $71 million for the establishment of our steel industry which was strongly recommended by a committee of American engineering consultants who came here to study on the spot this essential project of ours.

We can also expect that a bill will be presented in Congress to appropriate the sum of $24 million to meet our claim for the gold devaluation profits. This we have worked for a long time since prewar years. It is my good fortune that I have been invited to attend the signing by President Eisenhower of two acts for Filipino veterans hospitalization and for benefits of orphans of Filipino veterans in the aggregate sum of $21 million. I want it also recorded that the generosity of the American people to the Philippines is not limited to official Washington only. It also extends to a marked degree to private financing and industrial agencies which promised us to work out deferred payment arrangements to provide raw materials and machineries for our new industries thus helping us with our dollar reserve problems. This aggregate estimated sum may run up to $50 million. Interest in the investment of American capital to help us develop our natural resources has been stimulated all over the United States. This report will be incomplete without mention of our American friends who; through their own initiative and goodness of heart, donated farm implements, medical supplies, and equipment for distribution among our people in the rural areas. Definitely this is a token of American confidence in our future.

All this economic assistance is but one manifestation of the tremendous good will and confidence that characterize the Philippine-American relation and further engendered, I feel, by my state visit. A new emphasis has been given to the need for common defense against aggression through the strengthening of the SEATO and a reaffirmed adherence to the principles and purposes of the United Nations. With respect to the Mutual Defense Alliance between the Philippines and the United States, I believe it most significant that in our official communique President Eisenhower declared that “any armed attack against the Philippines would involve an attack against United States forces stationed there and against the United States, and would instantly be repelled.” Here at last, from the highest American authority, the President of the nation and Commander-in-Chief of its armed forces, is a clear assurance of instantaneous American retaliation in the event of enemy attack on our country. I have nothing but praise and gratitude to the American Department of State, from Secretary Dulles to Ambassador Bohlen, who have tirelessly collaborated to make my visit pleasant and fruitful. In the American Senate presided by Vice-President Nixon and in the House of Representatives led by Speaker Sam Rayburn, the Philippines counts with staunch friends and supporters.

I believe I can say that I have succeeded in establishing useful official and personal relations with American key officials and statesmen. But I think the sympathy and understanding that I have established with the American people wherever I have met them—in Washington and New York, Chicago and Los Angeles, Phoenix and San Francisco, are equally important and desirable. I have met and greeted thousands of Filipinos in the U.S.A., Hawaii, Wake, and Guam who are all proud of the accomplishments of the Philippine Republic.

In the sounds and sights of America and in the firm handshakes and sincere smiles of the American people, I have seen confirmed the belief that guided me during my visit; namely, that America has a soft spot in her heart for the Philippines. America, being a democracy like the Philippines, is controlled by public opinion. In the consideration of our interests in Washington, henceforth, we shall be able to count on friends not only in the government but also in the rank and file of the American people.

On this the twelfth anniversary of our republic, I believe that we have been vouchsafed by Divine Providence an intenser friendship, a firmer security, and more effective means for the realization of our national objectives of prosperity. A true and enduring friendship is a two-way street. We have, therefore, to reciprocate to the fullest measure of our capacity. We must remain faithful to the ideals of freedom and democracy which we share with the American people and all other peoples of-good will.

With the enhanced means at our disposal, we must enter the thirteenth year of our sovereignty with the resolve to work more and produce more. Loans and other forms of friendly assistance are only a palliative; they are only justified if they create that new excitement, that new impetus to increased productivity. We have abundant natural resources. We have a great work force. We have an increasing number of competent technical men, managers, and executives. And now we have additional capital and additional credit to enable us to finance our economic and social development. We can bring this confluence of advantages to the peak of national achievement only if we produce more of our food, more of our clothing, more of our shelter, and more of the good things of life.

On this national day of rededication and consecration to the ideals of our Republic, on this moment of solemn pledge to keep faith with the founders of our nation, foremost in our minds and hearts, with the good will and thanksgiving for the blessings that have been vouchsafed upon us, should be a high and firm resolve to increase the national wealth through harder work and greater productivity.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library