Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the awarding of the Legion of Merit by the Marquez Veterans Legion

[Delivered at Manila Hotel, August 26, 1959]

DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, FELLOW VETERANS:

I ACCEPT this award with great humility. I am sure that the other distinguished guests whom you honor here tonight deserve your plaudits more than I do. During that great episode which tested our worth to be free, none among the people gathered here tonight wavered in our faith in the sublime principles of freedom and democracy.

Your country and your government have not forgotten. Your country has not forgotten that in her hour of crisis you raised your arms to protect her. Your government has not forgotten, that in the dark days when it was forcibly exiled from these shores, you fought valiantly for its return to the Filipino people.

I believe that the welfare of the veterans must be the continuing concern of the government. My administration is dedicated to this idea. I also believe that this concern over your welfare should not be in the form of government handouts but, what is more important, in a form that would give our veterans ample opportunities for readjustment to society and for taking part fruitfully and purposefully in the task of building up the country which they helped rescue from the enemy.

It was in this spirit that I signed into law what is now Republic Act No. 1889, creating the Veterans Claims Commission. I am convinced that there are still legitimate claims of veterans which remain to be satisfied and I had precisely these deserving veterans in mind when I approved Republic Act 1889.

I was warned, when this, legislation was still pending in the Congress, that this law would encourage the growth of the so-called “post-war veterans,” and thereby give rise to numerous illegal claims. I am confident, however, that the appropriate agencies of the government will be able to distinguish the valid claims from the false.

I urge upon you who are here this evening to assist our government authorities in exposing those who would destroy the good name of legitimate veterans by filing false and unmerited claims. The greatest disservice you can do to your country and to your fellow veterans is to allow your­selves to be used by unscrupulous so-called “leaders” in their attempt to corrupt the veterans of this country.

With respect to the Omnibus Claims which we presented to the United States Government, a sizable portion of which will affect the veterans of our country, I shall press further our representation for a resolution of the issues that will be mutually satisfactory to both peoples. I have stated more than once our great faith in the American sense of justice. Because of this abiding faith, I am confident that the great American people will do right to those who really stood by them in their darkest hour.

Today, we are faced with the massive task of building out of the ruins of war and the mistakes of past administrations a country that will guarantee to our people a livelihood commensurate with their status as a free nation. Your fiscal planners, upon my directions, are taking bold and decisive steps which are designed not to be mere palliatives but to be lasting solutions to the problems which have chronically plagued our country.

I am convinced that nationalism and the Filipino First policy, upon which my administration stands foursquare, provides the key that will open for us the gateway to a life of prosperity and peace, not only for this generation, but also for Filipino generations yet to come.

I ask all of you, and through you, and all other veterans in the country to rally behind me in this task to build our nation. Let every veteran in this fair land of ours be a warrior in times of war and a builder in times of peace.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech before the Awarding of Legion of Merit by the Marquez Veterans Legion held Wednesday morning, August 26, 1959, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35) , 7324-7326.