PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE OPENING OF THE 10TH WORLD JAMBOREE OF BOY SCOUTS AT MT. MAKILING, LOS BAÑOS, LAGUNA, ON JULY 18, 1959

My friends, distinguished guests, boy scouts from all corners of the globe:

It is with a deep sense of honor and pride that I stand before you today to participate in the inauguration of the Tenth World Jamboree of the Boy Scouts. This is a momentous occasion not only for the Boy Scouts of the Philippines but for the entire nation. We are privileged to be the host to this gathering of young men from all over the world, representing diverse cultures and nationalities, united by a common ideal—the pursuit of character, citizenship, and service.

This Jamboree is a testament to the enduring principles upon which the Boy Scout movement was founded by Sir Robert Baden-Powell. These principles—duty to God, duty to others, and duty to self—are timeless and universal. They are the bedrock of a strong and virtuous society. In a world beset by conflicts and challenges, the values espoused by the Boy Scouts are more relevant than ever.

We in the Philippines have long recognized the importance of youth development. We believe that the youth are the hope of our nation, and we are committed to providing them with the opportunities to grow and develop into responsible and productive citizens. The Boy Scout movement has been a valuable partner in this endeavor, instilling in our young men the virtues of discipline, self-reliance, and patriotism. 

I am particularly pleased to see the large number of boy scouts from Asian countries participating in this Jamboree. This is a symbol of our growing cooperation and understanding in this region. We are all striving to build a better future for our people, and we can achieve this goal by working together in a spirit of mutual respect and friendship. 

To the boy scouts who have come from afar, I extend a warm welcome to our country. I hope that your stay in the Philippines will be a memorable one. Take time to explore our beautiful islands, meet our friendly people, and learn about our rich culture and history. 

To the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, I commend your dedication and commitment to the ideals of the movement. Continue to be exemplars of good citizenship and service to others. 

Finally, to all of you, I say: May this Jamboree be a resounding success, and may it inspire you to live lives of purpose, integrity, and service. Mabuhay!

LORD ROWALLAN, GENERAL SPRY, CHIEF SCOUT VARGAS, BELOVED SCOUTS, AND SCOUTERS:

I AM deeply impressed by the colorful ceremonies (marking the official opening of the 10th World Jamboree. In the name of the Filipino people I welcome you—the young ambassadors of goodwill.

I realize the distance, the efforts, the sacrifices, the expenses, and the risks encountered and experienced by all of you in coming here. Your presence here in this colorful gathering is indeed the most eloquent evidence that people everywhere today are doing their utmost to preserve peace and to save this world and humanity from another global conflict through the use of love and understanding which Christ himself and other religious prophets have preached thousands of years ago.

This occasion is a very eloquent demonstration of young people like you (and me, like Lord Rowallan and my fellow president, Mr. Vargas) to preserve this world and to assert your right to live in an atmosphere of mutual trust, peace, and decency. It clearly manifests that you are resolute in your desire to fashion out a future which would be best for you as gleaned from your theme, “Building Tomorrow Today.” And who knows? Perhaps you would grow wiser than we and some of the leaders of the world today. I, for one, would like to see this come to pass within this generation.

My friends, I grope for words to express how happy I am, as well as the Filipino people I represent, to have you with us not only for a day but for the duration of the 10th World Jamboree. We consider it a rare and distinct honor to play host to a group of young people who will someday shape the course of world affairs.

The choice of Mt. Makiling as the site of this Jamboree was indeed a wise and happy decision. For the legend of this mountain aptly describes and symbolizes the character of the Filipino people. According to legend, Maria Makiling was a beautiful creature, half nymph and half sylph. She was tall, peaceful with big and dark eyes, long and abundant black hair. Her color was a clear, pure brown, a kayumangging kaligatan as we call it in Tagalog, our national language. She was simple, pure, and generous. She had a very tender heart. When the poor country folk wandered about the slopes of this mountain to gather firewood or wild fruits for food, she would fill their baskets with ginger, vegetables, and fruits which turned into solid gold when they reached their homes. And she did this without their knowledge.

Once a hunter came around and tried to kill and chase a boar. Suddenly, Maria Makiling appeared and said:

“The wild boar belongs to me and you have done wrong to chase it. But I see that you are very tired, your arms and legs are covered with blood. So, come in and eat and then you may go on your way.”

In exchange for the boar, she gave the hunter some pieces of ginger which, when he gave them to his wife, became nuggets of gold.

But Maria Makiling knew how to retaliate when abused. She also wrecked vengeance when compelled by circumstances. At one time, she sent horrible and strange-looking monsters to frighten two mean and cruel hunters who ridiculed an old woman beggar and, while on a rampage, killed boars and deer owned by the Queen of the mountain.

This is what the Filipinos are: hospitable and kind. Our country is a rich one, endowed with enormous natural resources. We have gold mines, iron, copper, nickel, and other minerals. Our lands are fertile and our forests are thick with timber, wild animals, and other forest products. Our seas and waters abound with marine wealth. While you are here, we shall offer you the best that we have. We may not be able to please all of you or to satisfy all your wants, but rest assured that whatever we give you are the best we have and that they come from the bottom of our hearts, and we give them to you out of love, expecting no returns.

I heard that the overseas delegates who are here number around three thousand young men. That is an astounding figure. We never had so great a number of visitors before. And maybe we shall not see anything like this again—not in a few decades, at least. I take this opportunity, therefore, to congratulate all of you, especially those who have come from the farthest end of the globe. I am extremely happy that our Asian neighbors are among the biggest delegations represented here—’like China and Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Indonesia, Malaya Hongkong, Korea, Burma, Singapore, Vietnam, Borneo, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Sarawak, Ceylon, and last but not least, India. I also wish to extend my warmest greetings to our good friends from the West—like Canada, the United States, Great Britain, France, Belgium, Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Ireland, Austria, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and the Netherlands; the Latin American countries such as Mexico, Cuba, Brazil, Chile, Jamaica, and Venezuela; the oil-rich countries in the Middle East—like Iran, Egypt, Israel, Libya, and Pakistan; and other countries like Kuwait, Liechtenstein Sudan, and Tunisia.

This camp you are gathered in, has been given by the Philippine Government to the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. Thousands of Filipinos have contributed in the development of this site. I wish also to thank publicly the United States Armed Forces for its contribution in equipment and material for the improvement of this camp site. As Boy Scouts, therefore, this Camp belongs to all of you. You may use it anytime again in the future if you wish to. This will be a permanent property of the Boy Scouts and a training center of youth for all time.

Let me give these parting words to you my young friends, words given as an older brother rather than as President of this young Republic, that the world is always in need of men and leaders, strong and pure of heart. The principles for which Scouting stands are the builders of such men and leaders.

My beloved young friends and Scouters, I wish to reiterate in closing, that we welcome you as brothers and friends. Make the most of your stay here by learning what you can about our country, our history, and our culture. Feel at home by knocking at our doors any time. Let us open our hearts to one another so that when you go back to your respective countries, we shall have profited much from each other, not in terms of material things, but in terms of goodwill, understanding, and peace.

East and West, new is your time to meet and know each other. Good luck.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library