PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE COMMENCEMENT EXERCISES OF THE MANILA LAW COLLEGE, MARCH 27, 1957

MY first words are warmest congratulations to each and all of you on this great moment of your graduation and felicitations to your Alma Mater—the Manila Law College—for turning out this big bunch of brained youth to the field of action and productivity.

At a time like this—shortly after the tragic misfortune that has befallen our people because of the demise of our beloved President Ramon Magsaysay—it is well to take stock of ourselves. It is necessary to appraise our assets as a people in the midst of a momentous period in our national life. It is imperative that we make an honest examination of conscience to find out whether or not we have made ourselves worthy of the responsibility towards our country. Now that we have been orphaned of our leaders, what can we do? What shall we do?

Thus I have chosen as my subject: PATRIOTISM.

Every Filipino loves his country. But not every Filipino is a true patriot. He who loves the Philippines only for what the country can give him—lands, houses, plantations-is not necessarily a patriot.

Patriotism is unselfish like Rizal’s love of country. Patriotism is a passion that cannot be denied like Mabini’s attachment to his beloved Philippines. Patriotism is boundless like Magsaysay’s devotion to his people.

But this infinite affection, this predilection for our country, means a number of concepts. It means a belief that our land is the most beautiful, the most fertile, the most healthful in the whole world. Patriotism also means that wherever we may be we are proud of our culture—our dance and our arts and the traditions of our people. To us, the most glorious history of all mankind began with the scroll written with the blood of Lapu Lapu in Mactan, which was unfolded through the centuries and embellished with the deeds of Dagohoy, Tamblot, Del Pilar, and the unsung heroes of ’96 and of Corregidor and Bataan.

Patriotism has come to mean love of our countrymen. Each one is a part of us. Each one is a part of the Philippines. You hurt one Filipino and you hurt the whole nation. Every Filipino is an inherent part of our nature. Therefore, any misfortune that a Filipino suffers is a misfortune of the entire Philippine archipelago. Thus, perhaps among ourselves, we do not feel intensely the harm we sometimes inflict upon our own fellow-countrymen. But let a foreigner pull one single hair from a Filipino’s head or step ever so lightly on his toes and, as one man, we rise in his defense.

And so patriotism means that we love and cherish our fellow-Filipinos. We admire their courage, their diligence, their patience, their peaceful and law-abiding nature, their hospitality, their kindness. We feel a terrible pain when Filipinos are accused of indolence, indifference, smugness, and complacency. And we proceed to teach ourselves to be more alert, more industrious, more persevering. This explains why PATRIOTISM is such a perennially fascinating subject. Patriotism is progressive and, like wine, it mellows with time. Patriotism is not isolationism. It is not chauvinism. It is the antonym of patrioteering.

How can we preserve this love of country forever? We can keep the patriotic spirit through education and information; through the practice of honesty and the observance of honor—above everything; through constructive action often impelled by what is known as civic conscience.

If we wish to preserve a genuine love of country, we ourselves must employ all the means at our command to enable us to sing with pride:

“Land of the morning …” and

“This is my own, my native land.”

Then suddenly we shall stiffen and say in an ominous undertone:

“Never shall invaders trample this sacred shore.”

But why speak of enemies? Who are our enemies?

We have two types of enemies. One is external; the other, internal.

The external enemy is COMMUNISM. He is the Communist just outside the Philippines. He creeps onto our shores in swift, silent boats—like a thief in the night. He melts away with the shadows. He shouts his threats and chants his siren song through radio transmitters in Moscow and Peiping.

He is disguised sometimes as a neutralist. He wants us to live in peace with the Communists—as if it were feasible to live with the devil. He comes here as a neutralist—but he is a neutralist for Communism. When he leaves our country, he tells the Communists how evil and reprehensible the Filipinos could be. Beware of Communists in the guise of a neutralist.

The time has come when we must call a spade a spade. There can be no compromise between light and darkness, between a government of, for, and by the people and a government of dictators, between Freedom and Communism. Neutralism is an effete equivocacy. Neutralism is simply shutting our eyes to reality.

Communism stealthily, quietly, treacherously crawls on its hands and knees to enter Congress, the schools, the civic organizations, the very heart of the government. Communism is like a termite. It slides noiselessly into the very foundations of our house and slowly, surely, silently destroy them.

This is the enemy without.

The other enemy is within our own selves. To a large extent we carve our own destiny. If we help ourselves, if we realize that God will help those who strive, seek, find, and do not yield to the temptations of the world, then the Philippines will be the happiest country that man has ever inhabited.

Our enemy within ourselves takes the forms of selfishness, greed, impurity, and dishonesty. We cannot have true patriotism as long as we allow ourselves to be completely dominated by these evil traits. We must conquer them if we wish to triumph over our external enemy.

Let us never forget that the true Filipino, like Rizal, Burgos, and Quezon, is not afraid to admit his error and to proceed to “build more stately mansions than the last.”

I enjoin you, therefore, my dear graduates, never to falter in the gigantic mission, to be morally and spiritually pure and intellectually strong. The palms of victory will be yours if you possess honor and virtue. Remember, you get out of life what you invest in it. You will be patriots and heroes of our country, for with hallowed selflessness you will give everything for God and the Philippines. With the abundance of love in giving, your harvest of life will be plentiful.

You will never as law practitioners allow your profession to be prostituted by greed and selfishness and by the grossness and sterility of our materialistic age. You will defend the cause of the weak and the unfortunate. You will uphold the rights of the common man who generally is inarticulate and, even, illiterate. You will not hesitate to lay down your life, if need be, for the imperishable glory of our beloved Filipinas.

And one day, from the dark shadows of our present night under the menace of Communism you will emerge and, like Bonifacio, stand upon a hill to raise the white sword of righteousness for the preservation of our liberty and our way of life. Keep that sword on high forever, for yours is this land to have and to hold, to keep and to cherish, “till the last syllable of recorded time.”

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library