Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the 1958 National Science Week

[Delivered at Malacanang Social Hall on March 24, 1958]

THE BASIC solution of our main problems today— which are economic in nature—lies in more production. This is the imperative need of our country, towards which I have geared all government efforts so that in due time we shall become self-sufficient in our primary necessities: food, clothing, and shelter. In my inaugural address, in my second austerity speech, in my state-of-the-nation message, and in my budget message I stressed the urgency of greater production and indicated the ways of achieving it I also said that in this modern age when science has revolutionized old concepts and swept man into the fringes of outer space and revealed the illimitable potential of the atom, we should fully harness science to fill our needs and utilize scientific methods and discoveries to bolster our production.

The holding of the National Science Week is a determined move of our government to make our people conscious of the role of science in enriching our economic life through increased production. We are met this afternoon to launch a program of maximum and universal application of the bounties of science and technology in ameliorating the economic and social conditions of our people. It is fortunate that we have the capacity of achieving this.

Our country is richly endowed with a wealth of natural resources. We have an ample reservior of manpower capable of exploiting these resources. I am certain that the full and wise employment of these resources and manpower will bring to us the blessings of abundance and prosperity.

The Government is committed to an intensified universal promotion of science. However, in the past, efforts proved ineffective because of lack of coordination and inadequate interest given to scientific work. But now there are compelling reasons necessitating a direction of the effort and a sustained interest in our undertakings in science. The task of determining our scientific requirements or what needs improving and intensifying is relatively a simple matter. However, that of policy, planning of programs, and documentation of financial needs are, I believe, fundamental in the success of our work.

Our science and technology efforts should be directed and integrated for maximum and immediate utilization. We must gear all efforts towards fulfilling economic self-sufficiency. The potential of our local resources needs exhaustive investigation, while the products of our scientific and technological endeavors must be widely dessiminated for adoption and application by the agro-industrial sector. Of course, let us not forget the other aspects of fundamental and applied researches. They are as equally compelling, especially in the fields of medicine, biology, engineering and the social sciences.

In the light of our present economy, however, let us have more of directly beneficial applied science and undertake reasonable pure and fundamental research only as a tool for teaching our future scientists, engineers and men of related technical skills. The immediate and future impacts of our science should be adjusted to the ever-expanding requisites of everyday living. Scientific work should be aimed at increasing, expanding, and improving our production output. Under the austerity program, applied research should be given preferential attention and should be carried up to pilot plant scales in order that production facilities can adopt it with least hesitation. Pure and basic research-will provide the training incentives and will be further employed for practical uses.

All these endeavors, however, are mainly dependent on technically trained personnel. Our technical manpower pool is still in its embryonic stage. The accomplishment of the urgent tasks we now have must depend upon those we already have, those who are now engaged in professional teaching in our colleges and universities, and those whom we may be able to draw from private sources. Our projective program should engender wider public support and realization of the vital need for highly competent technical manpower and the recognition that the development of professional and skilled personnel is largely dependent upon the effectiveness of our educational system. To this end we have to inculcate in our youth the opportunities and needs in science careers. We have to reexamine the status of science teachers to improve the teaching quality. Altogether, the promotion of science must be integrated into the broad base of society inside and outside of the classroom.

The present status of science facilities in schools leaves much to be desired. There should be provisions for better laboratories and equipment. In order, however, to afford adequate instructional and operational aids to our science personnel with the facilities which we have, it will be practical and wise initially to establish centers where engineer, scientist, industrialist, businessman, and educator can be brought together; Later on, when we shall have ample equipment and personnel, we can expand laterally to more utilization laboratories.

At present our specific projects are undertaken by various departments, bureaus, and offices. Related researches and significant studies are likewise done or assisted by government agencies like the National Science Board, the Institute of Science and Technology, the National Research Council, and the Philippine Science Foundation. There are individual and group researches being done by others, In order for us to strike a sensible and practical direction of this massive endeavor, it is necessary that this should be integrated, coordinated, and intensified. And this aspect is even made more urgent in view of flagrant unnecessary duplications which are costly in time, effort, and money.

The financing of reasearch almost immediately comes to mind. The overall establishment of research entails heavy investments. For this reason, the government and private enterprises should join hands in fulfilling this basic prerequisite to success. Our laws and our facilities should seek the active participation and aid of private sectors and other extraneous sources which are the direct beneficiaries of research like the agro-industrial group, science societies, clubs, foundations, institutes, and laboratories. We should strive to draw support from foreign philanthropic institution and international bodies and groups. Then maybe we can really embark on a substantially financed science effort.

Another serious problem facing the science activity is the inadequacy of standards and documentation facilities. Our products have to come up to quality standards which have to be continually improved and analyzed. The current move by private industries to promote standardized quality products is to be encouraged and extended. Our technical libraries should contain information and documents not only of domestic research but also from countries where experimentations are advanced. We can thus have a rich reservoir of scientific knowledge, processes, and techniques from where we can draw basic and fundamental science and establish a solid base for extensive applied science.

During the period ahead, our greatest need is the provision of a comprehensive and logical pattern of our science and technology. For our immediate and short-range programs, let us embark on projects that will qualitatively and quantitatively substitute for specific imported goods. Let us strive to intensively increase production through scientific methods and let us expand our production facilities by the adoption of improved scientific diversification processes and techniques. Our long-range program of producing manpower for future needs and projects involving the basic and social sciences will be concurrently undertaken but the pre­ponderant activity will still be in applied research directly usable for increased production in food, clothing, and shelter.

In this age of the atom, the jet plane, and the space ship, we cannot expect to keep up with the pace of progress if we cling to ancient notions and persist in pursuing old practices. We have launched a program of greater production of our essential needs to which we are putting to use the aid of science: I, therefore, appeal to all our people to rally behind this program whose success will mean the strengthening of our economy and the lasting happiness and prosperity of our people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library