Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the Lyceum of the Philippines and the conferment upon him of the degree of doctor of Humanities, Honoris Causa

[Delivered on April 8, 1961]

AT the very outset, I wish to express my profound thanks to the President and the Board of Trustees of the Lyceum for the distinct honor that is being bestowed upon me today with the conferment of the degree of Doctor of Humanities. I shall treasure this recognition; of my humanitarian services until the end of my days. It shall be my constant endeavor to live up to the highest ideals of this great institution, and to prove a worthy alumnus thereof. To my fellow alumni who are graduating this year into the different professions, may I extend my warmest felicitations for their successful completion of their studies, and my sincere wishes for a full measure of true success in life.

Thanks for the degree. It is a source of great pride for me that this great institution, from whose portals you will issue forth today to the great adventure of life, has, in the relatively short span of years that it has existed, attained a glorious record worthy of the name of that illustrious Filipino who gave it birth, Dr. Jose P. Laurel— statesman, scholar, writer, lawyer, leader of his people, and nationalist.

I have had the signal honor of closely associating with Dr. Laurel in his long career of public service. He was one of our very few statesmen who burned with the passion of Filipino nationalism through varying political climates. The ebb and flow of political fortune did not make him waver in his convictions. His desire for the freedom, progress, and prosperity of our people was an unquenchable fire in his soul.

Like most of our great men, he saw that proper education is the key to the progress and prosperity of the nation. He saw that the future of this country lay in the hands of the youth. He saw that this x youth must be guided towards the right path through education. Unlike others, he did not stop at talking about the need for proper education for the youth. He acted and founded this institution which now rises like a pillar of fire to guide many a Filipino youth in their travel to the Promised Land.

Today, I will speak to you about our country, her dreams and her aspirations, her achievements, and her growth. That is to say, her present, her past, and her future.

I am indeed happy as a Filipino that the United Nations recognizes our economic development as spectacular; that the Philippine Republic is the most successful democracy in Asia. How far have we advanced in economics, in education, and in all other human activities? Since the Nacionalista administration took over in 1954, our growth in all phases of national life is something we can definitely be proud of. Let us look at a few facts. The Gross National Product of a country is the market value of the output of goods and services produced by that country’s economy. In a general sense, it is the best indicator of a nation’s growth. In 1953, the last year of the Liberal Party regime, the gross national product of the Philippines was ₱8.002 billion. The gross national product for 1960 is ₱10.8 billion or an increase of almost 3 billion pesos in seven years.

In 1953, the last year of the Liberal Party regime, there were an estimated 1,468,000 unemployed. In 1959 an actual survey showed that only 749,000 were unemployed. There was a significant drop in unemployment despite the fact that the labor force of the country increases by some 280,000 annually.

When I took over the presidency in 1957, the employed labor force according to the Bureau .of Census was 8,149,000. In 1959 the employment figure rose to 8,959,000 or an increase of 810,000 laborers. The increased economic activities in 1960 as evidence by the marked improvement in the gross national product indicates an even higher level of employment in that year.

The opposition likes to talk about graft and corruption. So let us look at the record. The Liberal regime ending December 30, 1953, was marked by the shocking surplus property scandals, the import control mess, the Chinese immigration quota racket, the systematic looting of government funds, the infamous Buenavista-Tambobong real estate deal, and the bloody crimes committed to rape Philippine democracy in 1949. So when I assumed the Presidency in March, 1957, I inherited the problems of graft and corruption prevailing before my time. I launched a vigorous war in 1958 against graft, and by 1960 a total in round figures of 22,000 administrative cases had been filed. Of this number 14,000 have been decided, resulting in 10,000 convictions and 4,000 exonerations in round figures. The rest are still pending. In addition a total of 740 criminal cases have been filed. About a hundred of these have been decided, resulting in 75 per cent convictions and 25 per cent exonerations.

It is not true that I have dealt drastically only with the small fry. I have fired or punished top ranking officials; such as, undersecretaries, several bureau directors, fiscals, justices of the peace, collector of customs, etc. No official rank or social position or party affiliation can save anybody found crooked or corrupt. Aside from these achievements in the campaign against graft and corruption, it was during my administration that the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Law was enacted.

At this point, I want to call your attention to the fact that it is the Nacionalista administration that flushed out, exposed, and punished corruption in the government without fear or favor. And for doing so, it is tagged as the most corrupt administration. How else can you fight corruption except by exposing it in the press and proceeding against the culprit? We could have done like the administration before our regime, hiding the crime; covering the culprit, and deceiving the people that everything is okay. But as far as this administration is concerned, we are willing to do the dirty job even if in doing so we get splashed over by part of the mud. To this end, the 2,200 administrative cases so far file will be doubled or trebled as long as it is necessary to reestablish morality in our Government.

In the fight against communism, let us not forget that it was during the past regime that the communist threat to our security reached its peak of armed rebellion. It was the Nacionalista administration that broke the back of the communist movement in the Philippines. It was I who signed into law the bill outlawing the Communist Party. And it was during my administration that the concluding gains in the fight against this godless ideology have been achieved.

In the field of foreign relations, this administration has succeeded to elevate the nation’s international prestige. It has earned the respect and esteem of the nations owing to her courageous independent and dignified course of action in international politics. We launched our Filipino First policy, and now this policy is recognized and respected by the whole world. Thus, the ‘Filipinism” of Laurel, the Nationalism of Recto, and economic independism of this administration constitute the essence of our foreign policy.

Today, our rural communities are humming with renewed vigor and life. The Office of the Presidential Assistant on Community Development (PACD) is proving to be an effective instrumentality in the promotion of the welfare of the rural masses. In the short span of four years, the PACD has become a vital factor in the economic, social, and cultural progress of our country by reawakening in our people in the rural areas their capacity for self-help and an awareness of their ability to recognize their own problems and adopt measures for their solution.

Where once existed barrios wrapped in apathy and sense of hopelessness, there now thrive invigorated communities inspired by democratic grassroot leadership—a strong guarantee against the inroads of communism.

From an initial coverage of 22 provinces in 1956, with 2,000 self-help projects only the community development movement now covers 55 provinces. Now self-help projects undertaken number 29,886 valued at ₱29 million. These projects included food production, varied barrio improvements feeder roads, barrio waterworks and spring development repair of schools, communal irrigation, promotion of public health, and related improvements.

Furthermore, in 1953 before the Nacionalista administration took over, there were 2,000 artesian wells serving 1 200 000 people. Today there are 14,000 artesian wells serving 4,500,000. There were 400 waterworks systems before serving 4,000,00 people. Today, there are 700 waterworks systems serving 6,500,000. There were a total of 84 irrigation systems (national, communal, and private) before serving a total of 15,000 hectares. Today, theer are a total of 119 irrigation systems serving a total of 60.000 hectares.

It was because of this quadrupled increase in the amount of acreage subjected to irrigation, plus a more determined campaign to improve production techniques through seed selection, soil conservation, soil analysis, use of fertilizers, etc that the Philippines for the first time in our history was able to become self-sufficient in rice during this administration.

Before 1954 the highest appropriation of the Liberal Party for health was ₱16 million. This year we are spending ₱70 milion for health services and next year this will be increased of ₱73 million, or 4 1/2 times as much.

This increased expenditure for health has accounted for the significant decrease in mortality and communicable diseases in the increased number of rural health units, both stationary and mobile, in the increased periodic health checkups among our poor people who cannot afford paid medical attention, in the initiation and spread of the movement to bring doctors and nurses into the hinterlands hitherto unreached by modern medical facilities. For example in the last year of the Liberal Party regime there were 200 hospitals with a bed capacity of 15,000 serving a total number of 200,000 people. Today there are over 300 hospitals with a bed capacity of 25,000 serving a total of 400,000.

In the field of public works and transportation, the advances we have made are also clearly marked. Today we have 6,000 kilometers of unsurfaced roads as against only 4 000 kilometers in 1953. We have now 25,000 kilometers of gravelled roads as against 20,000 kilometers in 1953, we have 6,000 kilometers of asphalted roads as against only 3 000 in 1953; and we have 900 kilometers of concrete roads as against only 700 kilometers in 1953.

In 1953 we had a total of 66 airports, 50 of which were owned by the Government and 16 of which were private. Today we have 102 airports, of which 63 are government-owned and 39 privately owned.

In the field of public land distribution, this administration dealt a death blow to the causes of dissidence and communism by issuing 16,700 land patents or titles in 1954, 44,600 in 1958; and 26,900 in 1959. In addition the land tenure administration has speeded up the expropriation of private landed estate and is pursuing with vigor the cutting up and redistribution of these estates to the tenants occupying them, thus accomplishing the program of giving land to the landless and home to the homeless.

In the field of power resources and electrification, there were, in the last year of the Liberal Party regime, five hydroelectric power plants delivering a total of 300,000,000 kilowatt hours. This number, by the way, includes again, hydroelectric power plants constructed before the war. In contrast, today we have 14 hydroelectric power plants delivering 641,000,000 kilowatt hours.

Power is of extreme necessity in the development of industries, and the boost to industrialization in recent years is partly due to the availability of this increased power source. However, I realize that the growing needs of the country require the production of more power for the industries we are developing, and the increased utilization of water resources for power is a main item in my industrial development plan.

In the field of education our progress has dwarfed the best that the administration prior to 1954 could do in its best year. Whereas, the last budget for education under the past regime was only ₱156 million today, our budget for education is ₱306 million for the current fiscal year. For the next fiscal year, I have submitted to Congress a budget for ₱352 million for education alone. This amount which represents an increase of more than 100% in seven years went into the raising of our educational standards, increase of compensation to our teachers, the building of more schools, the opening of thousands of more classes, etc.

Ladies and gentlemen, I have mostly talked to you about the material progress we have achieved, about our strides in commerce, industry, and agriculture, the development of our natural resources, and the like. But let it never be forgotten that there are higher things in life than these. Let us remember not to sell virtue for wealth, nor liberty for power. The greatest need of today is love. Let the qualities of love, hope, and faith be the predominant elements of your hearts. After all, the education of the heart is the heart of man’s education. Let there be more faith in, and fear of, God. Let us keep in mind that the seed you sow in your mind is the harvest you will reap in your character. This means that every good deed you do, every good thought you think, and every good work you say, always brings reward; and every bad thought or deed always brings retribution.

Character is therefore the best and the greatest part of your education. The moral and spiritual values are far above human evaluation. Let us therefore establish our moral character on the foundation of rock, “and the rains of hardships fell, and the floods of reverses came and the winds of adversities blew and beat against it but it fell not because it was founded on a rock.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the Commencement Exercises of the Lyceum of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(17) , 3106-3111.