Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Read by Labor Secretary Angel Castaño representing the president during the Labor Day Rally

[Delivered at the Araneta Coliseum, Quezon City, May 1, 1961]

TO OUR nine million Filipino worker by whose daily toil the Nation lives, I tender my affectionate greetings; and on behalf of the Republic, a grateful salute.

As President, I have faithfully kept my appointment with you every year on this day for the past four years. Most of the time a President has to deal with high matters and abstract situations; not so on Labor Day. Facing the masses of workers, a President feels that these are the people, not in the abstract but in the flesh; so that if you pricked .them, as Shakespears said, they would bleed.

It is important for a President to keep to the ground; the poet must hear the grass grow, but a President must listen to the pulse beats of a people; he is rarely permitted the luxury of soaring visions; his is a down-to-earth responsibility.

That is why I have always tried to keep my Labor Day appointment with you and have always reserved in the Malacañang appointment book audience with you. In this way I feel reassured that we shall keep faith with each other come “hell or high water.”

I look at you now and I reflect on how rapidly our labor force has expanded between the Labor Days. We had a work force of only seven million at the start of 1954; this has since swelled to over nine million. This swelling of the work force is inevitable given the fact that roughly 800,000 new Filipinos are added to our population every year.

By way of historical contrast, there were only five million Filipinos at the time Rizal was born, and seven million when the Revolution against Spain broke out. Only some 65 years later, we have attained to our present remarkable size of almost 28 millions of which more than nine millions are reckoned old enough to be members of the work force.

Herein lies the heart of our problems as an underdeveloped country. Can we grow fast enough economically to catch up with the annual increase in our population? If we should lag in our economic growth, whatever gains we have made will be wiped out or offset by the growth in population.

It is said, therefore, that children are the main cause of poverty in Asia. Not that it is intended to denigrate children, who are the loveliest people, especially when they are your own. But the economies of the poorer countries seem to strain at the pressure of too many babies getting born.

Remember that most of these babies grow up to be workers, just like all babies before them; and the precise problems is that fewer opportunities than babies are created.

In the face of these forbidding prospects, it gladdens me to know that during the past few years, our country has achieved for our workers a higher general real income per capita; that our workers continue to enjoy one of the highest living standards in the underdeveloped areas which cover two thirds of the globe; and that-we are now well on the way in our Philippine Industrial Revolution of achieving our goal—a modern industrial economy which will be productive enough to guarantee permanently fairly adequate income for the great masses of our people.

It is through economic development that the masses of our workers, including those who are merely babies today, and those still unborn, will find their self-fulfillment. Your Government, therefore, is deeply preoccupied with the tasks of economic development. All the energies of my administration, to the extent that they can be directed or influenced by the President, are bent on this great and single-minded goal of our generation: the goal of building a modern agro-industrial economy and founded on the principle of a more equitable sharing of freshly generated wealth among all the classes of our society.

Your Government, however, while engrossed in the tasks of economic development, has not been wanting in attention and care for the more immediate problems of our working people. The record shows that in the atmosphere of freedom deliberately created and fostered by the policies of the Government, the number of trade unions has expanded more than four times since the middle of 1953; and these have been very sizeable gains in this area during the past four years alone.

During my administration, I have seen the institution of collective bargaining firmly and irrevocably implanted in our industrial relations, thus firming up the framework of our economic democracy.

I have seen labor department services modernized and greatly expanded, after my own desire; the enforcement of wage and labor standards carried to new levels of efficiency, in the face of great odds; the extension of all labor services to all the regions of the country through the creation of the twelve regional officers—which are little departments of labor in themselves. I have seen the section on women and child labor raised to the bureau level, as I have desired; and I have seen, too, the launching of a broad apprenticeship program, which, in time, should help us create the skilled man-power required by the economic transformation that we are seeking to bring about. I have the fortune of counting with the fullest cooperation and understanding of one of the most loyal friends of Philippine labor—Secretary Castaño.

But even more than all these, my friends, I feel glad that under my administration we have not only kept our civil liberties, which are like oxygen to the lungs of labor; we have made these freedoms stronger and more than ever secure.

Those of you who have lived through the Liberal reign of terror, and especially those who were made victims of unholy frame-ups between military and civilian agencies, readily understand what I mean. I have seen to it that the Government shall not stand in the way of workers’ organizations and the free articulation of their grievances, beliefs and ideas.

No worker should be arrested or jailed except through due process of law. This is my conviction, and I have tried my best to enforce it. If there had been failures here and there, I wish that they had been forcefully and immediately brought to my attention.

I shall not stand for the curtailment of civil liberties and especially of the right to workers’ organization, peaceful assembly, and the right to speak and write freely within the limits set by law.

I shall brook no repetition of those grim days when the Liberals occupied the seats of power, the days when a labor leader, no matter how democratic his persuasion, hourly ran the risk of being arrested as a communist, and perhaps shot while trying to escape.

And the labor leader shall have incurred all that, not because he was a subversive, but because he insisted on being free, together with the unions who had placed their faith in him.

So long as I remain President, there shall be no Maliwalu to stain forever the conscience of democratic government.

My enemies call me a communist sympathizer only because I have stood adamant for the proper respect of civil liberties and constitutional rights. Pekin and Moscow call me an American puppet simply because I have nothing to do with a godless, totalitarian ideology. Let them threaten me. Let them assassinate my character. I still stand and will ever stand for free conscience, free thought and free labor.

I do not believe I shall yield to anyone in my regard and concern for our national security. I was the President who signed the anti-subversion act into law; and as you know, this law carries the death penalty in extreme cases for those established as being engaged in conspiracies to overthrow the Government. And I was the President who signed the law to outlaw all communist parties from our land. I was one of the Asian leaders who dared to stand between the United Nations and the admission of Communist China as member thereof. I was one of the architects of SEATO and the Pacific Charter.

The Government, as it has always done, will protect the national security from elements that menace it. A proper concern for the security of the state obliges us to hunt for communists wherever they may be found, and the labor movement is a favorite target as well as a convenient haven for communists. So are the student movements and the ranks of writers, artists, and intellectuals.

Inevitably, therefore the attention of the Government’s surveillance agencies touches these vital groups in our society.

But I do not believe in imperiling the names of many innocent men through an excess of zeal on the part of government agencies. When because of wanton zeal we accuse people as communists and give them a public trial on the basis of vague charges and the flimsiest evidence, we more often than not do democracy a disservice. We dispense thereby with the principle of due process sanctified in our Constitution, without which democracy is reduced to a mockery.

The Constitution and the laws arm us with all the weapons we need to fight the Communists, without transgressing the rights of the people. But the best weapon we can ever oppose to the Communist conspiracy is that which they fear most: a purposeful sobriety and unerring sense of responsibility. The Communists are not ten feet tall. We should never exaggerate their strength. But neither should we underestimate them. And above all, let us not play into their hands by promoting mass hysteria.

Conditions of hysteria are the field in which communists play their best game. And hysteria is such that the rights and freedom commonly associated with a democratic way of life cannot be compatible with it.

Like the other peoples of Asia who are committed to the ideals of freedom, we, the Filipinos, are still engaged in a great and historic experiment: to make democracy work successfully in our region despite poverty, ignorance, and disease.

It is my undying faith that we shall not fail. We must not fail. Philippine democracy is already a rising reality in Asia. And when we say that a democracy is working for our people living under our flag, we are really saying that not only do their lives materially improve, but also that they truly enjoy the freedoms vouchsafed them by their Constitution and by the entire democratic tradition.

Unfortunately, the most dynamic and vital elements in a society are the ones that make full use of the Constitutional freedoms, therefore, these are the elements—workers, artists, and intellectuals who often bear the cruel burden of a senseless, unreasonable, and self-defeating Anti-Communism.

In my own scale of values, my friends, the most effective fighters against Communism are those who do their positive best to contribute to the success of democracy in the Philippines.

I would put in this class the progressive or enlightened businessman together with the responsible unionist; the worker who tries to excel in his line of work so that every one considers him valuable; the citizen who makes full use of his rights, who speaks out, and who does his bit for the success of his community; the professional—whether lawyer, doctor, dentist, engineer, writer, or nurse—who attains a high degree of individual performance in his field and at the same time faithfully discharges his civic responsibilities as a free men in a free society.

All these do not mean that the Republic underrates the threat of Communism of our national security and to the social peace. Your Government will exert every effort, as it has always done, to ferret out those sinister forces whose sole mission in life is to defeat our democracy and implant upon this land the reign of a brutal, totalitarian, and godless ideology. We shall never relent in the task of safeguarding the peace and integrity of our country against the menace of these few fanatics and subverters whose allegiance belongs, not to this Republic, but to foreign powers. For them we reserve the mailed fist of our Christian, democratic, and peace-loving people. But for them we also raise the symbol of hope should they abandon the life of hatred central in Communism.

But I hope that so long as I am President, we shall no longer be mortified with mass injustices and violence committed against innocent and helpless citizens in the name of Anti-Communism. I pledge I shall brook no Maliwalu incident under my administration. I shall countenance no recurrence of the Liberal reign of terror which inevitably picked its victims from the ranks of the trade unions, the writers, the intellectuals, and the more active youth of our universities and colleges.

But the rest is up to you. The Government is democratic; in accordance with our common principles, the Government creates and guarantees a certain atmosphere of freedom; it creates opportunities, but it is you who are to use them.

Fellow Workers—this is an election year and it is only natural for you to ask where the Administration stand on the different economic questions that affect Labor.

Let me open my heart to you. There you will feel the pulse-beat of gratitude to labor, to you, for the resolutions too many to be read here from labor and trade unions all over the country, as well as from industries, big and small, in which resolutions you have reiterated your confidence in, and support of, my humble administration and with special reference to my economic policies and programs.

I wish to take advantage of this opportunity to express my undying gratitude for the continued faith and confidence in my administration you have manifested by these resolutions. It gives me more courage. It gives me more inspiration. And I pledge to you that as long as I live, I shall dedicate to the last breath of my life, my heart, my mind, and my arms to the following Articles of Faith:

(1) I believe that economic democracy is an essential bulwark of political democracy.

(2) I believe that to keep the national economic organization democratic the powers, functions, and resources of the State should be utilized to hasten and promote free competitive enterprise.

(3) I believe that our constant endeavor should be to create and maintain conditions under which there will be afforded maximum employment, maximum production, and maximum purchasing power of the peso.

(4) I believe that monopolies should always be prevented, and a system of broader diffusion of economic wealth be achieved and maintained.

(5) I believe that workers, investors, and also consumers should be protected from economic exploitation; such as, monopoly, profiteering, manipulations of prices, and dozens of other ways.

(6) I believe that one of the causes of wastage of economic vitality is the stifling of individual initiative and creativity.

I therefore stand for the equality of opportunities between the children of the poor and the rich, through the maintenance and progressive expansion of our educational system to wipe out totally ignorance and illiteracy, and to make every Filipino citizen a positive factor for good.

(7) I believe that it is of the essence that we maintain at all times a sound and vigorous economy. To that end, Science should be called to the service of the nation to develop a manpower trapped and dedicated to keep a steady supply of new invention, new discoveries of materials, new industries, and new opportunities for employment. In this connection a broad and well endowed system of fellowship and scholarship in Science should be opened to Labor.

(8) I believe in low-cost housing project, and the providing of other services needed for rapid and more expansive urbanization, especially in new industrial areas.

(9) I have faith in the social-conscious, welfare-conscious, and God-conscious of Filipino labor. I therefore stand on the rock of conviction that the greatest natural resource the Philippine Republic possesses is the Filipino laborer.

On these Articles of Faith I stand. To fulfill them I stand on this Tablet of Pledges.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia read by Labor Secretary Angel Castaño representing the president during the Labor Day Rally. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(20) , 3700-3705.