Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the presentation ceremonies of International Achievement Awards under the auspices of the Public Relations Society of the Philippines and the American Public Relations Association

[Delivered at the Malacañang Social Hall, October 25, 1958]

MR. TOASTMASTER,

GENTLEMEN OF THE PUBLIC RELATIONS PROFESSION,

DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, AND FRIENDS:

IT IS with deep humility that I am accepting these two awards—an impressive scroll from the American Public Relations Association and a beautiful plaque from the Public Relations Society of the Philippines. At the outset I must say that whatever public relations success has been achieved in relation to my State visit to the United States has been due in considerable measure to the generosity of the business organizations that played a big significant role in helping create a favorable atmosphere for the American tour.

While I am grateful to the American for giving us the facilities to make the trip a success, the assistance of private business in creating an impact on the American public cannot be underestimated. I want to make public acknowledgment of the invaluable help of the Philippine Association and its members and the unselfish cooperation of such vast organizations as Stanvac and Caltex, International Harvester and the United States Industries, and the Motion Pictures Association of America, to mention only a few. The top executives of these companies not only placed their public relations machinery at the service of the Philippines, but in some cases went out of their way to get favorable publicity for our country.

I am happy to see the representatives of many business organizations that gave us a helping hand among this distinguished crowd and I want to take this opportunity to reiterate my gratitude to them.

In reminiscing over my American visit, it can now be told that my highest objective was to present to the great American people an honest and candid picture of the Philippines and her problems, political and economic, and her legitimate aspirations that we may be better understood by the American people. I am happy now to know that I have fairly succeeded in achieving this goal. There is now definitely a better understanding between our two peoples. The government circles in Washington, the American business groups, and the American press and radio have made this possible.

On the theory that business organizations with interests in the Philippines and the Administration had a common cause in assuring the success of the trip, business groups were made priority target. Contacts were made simultaneously in Manila, Washington, and New York with leaders to acquaint them with the importance of the trip and the possible consequences of failure. It was not difficult to get the cooperation of the business groups because it was obvious to them that the success of the American tour would give this administration the strength and inspiration to solve our economic problems. Businessmen, after all, are business-minded. They realized that their own business would thrive and prosper only under favorable conditions and they were convinced that the American trip offered an opportunity towards finding a solution to our growing economic problems.

Through existing organizations, principally the Philippine Association, contacts with various media of public relations were established and expanded. Of course, our advance team exploited other contacts and did not overlook the other two targets; namely, the Washington circles and the American press. But in many instances, the job of explaining, the Philippine picture and position became invariably easier once it became known that American business was interested in making the trip a success.

We will not attempt to picture the vastness and intricacy of the preparatory work that had to be done in connection with the State visit. But most of you know that for the Philippine the situation was rather difficult because of a rash of unfavorable publicity that seemed to be timed to sabotage the visit. It was in a way fortunate that many of the top public relations men of some of America’s biggest business enterprises worked hand-in-glove with our advance team that operated under the Philippine embassy in Washington. Through these American PR men, others in the profession understood the problems involved and consequently appreciated the full meaning of the trip’s success. The PRA award was probably the result of this appreciation of the many difficulties.

The success of the American tour from a public relations viewpoint shows what can be done through close cooperation between government and business. At a point when the Philippine picture was beginning to look unhealthy to the American mind, business came to the assistance of the Administration and, with the further help of many friends in the United States, the dimming picture of this country was corrected.

Let us transfer the problem to the home front where we are today faced with major economic problems. I am aware that in business circles today there is considerable chafing and irritation, there is impatience and a growing feeling of uncertainty, there is pessimism. It is time werealize, however, that the problems we face which are causing this uneasiness cannot be solved by the government alone. And if business becomes indifferent now, just because results of continuing efforts to solve our problems are not immediate, if business stampede in confusion instead of remaining a stabilizing factor, where will our country be?

If on the American front government and business had found a common ground on which to stand, why should we not be able to find a similar position here today where the problems are more pressing and immediate?

The problems we face are common to the government and to business. The success we seek is common and commonly beneficial. There should be no line to split and divide government and business. There is no issue of partisanship here, no issue of politics—there should be none!

The vast business organizations that control the economic life of the country owe it to themselves to keep the government stable and secure, for it is obvious that any sign of insecurity would swiftly affect and even ruin business itself.

In the face of international uncertainties, with the weight of economic problems upon us, the need for the time is for faith-inspired business statesmanship. Our way of life, our system of government, makes it imperative for government and business to work together with trust and confidence undismayed by temporary reverses. The trouble with some business sometimes is that it becomes too grasping; in its fight for existence it often places the profit motive over and above public welfare. It is because of such an attitude that the government is compelled to crack down on business. This is no blanket accusation of business, for we have great institutions here that have demonstrated their capacity to sacrifice for the public good. But this country can certainly do more with more business statesmanship.

Perhaps, our public relations men should take it upon themselves to promote better understanding between government and business so that instead of carping criticism one way or the other, there would result a harmonious hammering of policies and practices that would redound to their common good and the country’s welfare.

Thank you again for your generosity in giving me these two awards.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the Presentation Ceremonies of International Achievement Awards under the auspices of the Public Relations Society of the Philippines and the American Public Relations Association. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(30) , 7220-7222.