PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB AT WASHINGTON, D.C. JUNE 19, 1958

I AM DEEPLY grateful for your hospitality, and glad that I have this opportunity to exchange some views and opinions with you.

My advisers have warned me that an encounter with the National Press Club is one of the roughest ordeals which an official visitor to Washington is called upon to face, perhaps the one item on his schedule which he would be happy to avoid, if he can.

But for all its vaunted terrors, it is in fact the one engagement which the official visitor can least afford to miss. For here he is privileged to speak to the American nation and to the world, and no consideration of personal convenience can outweigh the advantage that must accrue to the country of which, and for which, he speaks.

Fortunately, I am not a stranger to the ways of American press. We have in the Philippines a press that has faithfully patterned its principles and its practice upon your own. A press that is fully as free and untrammeled as yours, in certain ways even more so, as every Filipino politician has reason to know and sometimes to rue. In Manila there is a National Press Club with an organization and facilities that favorably compare with yours, and it counts with the membership of many newspapermen whose ability, energy, and dedication would entitle them to stand proudly with their peers anywhere in the world.

The American press is known for its courage and its frankness. These are qualities born of its heavy responsibility. For it is obvious that the press of the world’s greatest democracy and leader in the defense of freedom would hardly be equal to its task if it lacked the courage to get the facts and the frankness to tell the truth. Courage and frankness do not necessarily ensure infallibility, but the right to make mistakes is an essential part of freedom and is, indeed, the proof of its existence. Better a system which admits of the possibility of error than one which denies it altogether and by so doing, stultifies the search for truth.

It is by this conviction that I am emboldened to appear before you today. The traditions of the American press I hold in deep respect, for I know that the quality of fairness is as much a part of those traditions as are the qualities of fearlessness and candor.

As President of the Republic of the Philippines I would like to believe that I have a right to appeal to a quality of the American press which, in the context of our relations, is even more important than the quality of fairness. I refer to the great capacity which the American press has frequently shown for warm, sympathetic understanding of the needs and problems of other peoples. The Filipino people crave justice at your hands, but they need your understanding even more.

I shall not attempt to minimize the problems, and difficulties that beset the Philippines. But I think it would be useful to try to assess these liabilities against the background of the very real assets to which we proudly lay claim but which unfortunately, are often ignored in the summary judgments made of the conditions obtaining in the country.

Our first great asset is this: The Philippines is a country rich in natural resources. There is no valid excuse whatever why the country should continue to remain undeveloped and the people poor. We have an abundance of products that the world needs as well as the land, the materials, and the labor force to produce more of the things we need ourselves.

We have set in motion a two-pronged program of development in agriculture and industry. Through land reform, the introduction of scientific methods of farming, the encouragement of cooperatives, the expansion of irrigation facilities, and by bringing new land under cultivation, we hope shortly to become self-sufficient in rice, our principal food staple, and to increase our dollar-earning exports of coconut oil and copra, sugar, hemp or abaca, and minerals.

With the aid of domestic and foreign capital, mostly American, we have embarked on a program of industrialization. We have built a number of hydroelectric power systems, and as capital becomes available, we intend to build more. Our mining industry is making steady progress, and we have set up textile, chemical, cement, and steel plants. Our aim is to produce at home an ever-increasing proportion of the goods required for local consumption. For only as we succeed in doing this can we hope to correct the imbalance in our foreign trade and gear our production more closely to the needs of our fast-growing population rather than let it remain constantly at the mercy of the uncertain foreign market.

Our second great asset lies in the fact that the condition of peace and order is better today than at any time since liberation. We have conserved the gains that were made in this field during the Magsaysay administration, and our people are determined that Communist subversion and rebellion will never again pose a threat to our democratic institutions. This determination shall be fully reflected in policies calculated to eliminate the cause of public discontent and disorder—indirectly by creating conditions of economic security and confidence in the government, and directly by effective counter-measures against organized acts of violence from any quarter.

In the Philippines we have decided to take the honest and forthright decision of outlawing the Communist Party. We are not beguiled by the subtle arguments of the political theorists who say that it is undemocratic to deny freedom even to the enemies of freedom. We know from bitter experience, and not from fine-spun theory, that it is suicidal to give freedom to those who scorn freedom, and that in a country situated like the Philippines, it is better to sacrifice the refinements of political theory to the overriding necessity of national survival under a regime of law and order. Certain other countries in Asia have followed a policy relative to the Communist Party that is the opposite of ours. Let history be the judge as to whether we or they shall have better served the long-range interests of freedom and democracy in our part of the world. For our part, we have decided that the Communist Party is inherently committed in theory and practice to organized subversion and violence as instruments of political action, and for that reason we have decided to place it outside the pale of the law.

But our greatest asset, of course, is our people. We number twenty-three millions, small by comparison with some of our giant neighbors in Asia, but weighing proportionately somewhat more in the final tally of the adherents of freedom and this for a number of very good reasons. First, our archipelago occupies the strategic center of the Free World’s defense in the Far East, and sits astride the major trade, transport, and communications lanes running east and west as well as north and south within that vitaly important region. We have land and resources which, if fully developed, can sustain a population double or treble what we have at present.

Above all, we have a people that is one of the most literate, alert, and energetic in our part of the world, constituting a nation that is uniquely qualified to be the bearers of the blessings of freedom and democracy to its neighbors even as it has proved itself to be a loyal defender of their principles and institutions both against Japanese aggression and Communist attack.

I do not wish to be invidious, but I think it is fair to ask you ‘where, in all Asia or Africa for that matter, you can find a land and a people with a comparable tradition and record. We are the only nation in Asia that has been exposed to the two main streams of western civilization, the Latin and the Anglo-Saxon, taking the best of both while itself remaining basically oriental. From the first we received the tenets of the Christian Faith and the notion of justice under the law. From the latter we acquired the appetite for education, cultural advancement and material progress, and devotion to the principles and institutions of democracy. At the same time, as Asians, we recognized our indestructible affinities with our neighbors and we are determined to work out in peaceful cooperation with them our common salvation through the principles of democracy and the methods of freedom.

These, then, are the assets of my country and people. In their totality they are such as should warm the hearts of our friends and well-wishers in America who must often feel discouraged by one-sided or hostile reports of impending chaos or disaster in the Philippines. But in addition to all of these, I would ask you to bear in mind one crucially significant fact; namely, that in the Filipino people you have a nation in whose mind and heart the love of freedom and devotion to democracy have taken deep root beyond the power of Communist guile and blandishment to eradicate, that this is a nation whose loyalty to our common ideals has been tested three times in a decade—in the struggle against the Japanese invaders, in the campaign against the Communist rebellion, and in the battlefields of Korea—a nation, in short, that has rejected the illusory comfort of neutralism and has dared instead to stand up and be counted on the side of freedom.

And now, just frankly, I will discuss with you some of our problems and difficulties.

The first of these is of a financial and economic order, and it is a serious one. Our dollar reserves are at their lowest ebb since the country became independent. There is no, immediate prospect of narrowing the gap between our exports and imports. In spite of restrictive monetary measures we have not succeeded in reversing this downward trend. As I have said before, we are endeavoring by every possible means to increase our productive capacity both in agriculture and industry. But the increase has not caught up with the needs of an expanding economy and an expanding population. At the same time, we realize that further import restrictions at this time would have these adverse effects: they would gravely impair the country’s economy by interrupting even the modest program of agricultural improvement and industrial expansion on which we are already embarked, and they would create mass discontent because of unemployment and high prices, thus further reducing the standard of living which at present already stands close the level of bare subsistence.

We propose, instead, a two-part solution to this problem. First, what we need immediately is a credit line against which we could draw from time to-time funds for such specific development projects as the considered judgment of American and Filipino experts would deem to be wise and prudent. We do not want any handout or an outright financial grant. We want development loans on a strictly business basis. Secondly, we hope that at any propitious time a careful and definitive review be undertaken of a number of outstanding financial claims which the Philippine Government had pressed in the past. The sums involved in these subsisting claims are rather substantial, and if considered and granted in a spirit of mutual understanding and equal justice, would go a long way in strengthening our financial and economic position.

Among these are our veterans’ claims, and it is our confident hope that they can be met in a manner that is not piecemeal, but that a policy can be laid down that will decide once and for all this problem, the satisfactory solution of which is so vital to Philippine-American relations.

Our second major problem is of a political and military order. I refer not to the institutions of our political democracy, whose sturdiness is proved by the recent national elections which, as the American press can attest, were free, clean, and honest. I refer rather to the existing political and military problems between the Philippines and the United States. Of these, the most urgent and important one relates to the American bases in the Philippines. Fortunately, the question of the title to the bases has now been officially recognized by the American Government as belonging indefeasibly to the Philippines. There remain the question of the redisposition of areas to be used as bases to achieve greater coverage on protection and the modernization of existing bases, and the question of jurisdiction. Negotiations to resolve these questions were started nearly two years ago during the Magsaysay Administration, but were recessed before agreement could be reached. I am confident however that our differences will be resolved in a spirit of mutual respect and understanding, having regard to the supreme interest of our common defense. I wish to assure you that the Filipino people will never sanction any step that is likely to jeopardize our mutual security. At the same time, they will never demand from the United States Government a measure of respect for their National sovereignty greater than what the latter has shown in similar treaties signed with the government of other countries, including an ex-enemy country, Japan.

Finally, there is the problem of corruption in the government. That it exists in the Philippines I shall not deny. I do not believe there is any head of state or head of government anywhere in the world, this country not excepted that can stand here before you and affirm truthfully that his country is immune to this social cancer.

But having acknowledged the existence of corruption in the Philippines, I must immediately point out that our untrammeled freedom of the press and freedom of speech in the Philippines often produce, by means of snowballing whispering campaigns, highly imaginary, distorted, or exaggerated pictures of the actual situation.

It is my firm purpose to exert my utmost and punish dishonesty and corruption in public service. In the more sensitive areas of government, such as the offices of internal revenue, customs, and other revenue-collecting agencies, I have ordered full-scale investigations. I wish to assure you that the officials found guilty will be punished to the full measure of the law. But I must again point out that as the head of a constitutional government, a government based on the principles of due process and fair trial and on the doctrine that the accused is deemed to be innocent until his guilt is proved beyond reasonable doubt, I cannot assume the tone of a dictator and say that I will fire everyone so accused or send him to jail at once. Honest public service and clean government are essential elements of democratic government, but far more essential than these is the faithful observance of the Bill of Rights.

Today is the 97th Birthday Anniversary of the national hero of the Philippines, Dr. Jose Rizal. It is fitting that I should invoke his name today, because Rizal was the sworn foe of oppression and tyranny, vice and corruption, in his time, just as Thomas Paine was the implacable enemy of these evils in America more than a century earlier.

As a writer and artist, Rizal shared the universal faith of all free men in the power of the unshackled mind, the force of the liberating word that is spoken or written in freedom.

I have come to the end of my observations. But I should not wish to conclude my remarks without addressing to you, if I may, an earnest appeal to the great power of the American press. The American press is not an arm or instrument of American policy. Its first duty is to get the facts and to tell the truth without fear or favor. It is not obliged to be kind and forgiving to all America’s allies simply because they are allies. But the press of America must inevitably share in some degree the great and manifold responsibility that weigh on this country as the leader of the free world. I believe that, without derogating from its primary responsibility to gather, transmit, and publish news and opinion accurately, the American press can use its enormous power to help bring America and her allies towards closer amity and cooperation. I firmly believe that the American press can help to create in the peoples of the other free countries that degree of respect, regard, and affection for America to which she stands fully entitled by the demonstrated courage, generosity, and compassion of her people.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library