President Perez, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen:

LET ME congratulate the Awardees on their outstanding journalistic record for the year 1959 which has merited for them the honors given this evening, under the auspices of the Standard Vacuum Oil Company. I take this occasion also to thank the members of the Fourth Estate for their excellent coverage of the last national elections. Their alertness has in no small way helped keep our polls free and the voters intelligently informed on issues vital to the welfare of the nation. Thus, the cause of democracy has been further enhanced and the political maturity of our people fostered through the media of untrammeled exercise of free speech and the right to discuss the views and opinions of individuals as well as of parties.

I am deeply gratified by the showing of our electorate, by their sobriety of judgment, and by their interest and enthusiasm in political and economic affairs. Now that the elections are over and the people’s mandate proclaimed, I exhort all our citizens to set aside political sentiment and close ranks behind their chosen leaders, and join hands once again in our common struggle for better living—for the production of more food, more clothing, more shelter, and a greater abundance of all the good things in life, that we may, in the not too distant future, stand on our own claim for ourselves the buttress to political freedom eh is economic independence.

In this task, too, the Press plays a vital role and has solemn responsibilities to discharge. It must kindle a consciousness and awareness of the whys and wherefores of the economic struggle among the people, and thus enlist their support for measures aimed at sound economic development. It must serve as the fiscalizing voice of the people as the need arises, but take care to criticize in a constructive manner, without prejudice or demagoguery, seeking to build up rather than destroy. It must always uphold the truth so that public opinion may be molded into an effective vehicle for national, economic, and cultural advancement.

One of the salient issues in this year’s elections has been the economic policy of the Administration. I feel that with the election of five Nacionalista senators, and the victory of the party’s candidates for gubernatorial and mayoralty posts in two thirds of all the provinces, the Administration’s economic platform has been vindicated. At the same time, the election of three opposition senators is testimony to our people’s political maturity in desiring to place an able fiscalizing group in the highest legislative body of the land.

The Nacionalista Party and any administration are pledged to push the prosecution of economic development still further, although I can humbly claim that we have already made remarkable progress. The magnitudes of our success have been amply discussed during the election campaign, and I must emphasize that their achievement has not been easy. Our economic development has been an uphill struggle demanding much sacrifice and hard work. But then, any economist can tell you that the economic development of an underdeveloped country is neither spontaneous nor free from critical difficulties. It must be planned, executed, and even enforced; it must involve a welter of decisions and measures not only on the part of the government and its agencies, but also on the part of businessmen, investors, and the consumers of the country itself. Some of the measures called for may be unpalatable but unavoidable during the process of development, such as increased taxation and borrowing, austerity in spending and consumption, import and exchange controls. We have had our share of these measures in the past and, while they are being continued to assure an orderly process of economic development, it is the Administration’s plan to do away with controls as soon as can safely be done. Economic development is unremitting, and is not a task to be accomplished in a single year. Many of the industrial countries have come through decades of development.

Barely five months ago, just before the election campaign, the Administration sponsored an economic measure which aroused heated controversy and drew sharp criticism from many quarters. Certainly such a measure was politically unpalatable, and we recognized that it might impair the chances of party candidates in the forthcoming elections However, its implementation was in our opinion, an economic necessity for the country in view of the threatening inflationary conditions generated by a rapid rise in development expenditures at that time. So, political expediency was ignored, and the foreign exchange margin bill was enacted into law to shore up our defenses against monetary instability.

Dire predictions were made both preceding and after the enactment of the margin law. It was prophesied that prices would spiral so steeply that even the essential commodities of daily living would be out of reach of the common man. Yet, had the Administration not acted decisively and courageously in the way it did, despite the adverse political implications of its move, we would have faced a real economic crisis. The prevailing inflationary trends would have shortly depreciated our international reserve to such an extent that not only would consumer imports have to be stopped, but even importations of producer raw materials curtailed. The resulting shortages would have boosted prices up to really intolerable levels. It was at such a time as this, that action of a high degree of courage and statesmanship was called for, and the Administration could not shirk its duty, no matter what the cost.

The operation of the margin law has been as effective as planned, and the country’s economy has been displaying new strength in recent months. The electorate has clearly demonstrated its endorsement of the Administration’s economic platform and its dismissal of the margin controversy as a valid election issue.

More than anything else, the performance of the Philippine economy itself has been the strongest vindication of the Administration’s economic program. The international reserve, which has been drawn on heavily during the past ten years to meet the foreign exchange requirements of our developing economy and the imported needs of the consuming public, has registered a remarkable recovery since last July 15th when the margin law was enforced. Its level at the middle of November was $166.7 million, a $33.8 million improvement over the reserve on July 15th. And this in spite of the fact that we made a $12.5 million payment on our repurchase obligations with the International Monetary Fund. We were favored with $35.2 million favorable balance of trade during the first semester of this year, plus an additional $35.0 million in the last three months. In other words, since the start of the year we have exported $70 million more in goods than we imported, about half of the surplus garnered in the period, July to September, which coincides with the first months of operation of the margin law.

Incidentally, this is the first time in the past eight years that the foreign trade of the country has turned in our r favor. Before the establishment of the Central Bank and I the imposition of controls, our yearly trade deficit averaged $273.1 million. In the subsequent years under controls I from 1950 to 1958, the average trade deficit was cut down to $152.3 million. This year, instead of a deficit we have f a large surplus. This improvement in our balance of trade is all the more remarkable when we consider that while the import needs of our industries and the consuming public at this stage of our development continue to be heavy, we now produce for ourselves many of the items we have imported in the past. Furtherance, a very significant expansion in our exports has been achieved this year.

It is indeed gratifying to report that the Margin Law has not pushed the prices of prime commodities beyond the reach of the masses. The latest price surveys reveal that prices of consumer items such as food and clothing stood an average of only two per cent higher in October than they were in July. Furthermore, the consumer prices in October were even slightly below their level a year ago. The prices of imported commodities and locally produced commodities using imported raw materials have been expected to be most affected by the margin levy on foreign exchange. Yet, the index of imported consumer goods reflects a price increase of only a little more than two per cent since July. Even on the wholesale price level, imported commodity prices have advanced by only 3.5 per cent. Such price movements certainly do not conform to the price spirals conjured by the critics of the Administration’s economic policy.

Let us briefly consider other statistics relating to the operation of the much unaligned 25 per cent margin law. A primary function of the margin is to act as an anti-inflationary instrument through withdrawal of the required margin collections from the money supply. As of November 13, the Central Bank has accumulated some ₱39.8 million under the margin law. Also, as a result, the excess reserves of the commercial banks have been reduced and, consequently, so has their ability to create credit on the basis of these reserves. While total money supply has been expanding at the rate of 0.75 per cent a month during the 12 months from July, 1958, to June, 1959, monetary expansion has now slowed down to only 0.4 per cent a month since July this year. The margin law, therefore, has so far succeeded in holding down inflationary potentials in the economy by its two-pronged influence on money supply and credit creation.

The strengthening of our economic position at home has also been reflected in the recovery of the Philippine peso on the free market abroad. From the middle of July to the middle of November our peso has gained 32 points in the free money market.

These then, my friends, are but a few of the portents of better things yet to come. Now that the elections are over I urge all our citizens, regardless of party affiliations or political sympathies, to contribute in any way possible towards the realization of our common economic dream. In this task, I call for a resurgence of all that is best in our people—the industry, perseverance, thrift, and forbearance that are the hallmarks of true patriotism.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President’s speech at the Stanvac Journalism Awards Dinner, at the National Press Club Building, Thursday evening, November 26, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(47) , 9866-9870.