SPEECH OF PRESIDENT GARCIA, AT FORDHAM UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK CITY, ON BEING CONFERRED THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF LAWS, HONORIS CAUSA, JUNE 22, 1958, AT 3:15 P.M. NEW YORK TIME (JUNE 23, 1958, 4:15 A.M. MANILA TIME)

MR. PRESIDENT;

MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, AND STUDENT BODY OF FORDHAM UNIVERSITY:

THIS singular honor I know is more of a tribute of love and admiration for my people than a recognition of personal merit. I accept it, therefore, in behalf of the Philippines with the deepest gratitude. I have been the recipient of quite a number of honors in my life but I regard this as one to be highly treasured because it is conferred by a leading Catholic university such as Fordham, which stands as an impregnable spiritual citadel amidst a troubled and harassed world. World culture and civilizations were necessary to make us realize that God’s inheritance of freedom, equality, economic security, and contentment is meant not merely for the powerful or a privileged few but for all humanity, regardless of color or geographic accident. We have learned after bitter experience that universal prosperity, the universal enjoyment of the blessings of life, universal freedom, and equality are sine qua non of universal peace.

Shortly before the United States emerged as a leader of the free world after the Second World War, the American people realized that they cannot live in a vacuum of peace and prosperity all their own and continue to be unconcerned with the fate of the rest of the world. Isolationism has become incompatible with world leadership. Today, whether by design or by decree of destiny, this nation is the leader of the free world, and as such, it cannot remain uninvolved in the problems of humanity.

The modern means of communications, supersonic planes, intercontinental missles, atomic energy, and space satellites have made all nations-next door neighbors. With the conquest of distance and space, nations have expanded their concepts of nationalism. We have become more conscious of interdependence and must admit the interlocking of our destinies. If war should come it would affect all nations regardless of whether they are combatants or neutrals because it will be total in scope and total in destruction. A hydrogen bomb, when it explodes, will make no exception of a neutral. In other words the next war, God forbid it, will be a total social responsibility of the entire human race. Under the principle of the social unity of mankind, it is every nation’s bounden duty to contribute its share to the prevention of war. I submit that without in any way minimizing the importance of the efforts of the United Nations in this direction, this end can be achieved only if the conditions that breed social discontent, conflicts, and upheavals are removed and in their place the socio-economic conditions and ‘climate of peace and contentment every-were is established. In other words, war ends only when the causes of war are removed.

May I repeat here a few thoughts on this matter which I made on the occasion of my inauguration as President of the Philippines on December 30, 1957. I said:

“But deeper and more enduring than our preparations for defense is our hope and desire for world peace:—a just, honorable, and lasting peace. The Philippines stands squarely behind every sincere plea and effort for a stop to the armaments race that is leading the nations of the world to material and moral bankruptcy. World peace based on a ‘balance of terror’ maintained by a relentless contest in the development of increasingly more devastating nuclear weapons is a danger-fraught situation only one spark away from a cataclysmic explosion leading inevitably to one end—the total destruction of civilization. This administration will therefore tirelessly support any sincere effort towards the removal of all means to wage war through total disarmament of all nations and ultimately towards the removal of all causes of war by channeling the tremendous resources now spent for destructive purposes to fighting misery, poverty, disease, and criminality the world over and bring about the climate and moral regeneration for world peace.”

This great university, I am sure, cannot but endorse these sentiments and Fordham, as a leading cultural unit of American democracy true to the Catholicity of its ideals and traditions, can play a leading role to establish a world climate for peace. This center of Catholic education which counts with the ideological solidarity of thousands of Catholic Christian schools, colleges, and universities in the Philippines can be an effective leader in establishing the cultural and social climate for peace in the under-developed countries of Asia. The Asians are like Filipinos. Their desire for freedom from want, freedom from fear, and freedom to lift themselves from abasement of the body and the spirit is deeply rooted in their nationalism. The American educational and cultural record in the Philippines from 1898 to 1946 which was based on democratic principle, is mainly: responsible for making the Philippines what it is today—the greatest friend of America in Asia and a freedom-loving people.

Given a similar educational background, Asia can be won over to align itself with the forces that cherish and uphold the dignity of man and the highest spiritual values.

What is that American cultural and educational experience in the Philippines? Briefly, the greatest legacy of the United States in the Philippines is the educational system established there soon after the smoke of battle had cleared away in the Philippine-American War. Of course it must be said as a matter of historical truth that America had a good foundation on which to base that system and that foundation was laid by the church which for more than three centuries brought to us the benevolent influence of the Christian faith. The American soldiers, soon after peace was declared, became the first teachers in our public schools. They were the first purveyors of the blessings of the American democratic way of life, and the heart of the Filipino was gradually won over to the United States and bound to you by indissoluble cultural bonds further strengthened by national gratitude. You thus helped to establish a democracy in the Philippines bed-rocked on an enduring and indestructible foundation because it is rooted in the faith than can spring only from minds that are not benighted on the basis of our own experience. I dare say that if the frontiers of democracy are to expand in Asia, it will have to be through a similar cultural and educational process.

The educational system established which covered even our remotest village, mainly accounts for the democratic ideology which has effectively won the masses of our people and which has made them spurn the blandishments and the wiles of Communism. The social revolution wrought and brought about by the institution of such a system was indeed far-reaching. I am one of its products and so were my predecessors, Presidents Roxas, Quirino, and Magsaysay, and so were Ambassador Romulo and thousands of other Filipino leaders in education, business, and government. Our educational system consists of one state university, 20 private universities, 352 public and private elementary, high schools, and vocational schools, with a total enrollment of 4,595,000 students out of a total population of 22.6 millions.

American educational work in the Philippines can be duplicated in all of Southeast Asia where live 700 millions of newly-emancipated Asians. The Philippines can be the cultural liaison and the focal center of such a new educational endeavor and, if carried out with understanding and goodwill, it can unite the Asians with the imperishable bond that democratic ideals alone can give with the vast means and resources at the command of altruistic and philanthropic institutions; such as, the Eisenhower Fund, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Kellogg Foundation, the great American universities and colleges, and other foundations and institutions. The United States can embark on an expanded educational aid program for Southeast Asia through the. Philippines and help train the youth of the region who will be the Asian leaders of tomorrow. The end result of such an undertaking will transcend our time and beggar all estimates in material terms. I have no doubt but that the youth of Southeast Asia, its longing for education satisfied, its mental horizons broadened, its spiritual faith awakened, will respond enthusiastically to the call of freedom and democracy. This can mark the beginning of the end of Communism in our section of the world, for Jet it not be forgotten that the flowering of democracy in Asia can surge only from the heart of the Asian youth. It is the youth of today that must be won, and education alone can do it.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library