Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before various ROTC and PMT units of universities and colleges in Manila

[Delivered during the Field Day Celebrations in Luneta, March 5, 1961]

I WISH to extend, first of all, my warmest congratulations to all of you who participated in the impressive military formation this afternoon. I am proud of you, my young countrymen.

As President of the Republic, I have pledged myself to personal discipline with which you made every step. I know that I can look forward to a happy tomorrow for our country and people for, indeed, personal discipline is the fountainhead from which springs the greatness of any nation. Only through the cultivation of personal discipline can we feel secure in ourselves. Only through the aggressive translation of this personal discipline into national discipline can we hope to build a nation that can claim greatness on the basis of the spirit—a spirit that seeks a world beyond the softness and glitter of the temporal and accepts the challenge of the infinite. Indeed, I cannot overemphasize the importance of discipline—particularly of national discipline—in the same manner that I cannot overemphasize the importance of greatness.

As President of this Republic, I have pledged myself to the pursuit of this greatness for our country and people Let this occasion be the reason for a reiteration of that pledge. In our effort to establish a firm foundation for the material security of our country, we have not lost sight of the fact that a nation is judged not so much by the steel sinews of its material structure as by the soundness of its sense of values. We have not been without mistakes. We have received these criticisms in our stride and adopted the proper measures whenever necessary. But to our detractors, I want to state categorically that these mistakes have not blinded us to our true goal, nor have they slowed down the peace of our twofold effort to ensure the material and moral posterity of this country. The magnitude of our problems has not dimmed our vision. And this is the basis of our confidence. We can well forge ahead in our task of nation-building, light in heart under the pressure of human weakness because we are at the same time under the constant guidance of those principles that enrich the mainsprings of human strength.

More specifically, our confidence in the future is founded on our realization and cultivation of the potential of our youth. And as we—the elders—have to account for tomorrow, so will you—the youth—have a share in answering for today. On your shoulders rests the grave responsibility for preparation. Fail not yourselves now and we, your elders, can rest substantially assured that we will not fail ourselves before the judgment of the coming generations.

The discipline which is imposed upon you, the military training which you have to undergo, the days of drilling under the scorching heat of the sun or under the cold lash of rain, are, in theory, a preparation. All these, however, are also intended to serve as incentives, a spur by which the youth can achieve the militancy that is required of every citizen, a militancy that is a basic ingredient of leadership. Furthermore, discipline is needed to help develop leadership that will remain true to its patriotic mission. And this mission requires youth leadership to be responsible, free from undesirable influences. I say that this kind of leadership can only come from within the ranks of the youth and not from those external elements which have, made it a profession to exploit the youth to suit selfish ends.

I urge you to develop leadership. But more strongly, I urge you to purify your leadership from all factors which can swerve your progress from the path of truth.

At this juncture, I must make special mention of our success with the help of our militant youth to foil communism’s inroads be exposing it as a conspiracy to strip us in the final end of our liberty. We have succeeded in unmasking communism as a cancerous growth, seen or unseen, which seeks to undermine the time-tested and free institutions not only of our people but all of mankind. I urge you to carry on in combating and negating with truth what has been evolved by professional conspirators as an art of lies and deceit, and ultimately of violence, to overthrow existing and duly constituted governments.

In a war of ideas, in whatever field, I would personally encourage our youth to participate actively. They should be quick to criticize honestly the weaknesses of our society whenever there is a need for it, for in a democracy, in this way, the government can forge ahead truly responsive to the people’s desire. They should, however, be also quick to praise and support the government whenever it is equally necessary. Malfeasance in office has been given much publicity, so must efficiency in the public service be equally glorified.

When we present a problem by generally treating its negative aspects without the relevant facts to stand in a court of justice, we defeat the real purpose of making any criticism at all. We would only be creating issues for partisan groups to ride on for their own selfish ends. The youth should continue being model citizens of their communities, in word and in deed, thus creating an atmosphere where our free way of life becomes in itself a deterrent to whatever force seeks to destroy it.

For we—you and your elders—all share in the responsibility of helping prove, through the achievements of this small nation, that democracy in the face of its own imperfections is so much better than what communism has to offer. And it is not a contradiction to say that democracy, which finds nourishment in freedom, works best through discipline. Discipline, because we are a young struggling nation susceptible to. being diverted from our search for a place in the galaxy of greatness and because our success can furnish a stirring answer to the questions that divide humanity today into vast chasms of ideological and political discord. Given the guiding, light of principle, we cannot be pessimistic of the destiny that awaits us all. And young at heart but mature in perspective, we can march onward, as it were, in fine military order to greet the glorious dawn. I like to think that your splendid performance today serves as a spectacular promise of how this nation will face the future. I like to think that the parade and review just concluded is also a preview of our national conduct in the generations to come. Straightness and uniformity may not be the ideals of a democracy, but democratic diversity is also not an end in itself. There are many paths to truth but there is only one truth and in this purpose, we need to be united. To this end, we need discipline. Discipline in freedom-—it is for us all to show that it does work. But it is up to you, who will succeed us, to give the final proof.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech before various ROTC and PMT units of Universities and Colleges in Manila during their Field Day Celebrations on the Luneta on the afternoon of March 5, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(13) , 2297-2299.