MINISTER ABBOTT, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THIS is a historic occasion, an occasion so profoundly expressive of the warm, intimate, and secure relations between the United States and the Philippines.

The long tradition of friendship and the spirit of cooperation between the two countries have thus, today, gained in substance. I am confident that, despite discordant notes and jarring influences exerted by divisive forces that tradition and that spirit will continue to grow in strength and depth.

Today’s happy event has been preceded by a host of similar ones. Since 1951, under a joint program of Philippine development undertaken through the National Economic Council and the International Cooperation Administration, various projects have been set up to improve practically every field of the public service.

These projects include those undertaken in agricultural extension, highway construction, health, education, public administration, and in social and scientific research. Everywhere one turns, he may witness today the benefits that have been gained through such projects.

Not the least of these benefits is the establishment of an Asian Labor Educational Center here. Thus we are assembled here today on the campus of the State University to dedicate this edifice as a leadership training center for the free trade unions in Asia. The establishment of this Center with such modern facilities opens a new chapter not only in the field of education but in the struggle of the Asian workers for recognition as a vital force in the building of a democratic society.

Let me, first of all, offer my warm welcome to the labor leaders from our sister nations in Asia who have come to participate in this training program for union leadership. For Asian leaders of labor to come together in an Asian setting for study, for fellowship, and for sharing of experiences on problems affecting our workers in Asia is to me not only a refreshing but a desirable approach from the grass-roots level to develop closer ties, better understanding, and a more intelligent consideration of problems among Asian peoples than through a program such as this in the Center

Let me also offer my congratulations to the University of the Philippines for its pioneering efforts in the field of labor education during the past five years and for the important role it is now being called upon to play. I am happy and proud to see our own State University perform its role, for it is my sincere belief that institutions of higher learning, if they are to fulfill their mission in full measure, should help meet and respond to the needs and problems of society.

One of the most important problems we are confronted with in the Philippines—and in Asia—is how to develop free, strong, responsible, and democratic unions, for it is this type of union which alone could contribute to industrial peace and to the common good. Our approach to this problem has been two-fold: by legislation through the Industrial Peace Act, which guarantees to the workers the right to self-organization and to collective bargaining, and by education of union officers and members about their rights and responsibilities as workers and as citizens, through the Labor Education Center of the University of the Philippines. I am happy to note that during the past few years there has been a tremendous growth of unions which could engage in effective collective bargaining, free from the infiltration of subversive ideologies, and conscious of their rights and responsibilities.

However, we are still faced with grave problems in our efforts to improve the lives of our workingmen. There is, first of all, an ever pressing need for dedicated, responsible, and trained leaders in the labor movement so that such an institution could be an effective instrument for national progress. But above all, there is the need to liberate the workers from their apathy, from fear, and from ignorance if we are to have in the Philippines and in Asia a strong free democratic and responsible labor movement. The best answer to these needs is workers’ education on an extensive scale. I submit to you, my friends, that the education of workers, be they from the farms or factories, for active, intelligent, and responsible participation in the affairs of our country and in their own unions is indispensable to the building and growth of a democratic social order.

Workers’ education in Asia acquires greater significance when we consider that there is keen struggle for the minds of the Asian workers who, because of poverty and despair, may surrender their freedoms for seductive or false promises of economic security and a better life.

On this occasion, allow me to quote from Woodrow Wilson, one of the greatest champions of freedom the world has ever produced, who once said: “Everything I know about history, every bit of experience and observation that has contributed to my thought, has confirmed me in the conviction that the real wisdom of human life is compounded out of the experiences of ordinary men. The utility, the vitality, the fruitage of life does not come from the top to bottom; it comes like the natural growth of a great tree, from the soil, up through the trunk, in the branches, to the foliage and the fruit. The great struggling unknown masses of the men who are at the base of everything are the dynamic force that is lifting the levels of society. A nation is as great, and only as great, as her rank and file.”

Let me accept this gift—this important structure—because it symbolizes our goal in nation-building. As I have said before—“Beyond mere economic development, we are concerned, in short, with the building of a truly democratic social order. We want to open to the workingman the fullest possible opportunities for personal development and advancement, without taking away his freedom. We reject vehemently any rigid lines of social hierarchy in our country. We want increasingly to create a society where every Asian child is born, no matter his antecedent and his class may be, will be given the chance, through a decent life and education, to develop fully his God-given abilities to contribute to the national good.”

Let me accept this gift because it symbolizes the cause which we in Asia dearly cherished and fight for—the cause of freedom, justice, and human dignity.

Let me accept this gift because it stands for our faith in the common man.

For this gift, may I offer the gratitude of the Filipino people to the people of the United States.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). President Garcia’s speech at the inauguration of the U.P. Asian Labor Education Center, Wednesday afternoon, January 6, at the New Alec Building in Diliman, Quezon City. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(2) , 265-267.