Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the ROTC Field Day

[Delivered at the New Luneta, March 15, 1959]

IT IS always a great pleasure to speak to an elite segment of the country’s youth from whose ranks will emerge the leaders of tomorrow.

I am immensely impressed by the performance you have rendered, and I believe that the precision with which the movements are executed has been made possible by discipline.

However, it is NATIONAL DISCIPLINE, not military discipline that I wish to speak to you about for I feel that national discipline is more encompassing. It is a most potent element in our efforts at national construction and in our desire to enjoy the bounties of a free and democratic life.

I consider the subject not only important but timely and appropriate, especially in the wake of our people’s efforts to accelerate the development of our country. There is vital and urgent need for such discipline in all aspects of our national existence and in all our activities as a member of the Community of Nations.

What is national discipline?

National discipline is an attitude of the mind. It is the desire, the willingness, and the capacity for progress. Essentially, it is that attitude which impels individuals comprising the citizenry of a state to submerge their personal interests for the general welfare. It is founded on sound nationalism, which, significantly, is one of the greatest single determining factors of history, and which continues to this day to be the dominating force the world over. It is the capacity to make sacrifices when necessary, to assume responsibilities. It is the faith in our oneness of purpose as a people and in our collective capacities to pave the way to better living for all.

Perhaps, nowhere in our national activity is the national spirit more suggestive than in our educational institutions which, as guardians of patriotism, not only cultivate the grit and courage of our ancestors, but also keep the youth conscious of their rights and privileges as citizens of a. free country. And speaking of freedom brings to everyone the thought that the enjoyment of it and the employment of our liberties are broadest and most effective where such freedom is exercised with the corresponding responsibilities demanded of it. Hence, in our passionate love for freedom, nothing can disturb or stir us more than the slightest threat of losing it.

We, as a people, have eloquently demonstrated that we possess national discipline in times of emergency, although such quality tends to become dormant no sooner than the pressures are removed; We also tend to delude ourselves into believing that we are a great people by reminiscing past glories, so that in spite of the fact that our country is blessed with a vast natural wealth, we are still in the category of under-developed country.

Perhaps it is this wealth that induces us to live a life of ease and comfort, especially as we are under no immediate pressure to work hard for a living. Likewise, our historical development which has nurtured into us the advantages of democratic living has not quite educated us completely along corresponding responsibilities. Our middle class, which constitutes the backbone of our body politic, is not sufficiently sensitive to the affairs of the state. Apparently, it has fallen back on its true role by relinquishing to, a few leaders the collective responsibility of nation-building. Along, with these, we have professional critics, whose negative thinking has rendered them incapable of constructive criticism, and certain groups whose desire for progress has been confined to their own personal gains. National discipline means positive mental dynamic attitude vibrant with invincible faith and self-confidence. A defeatest mental attitude is suicidal. It is inimical to the interest of the State. Fill always your heart and mind with faith, hope, and love and you are an invincible man.

In our present state of development, the strengthening of the national economy calls for the highest form of national discipline.

In our setup, it is our leaders who are charged with the forging of national policies which are intended too work out the greatest good for the greatest number. Necessarily, certain groups are called upon to subordinate their personal interests for the general welfare.

I stress at this point that those at the highest level, whether in the field of business or industry, in politics or in government or in society have to make sacrifices in order for them to contribute to a most equitable distribution of our fruits of production and to make possible higher standards of fife for the people. For instance, those interests that demand protection in the form of tariffs and controls, or through tax exemptions and other privileges, must improve the quality of their products, pay workers higher wages for their labor, or provide lower prices for the consumers to really deserve such protection. These are about the strongest justification for any form of support to industry in a free enterprise economy.

It is for this that I sound an appeal for national discipline. I pose it as the supreme challenge to every citizen of our Republic.

While to your leaders belong the actual and active demonstration or constant practice of national discipline, the initial fostering of the spirit of national discipline begins with the youth. For the development as well as the preparation of the attitudes and capacities for progress is most properly within the sphere of the education process under which you as young people start building yourselves for the future leadership of the country.

As a most essential influence, national discipline pervades all forms of human endeavors whether such be in work or play, in our home life, in our studies, in our economic planning, in our policy-formulating and law-making activities. It pervades even the heart and the very enjoyment of bur liberties. In short, it must and should influence our social, economic, cultural, and political life.

As you, my young friends, develop yourselves and instill in your being a cheerful and welcoming acceptance of national discipline, I have great hopes that when you assume leadership of the country in the future, the responsibilities of providing for national stability and prosperity will be in capable hands.

Meanwhile, the present stage of our existence lays strong emphasis on the economic content of our national construction. This demands the collective responsibilities of our people which, as I said, exact a degree of sacrifice, greater political and social consciousness, which will create the atmosphere conducive to the growth of economic and other opportunities.

National discipline is the price of progress. Without it, it is impossible to provide the dynamic direction of our efforts to achieve higher levels of living. Without it, no amount of planning, law-making, or education can suffice, for even as a nation depends on its material and human resources for strength, so will such nation develop its potentialities for peace and prosperity from the degree of national discipline exercised by its people. Fortunately, we do have the Spiritual and moral forces within us needed for the development of a great nation. Our people possess the faculties that have enabled others to make their nations strong. Moreover, it is our great fortune to be endowed with a vast wealth of natural resources. Our forest reserves, mineral deposits, and other forms of natural wealth are an inexhaustible source of income that can provide more vitality and substance into our existence as a people.

In time I am sure our people will develop greater political maturity to steel them further against narrow partisan motivations which render it most difficult for our citizens to shift the true import of, or be guided properly by, existing programs for national growth. It often happens that the administration of government is hampered mercilessly by political opposition groups instead of being aided by such forces in generating a more dynamic government. This destructive tendency results in rabid partisanship that makes many among us impervious to the needs of the country.

National discipline is not only for us whom you have charged with running the affairs of government. It is also for you and the rest of our people. The challenge is to all who are actually dedicated to the work of .advancing the nation’s frontiers and to those who are truly devoted to the general well-being and dignity of our people.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the ROTC Field Day. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(12) , 2080-2083.