LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

IT IS an honor and privilege to officiate at the laying of the cornerstone of this country’s Philippine Atomic Research Center. I cannot conceive of a more auspicious symbol of our country’s great hopes for this decade than this afternoon’s ceremonies. Here on this now barren piece of earth, in the first month of the first year of the Nineteen Sixties, we have laid the first stone of a structure that will enable us to harness the atom’s might for accelerated national growth. The occasion even lends itself to the special cooperative nature of our atomic project. It marks the first public appearance of the new Ambassador from the United States which donated the reactor for our nuclear center.

The decade we have just left behind was a period of dynamic change in our history. It saw the start of an ambitious industrialization effort which brought great strides of progress in all fronts, manufacturing, mining, agriculture, and trade and made us substantially self-sufficient in food and in many consumer goods and gave work to thousands of otherwise idle hands.

It witnessed a rediscovery of our rural masses, their awakening and their metamorphosis into a social and political force that, more than any other factor, has injected urgency into our efforts for swift material growth.

The last decade marked the articulation and the eventual sweeping acceptance by both government and people of nationalism, especially in its simple and natural concept that the Filipinos, in their own land, are entitled to a major share of their country’s wealth, and that the vast opportunities laid open by a billowing economy legitimately belongs in good part to him.

Among others, during the last ten years, a communist rebellion was subdued and its last pockets of resistance eradicated. In agriculture, after hobbling along on the usual chronic insufficiency in staples, the last years saw an amazing leap into agricultural surpluses in rice, corn, and Virginia tobacco. Vast forests yielded their treasure in the form of logs, lumber, and other products. Mineral resources jumped to a leading place in our production and export lists. In trade, it was a period of rapid expansion both in products and markets. In the later years, helped along by controls, there was by a constant narrowing down of the unfavorable gap in our trade balance, culminating in an unprecedented favorable margin in 1959.

During the same period, the government channeled mil­lions into the construction of roads, bridges, buildings, airports, railroads, and irrigation systems. It set up the first truly national rural health system. It committed itself fully to a multi-million community development program designed to attack rural ills at their roots. It provided millions of homebuilders, farmers, traders, and industrialists with credit through its lending institutions. Controls set up to check the massive drain in dollars was in the later years redirected to support an industrial development program.

By the close of the Nineteen Fifties, the results of these and a host of other government measures had manifested themselves in such diverse manners as a passionately active and vocal electorate, a rapidly changing and expanding landscape, a cascade of locally made products, a gross national product that rose from ₱6.2 billion in 1950 to ₱10.7 billion in 1959, an increasing tempo in both our rate of economic growth and patterns of living.

We look back almost in awe at the road we have traveled in the last ten years. They were in retrospect a period of revolutionary and startling achievement in almost all fields.

But the achievements of the decade, tremendous as they are, only serve to bring into clearer focus the problems that continue to beset us.

Our population has grown, and continues to grow, at a tremendous rate. Our expanding economy can hardly keep pace with our expanding labor force many of whom continue to remain unemployed or under-employed. Much of our forest resources have been denuded, our fishing grounds destroyed. Two of our major export industries, coconut and abaca, have been attacked by mysterious diseases. A good portion of our people continue to live out their lives in illiteracy or disease, or both. Our growing industry and agriculture continue to demand technical skills, better methods and processes, new means of utilizing wastes, of improving products, of creating new ones from abundant raw materials.

Thus while looking back into the Fifties in the consciousness of achievement, we do so in the realization that our problems have compounded themselves and that some have even grown more unyielding to ordinary solutions.

And while looking hopefully into the Nineteen Sixties as a period of still greater victories, we know that the promise of the next decade can be fulfilled only if we find solutions to many of the attendant problems in our growing economy.

Many of our present difficulties are political and social in nature seeking their answers in the world of intangibles. But just as many—and those above mentioned belong largely to this category—are concrete enough and find their solutions in such realities as science and technology.

In fact an appraisal of many of our ills will reveal science as the common denominator in their solution. Like so many other countries, we have been drawn into the irrevocable conclusion that on science depends many of the answers to our problems, both old and new.

We claim with pride, as one of the Administration’s contributions, our categorical support for a greatly expanded and nationally integrated scientific program. Under Republic Act 2067, which created the National Science Development Board, we committed ourselves to the concept of using scientific knowledge as an instrument for the promotion of national progress. In support of this year’s science program, the sum of ₱5.9 million was provided. This includes the outlays for the National Science Development Board, the National Institute of Science and Technology, and the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission only and does not include the other millions spent by other agencies partially engaged in research.

In a policy speech delivered last year, we clarified our support toward efforts to gear our scientific research program to overall economic plans, grant priority to researches aimed at discovering solutions to our more pressing economic problems, promote science-consciousness among our people, and build up an expanded core of competent scientists through increased salaries, scholarships, awards, and other incentives. In short, we promised to grant the country’s science effort the measure of financial, moral, and administrative support it deserves.

These commitments, we believe have been faithfully kept within the resources allowed us. It is only too true, however, that considering the expanding frontiers of science, larger financial subsidies could easily be absorbed by an expanded research program. Certainly, because of the government’s limited financial resources, our efforts so far cannot fully measure up to the vast opportunities for scientific endeavor. Moreover, research, since it deals primarily with unknowns, is necessarily an expensive process. But serious efforts will be exerted to remedy this financial gap.

The Administration will seriously explore the possibility of utilizing a portion of the marginal levies on dollar remittances to support an expanded science program. It will consider as well the idea of channeling a part of import duties to the same purpose. And it will examine the proposal that the budgets of our science agencies be approved on a five-year continuing basis to prevent the undue hampering of research activities by funds annually—thus inconveniently appropriated. These three measures will, singly or in combination, enable Philippine science to attune itself to the world-wide dynamic growth of science and technology.

On the same occasion, we made special mention of our support for the multi-million nuclear research center in Quezon City to house a reactor granted by the American Government under a bilateral agreement. Under the science master schedule, we hope to have the facility ready at the end of 1960 and in full operation by the middle of 1961. This afternoon’s ceremonies is the precursor to the fulfillment of that enterprise, easily our country’s most outstanding science project to date.

The background of our Atomic Research Center has been amply explained to you by the preceding honorable speakers it will be sufficient, I hope, if I reiterate our people’s thanks to generous America, ably represented here by Ambassador Hickerson, for the grant that has made this center possible. Indeed, our Center is a study in Philippine-American cordial bilateral effort.

Great things are expected of our reactor center. As the focal point in researches involving the use of radioactive material, it is expected to contribute substantially to the advancement of science in this country. Its radioactive by-products will be utilized in experimental physics, engineering, chemistry, and biology. Within its confines, studies in nuclear engineering and, subsequently, atomic power will be conducted. While performing primarily as a center for research, it will serve also as a training institution in the new field of nuclear science. Scientists from all over the Philippines and possibly neighboring countries will be taught the many uses of the radioisotope in medicine and biology.

We now import radioisotopes in the treatment of goiter and tumors and in the study of human metabolism in medical diagnosis. We import radioactive matter for use in studies on soil fertility, genetics, and pest control. Our efforts are naturally limited. The birth of the reactor will mean the large scale production of this versatile tool of science, which will in turn trigger larger and more intensive experimentation. Industry will turn to this Center in the years to come for assistance in improving their processes and techniques, their products. Industrialists will use nuclear energy to check metal faults, measure thickness, and produce heat-resistant substances. From its portals will pour forth a wealth of scientific information that will help provide answers to economic problems otherwise incapable of solution by conventional research methods. On the basis of our Center, our entry into the international fraternity for the atom’s peaceful utilization under a regime of freedom will be complete.

From the date of its inauguration and for years thereafter, the edifice we have dedicated today will stand as a symbol of Philippine scientific achievement nurtured under the atmosphere of bilateral cooperation. But more than that, it will also personify our efforts to give our people— through the magic vehicle of science—the means for the attainment of a full abundant life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library