MY YMCA FRIENDS:

THERE is a ritual which couples who observe the golden anniversary of their union go through. They hie back to the church of their choice and in that solemn site where they first pronounced their troth fifty years back they pronounce anew their promises to each other. This is an occasion always tinged with joy and pride and sorrow. The fruits of the union are there to give meaning to the event—sons and daughters who have become pillars of the community; grandchildren, already pursuing useful and purposeful careers; great-grandchildren, still carefree, still noisy and naughty, still undergoing the long educative process to prepare their latent talents for adult life, still not realizing the full significance of the event but awed and mystified nevertheless at the simultaneous laughter and tear shedding going on. It is a moving and meaningful sight, this golden anniversary of the marriage bonds; it is a testaments to the continuity of the human race; it is the ultimate proof of the indestructibility of man. But there is sorrow, too. Flesh is mortal and the young, even as they rejoice, realize that the old must soon go to the great beyond, with pride at a task well done, yes, but go anyway, they must for eternal repose. I have yet to hear a couple celebrating the centennial of their wedding. It is at this point that I must draw the difference between the golden anniversary of the YMCA of the Philippines that we are celebrating today and that of the golden wedding anniversary of a couple. Whereas a golden wedding anniversary, significant and meaningful as it is, is a testament to a job well-done and to energies well-spent, it also is a milestone from which the couple must, henceforth sally at a leisurely pace along memory lane. The job is done and the rest is—rest.

Not for the YMCA. For as we celebrate today the Philippine YMCA’s fiftieth year, I see around me evidences of youth and youthfulness, evidences not only of energies well-spent but of vitality still surging and yet still burgeoning, evidences of vigor and vision that have already started planning and working for a successful and more fruitful hendredth year.

I have been an eyewitness to the enduring purpose and amazing growth of the YMCA of the Philippines. As a young student I boarded at the Student Y which was destroyed during the war, had since been rebuilt, and stands today at the same site as the Youth Center. I often played chess in YMCA recreation halls. Six years ago when I was Vice-President, I spoke before you in the very hall on the occasion of the YMCA’s fourty-fourth anniversary. I said then, “The YMCA has been an active participant in the national effort to increase production and improve the lot of the common people. It has interested itself in the effort of the present administration of President Magsaysay to restore the people’s faith and confidence in the government. It has always stood for social justice. It has consistently fought that the four fundamental freedoms may be enjoyed by the minorities and the majorities on the basis of equality and liberty. It has always stood for, and in many ways exemplified, an education of self-reliance and sell confidence and rugged individualism that would minimize the growing tendency of too much dependence upon the government. It has been one of the indefatigable advocates of the merit system in the civil service as well as in free enterprise. It has always stood for planning and programming in all collective efforts for the building up of an honest, efficient, and economical government. On the basis of this record, the YMCA fully deserves every congratulation that it receives.”

As if these things are not enough, the YMCA during its first fifty years—

(1) introduced organized physical and health education in the Philippines, including the YMCA-invented game of basketball, which has since become the national pastime, some wags will say, next to politics;

(2) pioneered in student and group conferences, boys camps, Boy Scouting, leadership training, and citizenship building programs;

(3) pioneered in and organized community service work in the slums;

(4) provide and stayed at the forefront of civilian relief for prisoners o£ war, displaced veterans, war widows and orphans, and stranded students during the depressing and dangerous period of the war years; and

(5) embarked on a program of rural reconstruction even ahead of, and afterwards side by side with, the government’s own rural improvement program.

This last phase of YMCA work received world reknown and acclaim when an American magazine of international circulation (The Reader’s Digest) devoted a special six-page article in 1957 to extrolling the effectiveness in Philippine nation-building of YMCA works and programmes.

But to my mind, over and above these major and significant achievements which seem unerringly to meet the changing challenge of the times, there is one for which 1 personally and officially take pride in, one for which I here publicly express my congratulations to the men of vision behind the Philippine YMCA movement. This achievement, another one of its firsts in the YMCA movement in the whole of the Asian region, is its present ability to stand on its own two feet, independent of support and assistance in terms of funds and personnel from its mother institution, the YMCA’s of the United States and Canada.

This is a truly noteworthy achievement in the task of institution building—the acquisition of a truly independent posture. It is this truly independent posture, which in the task of nation-building, we have yet to achieve in our economic development. It is to this economic independence that I have committed my administration and to which I am now devoting my energies.

For this reason, very early in my administration I launched our program of agro-industrial development in order that the increased production of an industrialized society may benefit our people. My Filipino First policy was designed and is being pursued with vigor in order to wrest the strangle-hold on our economy from aliens and their dummies. My campaign against graft in the government is likewise being carried out relentlessly in order that this cancer that is gnawing into our body politic may be cut off and checked completely.

We have made outstanding progress in recent years. We have become self-sufficient in rice—our staple food. Our industrial plants have gone beyond the packaging and assembly stage. Our textile production is almost enough to meet local consumption and we import less and less textile by the year. Electrification of the countryside is going on at a fast clip. Even our shipbuilding industry has gone beyond the rudimentary stage, having constructed the first truly Philippine-made sea-going vessel. Our rural areas are brightening up with renewed vigor brought about by cottage industries and community development programs. These things alone are a lot more achievement than can be claimed by past administrations put together. But I am the last to claim, that these achievements are enough. Rather I say that these accomplishments of my administra­tion are simply the initial steps in the right direction towards nation-building.

What is this direction towards which we are heading? What is the objective for which we are fighting? What is the nation’s purpose?

Our Malayan ancestors came to this beautiful bountiful land in the dawn of our history in search of peace and freedom from a tyrannical ruler. They found it here for a long, long time until superior weapons forced upon them a new kind of tyranny from the West. The cannon and the sword of this new tyranny, however, did riot kill our love for freedom nor our desire for freedom nor our desire for peace. And so we rose again and again; defeat never fazed us, nor cowed us to submission until at last we realized the dream of three hundred years, the emergence of a new nation, the first republic to be proclaimed in the whole of Asia. This was in 1898, a time when more so than today, the field of international relations was a jungle ruled by the mighty and the strong; when, as it is to some extent today, the fate of the small and the weak was decided by the big and the powerful. Spain, having lost control and possession of the Philippines to the successful Filipino revolutionists, saw one last chance at profit and literally sold the country to the United States with whom she was at war in Cuba. We had to defend our newly-won freedom and the Philippine-American war was fought with the inevitable result—the defeat of the weak by the strong.

The United States, however, turned out to be a totally different kind of colonizer than Spain was. Magnanimous in victory, she made sincere efforts at rehabilitating the prostrate land, introduced government sponsored sanitation and health programs to eradicate tropical diseases, set-up the universal public school system, and laid the groundwork for the speedy Filipinization of the government. Our people multiplied and business flourished under the protection of free trade with the United States. There was peace and prosperity and for a time contentment. Indeed some of our national leaders at the time thought that perhaps the best course for the country was to stay forever in the gilded case of American colonialism; but it is a tribute to our nation’s innate love for freedom that this benevolent colonialism did not blunt our national desire to be free. And so we fought again, this time not with arms but with persuasion, and again we won.

Today we are politically free. But freedom, we have found out, brings with it a host of problems, not the least of which is its maintenance and preservation.

Our population has quadrupled since the turn of the century. Our national production has not kept pace with this growth fast enough to afford all our citizens the bare necessities of life. Time was when our population was small enough so that the bounty of nature sufficed to give everyone a comfortable life. At -the rate that we are increasing, however, only a most careful husbanding and utilization of our natural resources would allow us to give to every man his share.

This is my covenant to our people. I will exert all my efforts to the end that every Filipino, however lowly, shall be able to get his share of the national patrimony and that no Filipino, however ‘highly placed, shall get more of it than he deserves. I shall see to it, within the powers vested in me by the constitution, that it shall be easy for the vast majority of our masses to earn a decent and comfortable living, even if I have to make it difficult for a few of our people to become overly rich.

My war against graft in the government shall continue to be relentless and it is only my love and respect for constitutional and legal processes, which after all are the foundation stones of democracy, that have prevented me from dealing with grafters more drastically. As it is, our anti-graft record is impressive enough. Out of 21,992 administrative cases filed, 13,600 have been decided, resulting in 9,547 convictions and 4,110 exonerations. Out of 740 criminal cases filed in the courts over 100 cases have been decided, three-fourths of which were convictions and the rest exonerations.

Upon my urging, Congress last year enacted the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices Bill, which I have since signed into law. Some continue to criticize my anti-graft fight record, but I dare anyone to show me a record that will surpass or even just equal it. I have to become a dictator and tread beyond constitutional and legal limits if I have to deal with grafters with more dispatch than I am doing now. We cannot just line up against a wall all who are accused of graft and shoot them down like dogs. They must be given their day in court and punished according to our laws, for this is the way of democracy, and I firmly believe that the means employed is just as important as the end to be achieved.

I am a respector of civil liberties and constitutional rights and the rights of minorities to co-exist with majorities. Nobody can say that during my administration anyone was deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. This shall continue to be so.

In the field of foreign relations, we shall continue our traditional ties with friends and broaden our contacts with the newly emergent nations which, like us, are still looking for their rightful place under the sun.

Lastly, we shall preserve in our country democracy as a way of life, republicanism as a from of government, and periodic free elections as the people’s mandate to express their will. These things I intend to do and more.

When the YMCA back in 1910’s introduced organized, competitive athletics, it did so, not only to develop healthy young men, but also to develop fair play and team work which are essential to the development of a working democracy. Democracy can not work as a one-man affair. The grandstand player has no place in an effective team. Alone, I can not accomplish much. Therefore, I ask of you to help me build this nation as you have successfully built an independent YMCA. Together there is nothing we cannot do; divided, we accomplish nothing.

I have been in many tight political fights during my long career in the public service. Fortunately, I have always been victorious; but no one, not anyone can say, that I won because I cheated. Nor can anyone say of me that when the fight was tough and victory seemed to belong to my opponent, I made advance excuses for my impending defeat by claiming my opponent will commit fraud and then threatening reprisal in that unlikely event. My years in the YMCA have taught me sportsmanship and the art of clean playing, virtues which today are at a premium. “When the Great Scorer pens my name, he writes not of me, won or lost, but how I played the game.”

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech at the closing of the YMCA Golden Jubilee held at YMCA Youth Center, February 26, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(10) , 1766-1771.