ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF PRESIDENT GARCIA’S LABOR DAY SPEECH, MAY 1, 1957, AT THE INDEPENDENCE MEMORIAL GRANDSTAND

My Beloved Countrymen:

I HAVE dared at this large gathering to use our native language because I wish to reach your hearts, although most of you know this language is somewhat difficult for me. I might prove deficient in this speech, but you should all know that you are dear to me.

I wish to thank all of you for this invitation extended to me this afternoon. I will never forget this occasion as long as I live.

Every year, on the first of May, the entire country celebrates the day of the laborer, of; the small man, the poor, the working man. This observance is a recognition of the country’s debt to all of you. Because, if there were no working men, there would be no Filipino nation.

I know that the death of President Magsaysay was a great loss to us. He was the idol and friend of all working men. He had done so much for us. He defended and took up your cause. Today, by the will of God, the administration of government has fallen into my hands. I will carry on all the policies of President Magsaysay. I will protect and defend you; I will help you. Your happines shall be the paramount objective of my administration.

I know the sufferings of the working man, because I am a poor man myself. The tears that stream from your eyes are the same tears that also stream from my eyes.

This is why I appeal for your confidence and you may rest assured that your aspirations will not be unfulfilled.

I ask you to cooperate with this administration, and I in turn am ready to help you. Tell me your problems, and together we shall look for solutions to those problems. I will look for remedies for all of your complaints.

I have impressed upon Congress the importance of the Social Security bill because this will provide security and prosperity for all working men in our country. I will approve the Apprenticeship bill once it is passed by Congress.

I will sign into law any bill passed by Congress for the welfare of the working man just as I will veto any bill that will prejudice your interests.

I will support any effort to strengthen and propagate unions in our country. I call upon the labor leaders in our country to be honest and true to their duties. Because if these leaders are not honest and clean, our plans will not be realized.

I want to know that this government will seek earnestly to solve as soon as possible the problem of unemployment.

We will solve this not by words but by deeds.

My countrymen: On this day, as your President, I pledge to you that I will not permit the working man to be oppressed under this administration. In conclusion, I want you to know that Carlos P. Garcia, like Ramon Magsaysay, is your friend and is sincerely devoted to your well-being.

Mabuhay , all of you, and thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Read according to pronunciation