SPEECH OF PRESIDENT GARCIA AT THE QUEZON DAY RITES HELD IN QUEZON CITY, TUESDAY AFTERNOON AUGUST 19, 1958, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE 80TH BIRTHDAY OF THE LATE PRESIDENT QUEZON

MAYOR AMORANTO, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MY COUNTRYMEN:

WE COMMEMORATE today the 80th birthday anniversary of one of our Motherland’s greatest sons. Born to parents who both taught school in out-of-the-way Baler, Tayabas, where only the Spanish residents owned watches and clocks, the exact time of his birth was ascertained only because it coincided with the first ringing of the church bells for the first mass during the town fiesta, which was 7 o’clock in the morning, Having dedicated all his life since the age of 20 to the service of our country and people, he died at the age of 66 in a sanatorium in Saranac Lake, New York. He was called by his Maker when the Philippines was under enemy occupation, when the scheduled establishment of our national sovereignty and independence for which he had ceaselessly labored was less than two years away, and when he himself was an exile in a foreign, if benevolent land. Ravaged by tuberculosis, anxious and nostalgic for his home, and tortured by the uncertain fate of his people and country, Manuel L. Quezon truly died a martyr.

In his early youth he fought vainly in war to help redeem the freedom of his country. In peace he worked successfully to obtain our country’s independence from the sovereign power that had replaced Spain, the United States of America. At the head of the Government of the Commonwealth he was engaged in the final preparations for the establishment of the Republic of the Philippines when the Pacific War broke out and interrupted the peaceful and orderly work of liberation. The Japanese invaded and occupied the country for three nightmarish years. This unhappy development gave Manuel L. Quezon still another opportunity to serve his nation in war, giving up his life in the process.

This time, however, he did not wear a uniform nor shoulder a gun. He served as the rallying symbol of resistance against the enemy. As a refugee in the United States, through his public speeches, his voice as the representative of his country in the United Nations organization and the Pacific War, Council, and his personal contacts with American and other allied officials at the highest level, he greatly hastened American effort to liberate the Philippines from the enemy and thus shortened the days of humiliating enemy occupation.

It will never be known how much shorter was the ordeal of our people under the enemy because of Manuel L. Quezon’s effective work in the United States. But we do know that he gave up his life for this great and urgent task. Long suffering from tuberculosis, it was perhaps a foregone conclusion that, as a war refugee living in the tunnels of Corregidor, traveling by submarine, ship, and airplane always hunted by the enemy, and forever anxious about the fate of his country, he would not survive the war. Yet so completely obsessed was he by the vision of a liberated Philippines that, through sheer willpower and in spite of the steadily worsening condition of his health, he lived to see the conflict’s decisive turning point. It was in fact a radio announcement that General MacArthur’s forces had just landed at a point only 800 miles away, relentlessly on their way back to the Philippines, which unduly excited him that Sunday morning on August 1, 1944, agitating his soul in mixed anxiety and joy, and precipitated his death.

Although Manuel L. Quezon has gone to his just reward, he has left to our people a precious legacy that has become an important part of our nation’s capital asset. If we not only safeguard but also build upon it, we shall forever be rich and wise people. Among the most precious items in the great Quezon heritage are enlightened nationalism, democracy anchored on social justice, and shining patriotism. To us, they are truly a rich source of pride and inspiration.

As a nationalist, Quezon was realistic and farsighted. He was barely 20 years old when he joined General Aguinaldo’s forces that were fighting the American forces. His exploits as a young officer, from the time he volunteered to the time he surrendered, make up a tale of extraordinary courage and fortitude. Realizing that, after the capture of General Aguinaldo/by the Americans, the Filipinos had lost the war, he gave himself up to General MacArthur in Malacañang so as to verify at the same time the American claim that they had Aguinaldo in their power. Having found the American claim true, he followed the only road open to him; he returned to civilian life to work for the liberty of his country in the realm of peace.

Soon after the establishment of civil government and on the occasion of the first national election to choose the first members of the Philippine Assembly in 1907, Manuel Quezon and Sergio Osmeña, both still relatively young men, led in the organization of the Nacionalista Party and, through its historic platform, announced the basis of a new farsighted Philippine nationalism. Repudiating the obsession of the first Filipino leaders in government to annex the Philippines to United States, the Party and its leaders launched a firm and vigorous campaign for immediate independence. The people rallied around the two leaders and gave them and their party their overwhelming and enthusiastic support. Under their joint direction, Osmeña as leader from 1907 to 1922 and Quezon thereafter, the Jones Act and the Tydings-McDuffie Independence Law were obtained. In recognition of the decisive and dramatic part played by Manuel Quezon in the long campaign that culminated in the scheduled grant of independence, our people awarded him the highest honor within their gift—the presidency of the nation.

The nationalism that Quezon taught us was not petty but great-hearted, not docile but firm, not jingoistic but enlightened, not inflammatory but constructive. It was the nationalism of neither a demagogue nor a megalomaniac; it was the nationalism of a wise statesman.

Having settled the question of independence with the enactment of the Tydings-McDuffiie Act and having been elected President of the Commonwealth, Manuel L. Quezon inaugurated the first social justice program that, like a welcome rain to a parched land, brought new life and meaning to the existence of our masses.

Under American rule, democracy in the Philippines seeped from the top. It was logical that American effort would be mainly aimed at the training of the leaders who would then carry on the work of democratizing the country. The Quezon social justice program supplemented the process by democratizing from the bottom. Comprehended in the Quezon program were our first Minimum Wage Law, Eight-Hour Labor Law, Land Resettlement Act, Tenancy Act, and many other laws that encouraged and lifted the common man. It became the broad basis for the greatly-expanded social justice program of the Republic.

A luminous and courageous statesmanship glowed throughout Manuel L. Quezon’s long public career. When an American Governor-General threatened, to reduce the measure of Filipino self-government, alleging that inefficiency had resulted from an overdose of autonomy, the Filipino leader had his finest hour. Resisting the American chief executive firmly but respectfully, he roared in indignation like a hurt lion: “Better a government run like hell by Filipinos than a government run like heaven by Americans!” And when he found it necessary to split the party in whose fold he had attained public stature, he declared with courage and patriotism: “My loyalty to my party ends where my loyalty to my country begins!” He had an uncanny ability to put the issues of the day in lapidary phrases that became deathless and inspiring.

My countrymen, it goes without saying that our own generation can best honor the memory of our departed leader by shaping our trusteeship of the public welfare in the image of his high achievements. We must faithfully apply the wisdom of his statesmanship to the problems of our Republic. The enlightened and farsighted Quezon nationalism must inspire and guide our foreign policies. The Quezon social justice reforms must be the solid base of our program of rural improvement, national economic development, and democratic growth. The Quezon standard of patriotic and courageous public service must be the standard of our expanding government service.

We shall, however, fail and disappoint our pioneer statesman and render his great work in vain if we lack the originality and imagination to expand his basic principles to the massive proportions of our present problems and needs. We can, I think, give warranty to our times, that we can do this by making sure that honesty in government is not a mere phrase but an actual practice, that our public policies are as sound as they are farsighted, that we show maturity in the use and practice of our rights and liberties in a democratic and sovereign nation.

To a certain extent, bigness in government can mean weakness. This sounds paradoxical but in some respects true. For bigness primarily spells more extensive resources, greater population, increased strength. In terms, however, of more extensive and more varied public services, greater personnel to assemble and supervise, and bigger problems to cope with, bigness can be a disadvantage. If in a personnel of 100 there is one dishonest man, in a personnel of 1,000 there can be 10 dishonest men and in 10,000 at least 100. Where a leader can effectively lead 100 men, he may be slowed down and hampered by 10,000.

There is no doubt that the problems of the nation have grown and multiplied since the days of the Commonwealth. The Republic must look not only to its domestic welfare, as did the Commonwealth, but also to its international survival. It must spread ever-wider and ever-deeper among the people the benefits and blessings of liberty, prosperity, and contentment, and it must play a respectable part in the common search for world peace and security. Yet, we should conceive of the greater problems of the present as a challenge to our energies, to our capacities, and to our patriotism.

In our new task of promoting and establishing friendship and amity with other nations and thus insure our prosperity and survival, there is a clear and compelling guide in the enlightened and firm nationalism of Manuel L. Quezon. Neither xenophobic nor submissively colonial, he actively and courageously affirmed the dignity and. self-respect of his race and aspired for nothing more no less than equality. It was upon his own suggestion that the clear bases of the Republic’s future foreign policies were written into our Constitution. Among these are the affirmation that the Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national policy and adopts the generally-accepted principles of international law as part of the law of the nation. And to emphasize this policy all the more, the Constitution defines the limits of our national territory by way of announcing to the world that we covet no other. By closely and faithfully abiding by the spirit of these declarations, we shall not fail to shape a norm of international conduct that will guarantee friendship with all nations and therefore security for our country, our territory, and our people.

For a long time now many of our people have looked upon public service as an opportunity to get rich. Venality has thrived because there has been lacking a strong and lasting alliance between public opinion on the one hand and statesmanship on the other. When public opinion has been strong, statesmanship has been lax, and when statesmanship has been vigorous, public opinion has been indifferent. Neither one nor the other alone can insure honesty in government. Both must squeeze out of the malefactors from above and from below in a sustained, coordinated and massive pressure that will show them neither pity nor mercy. We in the administration are doing our part; we have begun to investigate the more sensitive government offices and will not stop until we have purged the entire public service of the undesirable elements. But we urge the public to do its part. Public opinion must be equally aroused and determined to weed out of the government offices the niggling parasites and treacherous termites. With such a support, we cannot fail.

Only honest public servants can conceive and execute honest and wise public services. Again, in the shaping of public policies, statesmanship must have the cooperation of public opinion. But it must not be carping, publicity-seeking, narrowly-partisan, or strictly group-conscious. It must be honest and intelligent with an’ eye single to the common welfare. One of the basic virtues of democracy is the freedom the people enjoy in the discussion of public affairs and in this way churn out from the depth of their genius their basic wisdom and their highest ingenuity.

And this can happen only if the people make use of their democratic liberties with thoughtfulness and circumspection. Careless accusations, sweeping fulminations, undocumented indictment are in the code of responsible citizenship. The democratic liberties are not meant to create or intensify unfounded suspicious or sneaking distructs or mistaken enmities, but to make possible criticism without malice and the exposure without ulterior end of whatever may be evil in the body politic. In its highest employment, freedom should make possible free and voluntary cooperation characterized by mutual good will.

Just as yellow journalism is the primitive and destructive manifestation of this essential profession, so irresponsible and sensational comments on public affairs or against public officials is a sign of democratic immaturity. It takes honest arid responsible critics of government to guide honest and responsible government officials, and it takes honest and responsible officials to run an honest and responsible government.

Therefore, my countrymen, on this day that marks the 80th birthday anniversay of our great patriot and leader, Manuel L. Quezon, I urge you to pledge with me that, out of respect to his memory, as a response to the challenge of his example, and as proof of our greater maturity as a people, we shall cooperate together to make of our Republic for which he died, forever a land of social justice arid equal opportunity, of enlightened nationalism, of honest public service, and of responsible freedom.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library