PRESIDENT GARCIA’S LABOR DAY SPEECH DELIVERED WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON, MAY 1, 1957, AT THE INDEPENDENCE MEMORIAL GRANDSTAND

My beloved Filipino working people:

I mustered the courage, in this large gathering, to use our own language, as I wish to speak to you heart to heart, despite everyone knowing that this is a little difficult for me. If I fall short in my words, know that all of you are dear to me.

I thank you all for the opportunity you have given me today. I will never forget this as long as I live.

Year after year, upon the arrival of the first day of May, the entire Filipino nation celebrates in the name of the workers, the small, the poor, and the toiling masses. This is a recognition of the nation’s gratitude to all of you. For, without workers, there is no Filipino nation.

I know that we have suffered a great loss with the death of President Magsaysay. He was an idol and friend of all workers. He accomplished so much for us. He defended you. Therefore, now, under the will of Almighty God, the administration has passed into my hands. I will continue all the principles of President Magsaysay. I will defend you; I will help you. Your happiness will be the bible of my term.

I know the hardship of a worker, for I too am poor. The tears that fall from your eyes are the same tears that fall from my eyes.

Therefore, I ask for your trust and hope that your dreams will not be disappointed.

I ask you to help our government, and I will help you in return. Tell me your problems, and together we will find solutions to those problems. I will give justice to all your complaints.

I have emphasized to our Congress the importance of the “Social Security Bill” because it will provide stability and happiness to all workers in our country.

I will strengthen the “Apprenticeship Bill” once it has been approved by our Congress.

Any Bill in Congress that is for the good of the worker I will sign, and all Bills that are not good for you I will veto.

I will help the labor union movement spread throughout our country. I call on the leaders of the unions in our country to be clean and honest in their duties. Because if the leaders are not honest and not clean, our goals will not succeed.

I want you to know that this government will strive to resolve the problem of the unemployed immediately. I will do this not in words but in deeds.

My countrymen: today, as your President, I swear to you, workers cannot be oppressed under this government. In closing, I want you to know that Carlos P. Garcia, like Ramon Magsaysay, is your friend, and sincerely loves you.

Long live you all and thank you very much.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Read in English