PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE LAUNCHING OF THE 1960 FUND DRIVE OF THE COMMUNITY CHEST OF GREATER MANILA, THURSDAY AFTERNOON, JUNE 2, AT THE MALACAÑANG SOCIAL HALL

THE launching of the fund drive of the Community Chest of Greater Manila and the eighteen Red Feather agencies affiliated to it is always an occasion that I happily look forward to every year.

The Community Chest concept for raising funds for the support of its many and varied affiliated agencies has proven successful in our country in giving life and impetus to a massive charity effort reaching thousands upon thousands of beneficiaries.

“Give once and serve eighteen times” could indeed be the motto of the Community Chest, for the donor’s peso serves all eighteen Red Feather agencies.

Less than a week ago, the metropolitan area of Greater Manila was the scene of destruction and loss of human life unparalleled within memory of man.

It is true that a big number of the victims were “squatters” who settled on the unsafe banks of creeks and rivers against existing laws, but it is no less true that charity must be extended the victims to help them “to get back on their feet.”

The government is pledged to the immediate relief of the victims of the disaster and also to the eventual relocation of the squatters families to relatively safer areas. To achieve this end, I have mobilized all government agencies, and I have instructed the officials concerned to effect the relocation program. I have authorized the use of not less than ₱2 million for such relocation program, it being the determination of the Administration to face squarely the squatters’ problem and other germane problems in Greater Manila.

In the meantime, the disaster will increase greatly the number of the orphans and the infirm, the helpless and the maimed. The relief work currently being undertaken by the government and private charitable entities and individuals have to do with the immediate needs of clothing, food, and shelter.

The more long-range work of rehabilitating the infirm, the maimed, and the orphans will have to be absorbed by specialized agencies like those that form the eighteen Red Feather agencies affiliated to the Community Chest.

The number of these helpless men, women, and children will swell the usual number of charity cases handled by the Red Feather agencies.

For this reason, I wish to make a special appeal this year—to government agencies, provincial and municipal officials, business and commercial firms, employees and other citizens, and all Philippine residents regardless of nationality—to give as much, if not more than, what they gave the Community Chest last year.

Our people’s effectiveness to rally to help those in distress has been demonstrated time and again. I am certain that they will not fail to rally again anytime sickness, misery, distress, or disaster calls for it.

I wish to reiterate my call to all quarters to support this year’s Community Chest fund drive.

I now declare the 1960 Fund Drive of the Community Chest of Greater Manila officially open, and I hereby hand my personal contribution to the fund to your chairman.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library