MY FRIENDS:

“They are ill discoverers that think there is no land, when they see nothing but sea.”

I QUOTE from Bacon, one of the great thinkers of all time, from his Advancement of Learni ng.

Perhaps, one of the drawbacks to advancement in our own time in this our beloved country is negative thinking which is a vestige of colonial times when many of us accepted in resignation what we were taught in all subtlety that we were capable of only so much, and so far, and that we could not stand on our own without a mentor or a protector. The outcome has been atavism, into which the Filipino stragglers of colonial mentality would pull back or hold down the rest of the nation. Instead I urge that by and with a life of positive thinking, a life of faith, confidence and hope, and determination we can mould and achieve a great destiny as a sovereign state and as a free people.

With political independence achieved, we are now pursuing the economic summum bonum for ourselves and our country. I like to repeat here what I said in my first message to Congress, viz: “The faith of this nation is abiding; the spirit of this nation is mighty; the determination of this nation is invincible. On this rock of faith, with this spirit and determination, let us build the house of the nation.”

I hold firmly to this faith. But even as I speak before you, the voices of despair are active in the land. They seek to weaken our faith, undermine our courage, and sap our determination. They spread dissension and promote strife in the willful and deliberate effort to wreck the very foundations of the house of the nation.

These voices belong to the opposition. They say our policies are confused. They say our policies are ineffective. They say that we are bringing the country into ruin.

But these false prophets find themselves rebuffed by incontrovertible realities.

I take this opportunity to report to the Filipino people that for the first time in post-war years and within only two years of the implementation of my economic policies, our country has achieved a favorable balance of trade in the amount of ₱95.2 million as of July 31, 1959. There are definite indications of the heartening upswing of trade in our favor auguring a 100-million peso favorable balance of trade by the end of this year.

Now, this favorable balance of trade is not an accident. It is a direct consequence of the economic policies of the Nacionalista administration implemented wisely and courageously.

Let me remind this convention that in 1949, considered the peak year of the Liberal administration, our unfavorable balance of trade went up to the staggering amount of ₱676 million. When the Nacionalista administration took over in 1954, we inherited from the Liberals still a huge deficit in our foreign trade which we gradually overcame until this year of 1959 when we turned the tide from minus to plus by registering in the first seven months a surplus I mentioned before, 95 million pesos, with the bright prospect of going over the ₱100 million mark at the end of the year.

When the Nacionalista Administration took over the reins of government at the end of 1953 by the overhelming mandate of the people, the cause of economic development received fresh impetus. It was clearly recognized that without development there could be no economic independence, and without economic independence the fruits of political freedom could never fully be ours. Therefore, the new Administration triggered an acceleration of the development program. The government deliberately cultivated an atmosphere conducive to economic expansion on all fronts. The public authority poured its expenditures into economic and social development projects—into dams and power-plants, irrigation systems, roads, bridges, portworks, technical schools—into the multitude of overhead facilities without which no healthy development can be sustained. Private enterprise was encouraged to establish and build its factories and firms in industry and extend its productive activities in agriculture. Those who would enter production were accorded preferential treatment in the form of easy industrial and rural credits, tax concessions and subsidies, marketing aids, priority in the use of dollars, and the protection of tariffs and import controls. The response of private enterprises to these policies surpassed our most optimistic expectations. A heartening upsurge of investments and industrial activity took place. Therefore, despite the inherent weaknesses of under-development aggravated by unfavorable influences from outside our borders, the country was able to push forward with great stride along the highway of progress.

As direct results of these wisely laid-down policies and courageously implemented plans we may be allowed to overstep the bounds of modesty and mention a few more of the outstanding achievements besides the first one ; that of achieving a favorable balance of trade for the first time in postwar years:

1. The recent discovery of oil mines in Cebu where the first well yielded a daily output of 72 barrels of oil without the aid of a pump. Oil experts predict that this well will easily fall as Class A-1 oil well under American standards. The Administration immediately put the resources of the Central Bank behind this 100% Filipino oil mining company to enable it to expand as rapidly as possible its program of oil digging. The oil era of the Philippines has thus commenced under most auspicious circumstances. If the Venezuelan Bolivar (equivalent to our peso) has become stronger even than the dollar where the only pillar of its national economy is oil, there is ample reason to hope that the Philippine currency should grow even stronger, as, besides oil, our national economy has several other pillars; such as, sugar, copra, hemp, tobacco, timber, minerals, and very soon steel.

2. I am happy to report also to you, that as of October 14, 1959, the peso in the Hongkong money market has risen in value by 53 pts. This is considered a spectacular rise taking into account the fact that when the margin bill was discussed in Congress, the peso value with reference to the Hongkong dollar was 1.27 and now it has risen to 1.80 with some indication of rising still. This means that with the passage of the stabilization measures the most important of which is the so-called dollar margin bill, the Philippine currency has gained stability which is being the most recognized by the whole world.

3. I am also happy to announce that the dollar reserves of this country has risen to $168 million where it was only around $130 million during the discussion of the dollar margin bill.

4. As you all know, one of the surest gauges of economic progress is the gross national product. When the Liberal regime came to an end in 1953, the gross national product was over ₱8 billion. By the end of 1957, the first four years of the Nacionalista regime, our national product skyrocketed to over ₱10 billion. In 1958, the spectacular rise under the Nacionalista husbanding of the national economy continued and we chalked up a gross national product of 10 billion, 464 million pesos showing an increase of two billion 462 million pesos in five years.

5. Another index of economic growth is in the fields of agriculture, manufacturing, and mining.

I submit to you figures not only from our own statistics but also from the statistics of the United Nations. Since 1954 when the Nationalista took over, our agriculture production has advanced by 35.1%, mining has registered an increase of 50.2%, while manufacturing production, achieved a remarkable 73.7% improvement. In modern times these advances are without parallel in any part of the world. On the overall, production in all fields has increased three times.

6. Another significant indicator of the pickup of economic activity is the number of new business establishments set up. Since 1953, the records show that a total of 35,520 business firms were organized and registered for operation, about 4,000 of them in the first six months of 1959 alone. Would this be possible, if as some of our critics’ claim, the economy is stagnating and business is coming to a standstill?

7. If our critics are right, how account then for the tremendous growth in banking facilities? Banks are not set up and expanded unless adequate commercial and industrial activity require their services. Today there are 18 commercial banks and 128 rural banks serving the people throughout the country as compared 15 commercial banks and 18 rural banks in 1953. Consequently, total resources have grown tremendously from ₱1.26 billion in 1953 to ₱2.23 billion as of the end of June this year showing an increase of ₱970 million. In addition, more than 500 ACGFA cooperative marketing associations throughout the islands now serve the rural areas with credit, marketing, and modern warehousing facilities compared to the 120 units in 1953.

8. The administration’s professional critics have charged the Nacionalista administration for the rise of prices of all commodities in this country. Before a crowd of business-minded youth such as this I need not state that this upward trend in prices is a world trend not a local one. The world economy of which we are only a segment is the root cause in the rise in prices. But I would like to emphasize the fact that this world-wide upward trend in prices has given us more benefit than disadvantages. Let me cite you actual instances. In 1958 a quintal of copra (100 kls.) cost ₱37.70; today it costs ₱51.12 or a benefit in our favor of ₱13.42 per quintal. Hemp per picul, was ₱39.43 in 1958; now it is ₱55.26, or a benefit in your favor of ₱15.83 per picul.

Coconut oil per quintal (100 kls.) in 1958 was ₱65; it is now ₱86, or a benefit in our favor of ₱21 per quintal. Desiccated coconut per quintal in 1958; ₱63, now ₱77.59, or a benefit of ₱14.59 per quintal. When we take into account that for the first half of 1959, our total exports aggregate value was ₱539 million as compared to ₱461 million for the same period in 1958, or a gain of ₱78 million, whereas our imports for the same period in 1958 showed decrease of ₱98 million, we can readily see that the upward trend in prices has been to our advantage as a whole.

9. The 9th achievement along economic line which I consider of vital importance is the achievement within one year of my administration of self-sufficiency in food. For many decades the Philippines has always imported rice to supplement its home production in feeding the population. We spent millions for the importation of food, but in 1958 we reversed history. We have achieved self-sufficiency in food and this year the Cabinet authorized the NARIC to export to Japan 24,000 metric tons of rice and 8,000 metric tons of corn. We have in the NARIC bodega a surplus stock of 2 million cavans of rice above our national requirement for food. The progress report of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources predicts another bumper crop this year which will swell the surplus of rice and corn. Again, our achievement in this line has reversed history from that of a rice importing country to that of a rice exporting one. My friends, this alone would entitle the Nacionalista administration to a reaffirmation of confidence by the Filipino people.

10. Another achievement of this administration wrought with big possibilities is the establishment of a Philippine merchant marine under Act No. 1407. Let us not forget that the Philippines has only a total of 57,000 tons of Philippine registry engaged in foreign shipping. As a result of that, only S per cent of our foreign trade, that is, exports and imports, are carried in Philippine bottoms and 97 per cent are carried by vessels of foreign registry. When we take into account that in 1958 the aggregate value of our foreign trade was in round figures ₱2 billion, we will realize how many millions of pesos the country pays for freight to foreign countries. So we started an ambitious program of expanding our foreign shipping. We ordered 12 vessels of 10,000 tons each to contract with Japanese shipbuilders and another 15 vessels of 10,000 tons each through the reparations agreement which will give us an additional total of 270,000 tons of foreign shipping, which added to what we have, sum up to 327,000 tons. Our goal is to have an aggregate total tonnage of 500,000 tons. My friends, by this achivement we expect to have a tremendous boost of our foreign trade and save hundreds of millions of dollars in freight which henceforth will go to Philippine shipping firms. Ships flying Philippine flags will sail in the seven seas of the world carrying our exports, and homeward bound, carrying our imports, thereby triggering a new era of foreign trade expansion which will certainly break all previous records.

My friends, these 11 achievements of the Nacionalista administration, modesty aside, constitute glowing chapters in the saga of our economic development. But the Nacionalistas are not satisfied with material progress alone. We are also devoting a great part of our efforts in trying to lift up the moral and cultural heritage of the nation. So right after the inception of my administration, we announced an unrelenting campaign against graft and corruption mostly inherited from the previous administration of the Liberals, and we are proud to announce that in one year and seven months of anti-graft campaign we produced results of which the Nacionalista Party can be proud. Here are the figures which I would like to submit to your consideration. During that period of time, 1958-1959, without fanfare we prosecuted a total of 11,870 cases of all types of venalities and corruption. Of this more than 50 per cent had been decided or roughly 6,000 cases, and 4,000 cases were found guilty and punished in varying degrees according to the gravity of the guilts committed. Incidentally, among those found guilty and punished accordingly are one undersecretary of department, two bureau directors, justices of the peace, fiscals, and officials in various government-owned or controlled corporations, etc. One bureau director, two assistant bureau directors are yet under suspension. On the other hand, the extravagant promises of the Liberal Party to put up a clean, honest, and graftless administration if returned to power would sound empty and hallow in the face of their record of eight years of lethargic inaction and complicity in an unparalleled era of graft, corruption, and terrorism in election.

Before I conclude, permit me to discuss certain other policies which have bearing upon issues in the forthcoming elections. Presently I would commend to your support and cooperation the Administration’s program to spread more of the fruits of our progressing economy to the people. We have urged the channelling of investments to the provinces and encouraged the dispersal of industrial enterprises away from the traditional centers of population whenever feasible. Such developments would bring employment and technical opportunities to provincial workers, provide income not only for the provincial governments but to the area as a whole, stimulate trade and commerce, and consequently benefit local living conditions. This is our policy of dispersal. I am gratified to report that in line with our proposals, many industries have seen fit to establish their main plants in different parts of the country. Thus we have nail factories in Cebu and Negros Occidental, glassware in Rizal, metal products manufacturing in Bohol, tin can manufacturers in Bulacan and Davao City, a cassava flour mill in Lanao, a rubber plantation project in Zamboanga, soap plants in Pangasinan and Laguna, cement plants in La Union, Iloilo, Cebu, and Mindoro, and other industrial concerns in practically every province in the archipelago. Continuing cooperation from the business communities all over the country is a must if the government is to succeed not only in the prosecution of economic development, but also in the distribution of its benefits to every Filipino.

Another important policy in which the Nacionalista administration is deeply committed is the so-called Filipino First policy. Charges of insincerity in the implementation of Administration’s Filipino First policy have been made in the press and on political platforms. In answer, let me cite the bare facts. To the accusation that dollar allocations for Filipino businessmen are declining, I have this to say. The Central Bank which is the specific agency in charge of exchange allocation reports that while Filipino quota-holders received 39 per cent of total regular allocations in 1953, they received 44 per cent in 1958 and 51 per cent during the first semester this year. Americans were the next most favored groups, getting 26 per cent of the allocations in 1953, 36 per cent in 1958, and 34 per cent during the first half of 1959. On the other hand, the share of the Chinese which came to 20 per cent in 1953, dropped to 10 per cent in 1958 and 7.5 per cent from January to June this year. The share of other nationalities which came to 7 per cent in 1953, also fell to 2 per cent in 1958 and to less than 1 per cent in 1959.

I also wish to cite the percentage share of Filipinos in the capital investments of newly registered business. While 72 per cent of the investments of newly registered firms during 1953 belonged to Filipinos, in 1958 the share of Filipinos was 76 per cent; during the first semester this year it climbed to 81 per cent, The Chinese who were responsible for 24 per cent of the investments in 1953, accounted for 21 per cent in 1958 and only 18 per cent in 1959. Investment share of Americans and other nationalities have remained relatively the same.

Can the Filipino First policy then be a farce? Is the Filipino First policy anti-American or anti-anybody? Has the Administration raised the policy only for campaign purposes? The truth is that actually the Administration has plunged into the task of placing our growing progressive economy into the hands of our citizens. The facts speak for themselves.

I must say at least a few words about the foreign policy of the Nacionalista administration. I am proud to say the international prestige of the Philippines has been growing steadily in recent years. Our voice in international councils has gained more admiration and greater respect for the Nacionalist Party. My state visits to the United States in June of last year, to Japan in December of last year, and to Vietnam in April of this year have given fulfillment and more lasting publicity to our relations with the United States, Japan, and Vietnam. As a result of these successes, the Philippine Republic received invitations from many countries in Asia, like Korea, Nationalist China, Malaya, and Indonesia for its president to make state visits to those countries. Even European countries like Spain, France, England, and Italy have invited the Philippine president to make state visits to those great European countries. Recently, the diplomatic negotiations between Foreign Affairs Secretary Serrano and Ambassador Bohlen on the question of the military bases produced tangible results which not only raised the national pride of the Philippines but also re-established on firmer and more enduring foundation the Philippine-American friendship, a friendship cultivated though 50 years of American and Philippine statesmen and patroits, and passed the acid test of two world wars. Out of these negotiations we reaped the following happy results:

1. The return to the Philippine Republic of all inactive bases. 2. The reduction of the period of lease from 99 years under the 1947 bases treaty negotiated by the Liberals to 25 years. 3. The delimitation of the bases retained by the American government which the Liberals negotiated bases treaty of 1947 were given without the determination of areas and boundaries. 4. The return to the Philippines of the title to the bases formerly claimed by the American Government. 5. The need of consultation with the Philippine Government for the use of the bases other than the defense of the Philippines. 6. The establishment of the mutual defense board composed of American and Filipino military men for the administration of the bases. 7. The need of consulting the Philippine Government before any missle launching stations (ICBM or JRM) is established in these bases.

All these achievements in foreign policy we can justly claim to have added to a better understanding and closer and more intimate relations with the United States by removing the causes of irritants. These achievements are neither Philippine victory nor American failure. It is the common triumph of two good friends—the Philippines and the United States—who in war have stood by each other and in peace have collaborated with each other for the cause of freedom and peace with honor and justice, and who will forever stand by each other for the cause of world peace.

In conclusion I would like to state to the members of this Jaycee convention that the Administration has kept faith with the Filipino people. It has dedicated itself to the difficult task of attaining the aspirations of the masses of our people. The Nacionalista Party from 1907 the year of its birth, to 1946 led the Filipino nation in its great fight for freedom and independence. Now the same Nacionalista Party is leading fearlessly and relentlessly in the great fight for economic independence. I submit that the Nacionalista Party has chalked up considerable achievements in this respect, the most outstanding of which I had succinctly summarized in my remarks. In all humility I submit to you the plea for re-affirmation of your confidence in my administration which I assure you will lead our beloved country to new frontiers of progress and vaster horizons of accomplishments.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech at the 11th National Convention of the Philippine Jaycees at St. Louis Auditorium, Baguio City, October 15, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (37) , 7907-7915.