GRADUATES, OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES, MY FRIENDS, AT EASE!

I AM very happy to be with you today, and the nation is gratified that you have completed your military training.

While our Constitution renounces war as an instrument of national policy, in the same breath it provides that the defense of the state is the prime duty of government, and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be required to render personal military or civil service.”

My friends, as young and able-bodied citizens you constitute a vital element of our country’s peacetime and wartime resources. But it is in peacetime that the country’s resources must be fully developed and utilized. You must therefore be prepared to discharge your civic duties as free citizens of our Republic if you must increase the nation’s capabilities to protect itself in times of grave national crises.

Military training is, in effect, a sound way of improving your civic efficiency for constructive pursuits. It is, in fact, an effective means of training young people for leadership in their respective communities. Through their contracts with the young people of other section of the country, the trainees are afforded a valuable opportunity of knowing the problems of communities other than their own, and thereby widen their perspective, to enable them to look at things from the national point of view,

The military training program is based on broad national objectives, foremost of which is the building up of an active body of young citizens capable of upholding the dignity and independence of the Filipino nation. In short, the program aims to inculcate in a sound mind and a sound body the desirable qualities of a citizen who can act as a vital force for a progressive national life. The military discipline which is inherent in your training is designed to foster in you that quality of courage in the face of adversity, alertness, understanding of and deep insight into the problems confronting the community of which you are a part.

Knowledge of military tactics plays a secondary role in all these; and the individual who is imbued with a high degree of responsibility and civic consciousness is more important, more efficient, and more indispensable to a young and growing country like the Philippines. In recent public speeches, I have underscored the vital and urgent need for national discipline as a most potent element in our efforts at national construction and in our desire to enjoy the bounties of a free and democratic life. National discipline calls upon every individual to participate actively and judiciously in the social, economic, political, and other aspects of our national existence.

I would ask you, my friends, to contribute to the solution of the problems, not only those of your home and family, and I would also ask you to be more active in your participation in desirable community projects and in those with national significance. For instance, you might help relieve the economic difficulties of the nation by increasing agriculture production in your own community. There are provinces in the Philippines which abound in natural resources which provide many raw materials for our factories. Bamboo, to mention one of the most common products’ in the country is an important raw material in a number of profitable cottage or manufacturing industries. Coconuts, abaca, our extensive forest reserves, the waters that surround our beautiful islands are a boundless source of national wealth which awaits your enterprising hands.

Increasing the economic opportunities in our country constitutes but a single aspects of the national discipline that I have spoken to you about. As citizens of a democracy you will soon be exercising your political rights as voters. It does not matter much whether you are a Nacionalista, a Liberal, a Progressive, or a Nationalist-Citizens Party man. What is important is voting for the right man and the right issues; for ultimately, it is the right issues and the right men in the government that spell progress for our country. So be alert, my friends, to the political issues of the day. And only thus can we really become politically matured and forge forcefully a truly democratic existence.

This principle holds true whether you are electing a councilor, a municipal mayor, governor, a representative, senator, or president. It is your responsibility as free citizens to analyze carefully the issues that are raised before you and to vote for the men who can give you a government that is truly responsive to the needs of your community and the nation. That is national discipline!

No doubt, many of you will assume leadership in your respective communities, while many will settle for a role of just being members of society. But what really counts is the degree and nature of your participation, in the same way that “a chain is as strong only as its weakest link.”

Similarly, the strength of a nation is derived from the collective strength of its citizens, the greatest source of which are people of your age. From your ranks and files come the people who work in our fields, in our factories, and in the Armed Forces, and since a few years ago, there has been a marked tendency in our political life to draw leaders from among you. The dynamic spirit is most pronounced among young people; it is this spirit that is known to open many new opportunities. It is the strength that builds the pillars of our industry, one which advances our national aims and objectives and builds the destiny of our people.

As we pursue our daily chores we take courage and inspiration from the thought that our efforts are being dedicated to the security of our homes and of the nation. This thought, has a way of propelling peace and prosperity. Conversely, the knowledge that our endeavors are being wasted constitutes the greatest single hindrance to national growth.

People of your age are the connecting link between the past and the, future. You bequeath to the future the heritage of the past after you have enriched it with your own experiences and achievements. I realize that our Nation, as do others for that matter, impose upon the youth a tre­mendous responsibility of developing themselves to be capable guardians of the future. It is ironic though, that while this is true, the dynamic potentiality of the youth comes to the fore very rarely and only in time of war. It would be most ideal to have this dynamism as a constructive force in the building of our nation.

We, your elders and leaders, will sooner or later give way to younger people in the active direction or management of our national affairs. It is incumbent upon you the youth, to take the more dynamic role to steel or brace yourselves up for the major responsibilities in undertaking the progressive development of the country. At the same time you prepare yourselves to relinquish your role to the future, to which belongs the potential which will in time take up where you leave off, when you shall have graduated to the positions your elders are now in.

And so, my young friends, in our country, as in any other country, every citizen has a part to play. However insignificant that part may seem, that part is actually an essential one, for the lack of it will render any national effort incomplete. Your training has taught you discipline, among other things—that state of mind which impels you to subordinate your personal interests to those of the team or community of which you are a member. Your training has taught you the value of cooperation in bigger efforts, respect for your superior, and cheerful obedience to the laws governing your behaviour in the community. But along with these your training has prepared you to be better leaders or better followers.

Remember that you, as citizens of a free country, are first and foremost an active civilian force before you are part of a military reserve force. You can see, my friends, that while you have enormous responsibilities, you also wield tremendous power as a civic force which the strength of your community and our nation is drawn.

So my countrymen, now that your training is finished, I have even greater faith in your capabilities. Because of this, I firmly believe that when you return to your respective villages, you will bring something that is even more needed in this time, and that is none other than the “national discipline” that I mentioned.

As you return to your villages, I also want to convey to your parents, siblings, relatives, and countrymen my call for us to work together so that as soon as possible we can build a stable and prosperous livelihood. Let us make the progress of our country a legacy for the generations to come.

I wish you good fortune. May our Lord bless you. Do not forget to call upon Him so that we may find the path of righteousness and have the strength to fight all hardships.

I rely on your success, which is also the success of our country. And for my part, trust that I will continue to strive for your happiness, and my zeal will be devoted to good governance. Thank you very much to all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the graduation exercises of 20-year-old trainees from the Bicol Region held Monday, morning, June 8, at Fort William Mckinley, Rizal. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (24) , 4423-4426.