PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE MANILA HOTEL ON THE OCCASION OF A DINNER GIVEN IN HONOR OF PHILIPPINE MEN OF SCIENCE, ON JULY 19, 1959

Friends, ladies and gentlemen:

I THANK the organizers and sponsors of the National Science and Technology Week for the privilege of addressing you tonight. I also wish to congratulate you for the successful conduct of Science Week, which provided an opportune period for a highly stimulating exchange of ideas on the scientific and technological problems of the Philippines. Doubtless, your discussions have defined in clearer detail the numerous needs of the Philippines, and have assisted you in charting out the directions towards which your efforts as scientists and technologists must be channeled. I wish you utmost success in carrying out your program.

There is perhaps no better way of concluding this special week than by picturing the role of the Filipino scientist in the perspective of our nation’s modern history. In the thirteenth year of our political independence, we find that the weight of independent nationhood on our shoulders is increasing tremendously. We realize now more than ever that the sovereignty for which our heroes fought for is not only a blessing but a severe and demanding test. It is a test that has to extend over a long period of time, and which will determine whether we, as an independent country, can take care of our own economic needs by mobilizing our own efforts and exploiting our own resources in our struggle towards economic self-sufficiency. For, indeed, the stability of a nation in the long run is determined in large measure by the sturdiness of its economy.

It is not very difficult to define the place of the Filipino scientist in the pressing job of building a sturdy economy. In fact, a fast-growing society like ours cannot even conceive of surviving in the long pull unless it intensifies its scientific activities. Expressing it in the simplest of terms, we must make our farms and our factories produce more food, more materials for shelter, more clothing, more medicine, and more of the necessary commodities to meet the growing needs of a growing population. We have come to a critical time when we must diminish our dependence on other countries for the supply of these necessities because such a practice is sheer economic folly. National prosperity is an item that cannot be imported. We have to build it for ourselves.

In this task, the principal builders will be our scientists, our engineers, and our technologists. For it is they who have command of the knowledge and skills with which to extract the riches of our country’s resources, and to develop those riches into the many and varied products needed for our people’s use. It is they who can exploit the marvelous discoveries of modern science to increase our nation’s productivity and raise our people’s living standards. It is they who can put science to the service of our people.

It was in full awareness of these needs that your Congress last year passed Republic Act No. 2067, better known as the Science Act of 1958. This law is a substantial proof of the Administration’s determination to give the Filipino scientists all the support that the government can give. This is further proven by the sizable investments which the Administration, through the one-year-old National Science Development Board, has devoted to the all-important work of scientific and technological research.

These research activities are impelled and guided by practical considerations, and are geared to satisfy the most urgent needs of the economy. They are directed towards four main goals. The first is to develop methods and techniques of producing reasonable substitutes for the commodities that we normally import, and under this activity would fall the improvement of our rice and corn varieties the perfection of ceramics processing and researches into the manufacture of medicine from local plants. The second goal is to develop scientific approaches to improving our export products. Towards this end, a special committee has been formed to search for ways of effectively eradicating cadang-cadang, a mysterious vicious pest that has been responsible for the destruction of millions of coconuts in some regions of the Philippines. The third goal is to develop methods of commercially processing industrial and agricultural waste products into useful commodities. Bagasse and similar waste products, for instance, can be converted into pulp, paper, or wall boards. And the fourth goal is to collaborate with the Department of Education in revamping the general system of science teaching in our schools, with a view to producing scientists of the highest caliber. It is extremely heartening to note that the Department has increased the science load of both elementary and secondary school students. In conjunction with the Science Foundation of the Philippines, the National Science Development Board conducts a nationwide Science Talent Search to discover specially-gifted students, who are to be awarded government scholarships to enable them to pursue courses in the physical sciences.

At this stage, government research projects are still of modest proportions compared to the standards of economically advanced countries, but they are steadily growing and expanding. They now cover such varied fields as industry and agriculture, pharmacology, food and nutrition, biology, engineering, and technology. A significant milestone in the history of Philippine Science will be reached within the next two years with the construction of the Philippine Nuclear Research Center, which will enable our country to utilize the erstwhile incredible peaceful applications of the atom. This Center will house and operate our country’s first nuclear reactor, which will serve as a source of radiation for the production of radio-isotopes to be used in intensive agricultural, industrial, and medical researches. The construction of the Center will be a joint Philippine-American project, and will attest to the earnestness of our scientist to keep our country pace with the latest scientific advances in other parts of the world.

Needless to say, scientific research is not and should not be the work of the government alone. I wish to commend highly those sectors in private enterprise who have given much of their time, effort, and facilities to such activities. I urge them to continue the work, and I also raise a special appeal to two sectors which are traditionally the bulwarks of scientific research. I refer to the industries on the one hand and to the universities on the other.

The industries are in a happy positions to engage in the search for new scientific methods, new technological techniques not only for increasing but also for diversifying production. They have the technicians and the facilities; moreover, they always have recourse to the technical and financial assistance offered by the National Science Development Board to any project it deems worthy of assisting. The government is only too willing to join hands with private industry in the promotion of research for progress.

On the other hand, the universities have a distinct and special role to play in the development of our scientific potential, for they have always been the fountainhead of scientific knowledge and the training ground for scientific minds. I would ask our universities now to anticipate the future demands of our society not only for engineers and for technologists but for a special kind of professional, the need for whom is becoming greater in modern days. He is the scientific leader, a polished combination of the scientist and the organizer, equally proficient in laboratory work and in directing and managing the large-scale implementation of an idea. Without prejudice to the training of more engineers and technologists, our universities should likewise prepare now for engaging in a type of educational work which is definitely going to be absolutely necessary within the not-too-distant future, namely, the rigid and thorough training of researchers in pure science, on whose work and discoveries our future engineers will base their designs for a stronger, more scientific Philippines. For ultimately, the universities, as the seedbeds of scientific learning, are the very foundations of any nation’s scientific program; on them our country depends for its supply of finished, first-class scientists.

I am proud to announce that although the Science Act is only one year old, the Administration, through the National Science Development Board, has made a modest but earnest start in drawing up and implementing a master plan of research directed at the four goals that I mentioned. The need that is left us now is to carry on this program with sustained vigor. My administration is solidly committed to a vigorous program of scientific development. Tonight, as we end the celebration of National Science and Technology Week, I renew this commitment and pledge the support of my administration to the noble work of building a strong, healthy nation through Science.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library