ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT MARCOS ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING CEREMONY OF THE FIRST ASIAN FOREIGN SERVICE COURSE, LUNA HALL, DEPT. OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, JULY 22, 1957.

THE Republic of the Philippines, in sponsoring this First Asian Foreign Service Course under the joint auspices of the Eastern Regional Organization for Public Administration and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, is, in my opinion, projecting a new trend in international relations, particularly in this part of the world.

Diplomacy observes traditional gestures which, in sum, amount to formal and informal encounters of mind and vision in the foreign service of interacting societies. Diplomacy is an affair between peoples and nations, with diplomats and ministers as the instrument of contact, and this has until recent times become the common ground for mutual understanding among peoples.

With the advent of the United Nations, it was hoped that the affairs of men and nations would reach a new level of accord. Indeed, it has in many respects, but the reality of world politics has seen fit to shape diplomacy in a new way—new in the sense that influence and power have now tended to be concentrated in specific areas, exercised by specific groups. Leadership, therefore, has gravitated toward certain key points, converged on certain foci of interests.

Let me not burden the theme now current in the councils of the world—the theme of bi-polarity. But let me project the prospect of multi-polarity which, as a result of the knowledge and experience gained by nations in the creation and use of atomic power, is already a reality in our time.

I shall only suggest here that in the light of the actuality of a multi-polarized world order, the importance of regional order, the establishment and preservation of regional harmony, will exercise the vital role in the management of world peace. Were we to rely on the traditional practices of diplomacy, we would leave the creation of this harmony in all probability at the mercy of diplomats.

Again, a lesson we have learned in the past is that policy is only the synthesis of experience and knowledge. Thus a policy which seeks regional harmony will be the synthesis of knowledge and experience on a national scale, spread over to accommodate regional interests.

Diverse as the cultural traditions are of the policy and experiences of our peoples in our part of the world, we nevertheless, share a common dream of harmony; and better than leave the expression of this vision in the hands of policy-makers per se, we have now come to a point where men, in the fullness of their own knowledge and experience, must share in the responsibility of making and expressing national policy. It stands to reason that henceforth we can look forward to a better world.

Those who will share in the training and experience offered by this First Asian Foreign Service Course, representing as they do nations and cultures of our region, aspiring as they all will aspire, for their share in the making of peace, are the same who will sit behind diplomats’ desks and evolve foreign policies for their respective countries. In so doing, they will draw from the inspiration and practical requirements of the interests to which their nations and cultures are committed. But in so expressing these requirements in the area of foreign service, they shall know that they share a common knowledge and experience with their counterparts of the region. Thus within the framework of a nation’s basic foreign policy, within the guidelines provided by national communities, within the boundaries of action set by the United Nations as an organization and as a community of powers devoted to world security—within these bounds, we shall witness them at work, sharing skills and insights, indeed speaking a common language to each other and to the world. It is on this basis, that a new definition of peace and security and harmony may be possible in our world today.

Source: National Library