LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THE present Administration sincerely supports the Pax Romana International Movement, as represented here by the Student Catholic Action of the Philippines because the movement, international in scope, aims for enduring world peace founded on justice and moral law and love of our fellowmen. The Administration supports this movement because it rejects the principle embodied in the atomic bomb that “might is right.” I support the Pax Romana because it reaffirms on international scale the deathless Pauline principle in 13th Corinthian, viz: “So there abide faith, hope, and love, these three; but the greatest of these is love.”

Ladies and gentlemen, for fifty bloody centuries before Christ and other twenty turbulent centuries after Christ, dictators and governments have tried to prove that might is right. Even now the atomic bomb has been invented to uphold this doctrine of might. But these human efforts are all in vain because they are against divine justice. Peace based on might is fleeting. Only peace based on justice and love will endure. Only peace based on the eternal laws of the Almighty will prevail.

It is therefore my personal conviction that the great drawbacks of peace are ideologies which discard faith in God. Ideologies that annul human freedom and human dignity are serious obstacles to world peace. Ideologies that are rooted on gross materialism and that use brute force to sanction moral laws, these are the barriers to world peace.

It is for these considerations that I support the Pax Romana Movement in its crusade against these ideologies.

Young men and young women of the Catholic Action, in this connection let me say a few words about another crusade in our country. I refer to the crusade for Philippine economic independence or economic nationalism if you prefer that name. This is a policy involved among the issues of the last election and the people in solemn irrevocable verdict have given it their stamp of approval. They have given the Administration a mandate to go forward and in complying with this mandate I ask the youth of the country to give me their dynamic support.

Our administration on many occasions has been unjustly criticized for its present nationalistic policy. This nationalism has been variously labelled as—bigoted, nearsighted, conceived in hatred, unjust, and uncharitable. The application of these epithets merely stresses the ignorance of the true concept of nationalism, to which the Administration is committed. We have repeatedly enunciated our understanding of nationalism—a love of country and a striving for the national welfare. The pursuit of this “good” cannot be accomplished by a policy of hatred of foreigners nor a desire to deny them justice nor an inclination to do away with everything and anything not Filipino. This is indeed the erroneous and false type of nationalism to which we do not and cannot subscribe. We cannot hope to accomplish the best for our country by a policy of isolating ourselves and incurring the enmity of the world. No nation can now live in a vacuum of economic, cultural, or political isolation.

A people’s concept of nationalism reflect their own maturity or immaturity. There can be no more certain symptom of “colonial mentality” than an immature and morbid inferiority complex as a people. A mature people can afford to be friendly with other peoples and cooperate with them for their mutual good. An immature culture is afraid of foreign influences for fear that it may be completely obliterated. I think you will agree with me that we have reached maturity as a free and sovereign people. If we desire what is good for the country, certainly we should strive to assimilate the best that the world has to offer in culture, science, and progress. We need not be afraid that we will lose our individuality. By assimilation and synthesis of what is best regardless of where it comes from, we can develop a rich cultural heritage. No progressive country today can shut itself out of the interrelationship of other cultures and nation, simply because they are afraid to adulterate their indigenous tradition. In the light of this concept, our nationalism is not anti-alien or anti-American. It is not isolationistic or chauvinistic.

What the Administration has consistently advocated is Economic Nationalism, more popularly known as “Filipino First” policy. This is a policy which gives the Filipino a first preference in the economic development of his own country and in the enjoyment of her natural riches. This policy is based on the order of Providence. Natural resources and local opportunities must be offered first to those to whom they naturally belong. Too long has our economy been dominated by aliens who cannot be expected to have as much interest in the country as the Filipinos themselves. Our economic emancipation must start from ourselves. Our economy has been controlled by aliens since colonial times. We have achieved political independence. Now we have to achieve economic independence. Our foreign friends have won mastery of the economy of the country in the past. And we do not begrudge them credit for this at that time, but certainly under present circumstances they cannot begrudge the Filipino people the right to be masters of their own economic household.

Rizal was the father of nationalism in our country. It was he who gave voice to the muted aspirations of our people to be free, independent, and sovereign in our own land. This is the reason why it is most fitting and proper that our children in the schools should be taught the best of Rizal’s works so that they may be inspired by his ideals and imbued with the fire of his love of country.

However sometimes in our ever eagerness to maintain our economic autonomy—we are apt to follow the true concept of “Filipino First” policy to deteriorate into “Filipino Only.” A rational policy of nationalism is selective but not necessarily exclusive. It is not our intention to shut out doors to foreign traders and businessmen. Our door is always open for their cooperation for mutual benefit in the development of our country. We welcome friendly foreign capital into our country but only such of them as are willing to help us realize our goal under our economic policy and such of them as are willing to collaborate with Philippine capital on a joint venture basis. The vast natural resources of the country to be utilized require plenty more of capital than what is available here.

In conclusion, let me say that sound and enlightened nationalism moored to faith in God and his eternal justice and love is the path our youth should take and never depart from to attain the higher objective—world peace with justice and honor and happiness for all mankind.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). The President’s speech at the Pax Romana Dinner held at the Sky Room, Jai Alai, Sunday evening, January 17, 1960. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(4) , 715-717.