Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the 13th anniversary of MacArthur’s landing in Leyte

[Delivered in Tacloban, Leyte, October 20, 1957]

MAYOR CINCO, GOVERNOR TORRES, LIONS PRESIDENT MATE, AMBASSADOR BOHLEN, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MY COUNTRYMEN:

WE ARE gathered once again to commemorate a historic event in our people’s fight for freedom and dignity. Indeed, the first shots that were fired in this historic province of Leyte by the American forces of liberation 14 years ago, today, were fired in the name of freedom and the dignity of free men.

It was much more than just a military operation in the conduct of the war in the Southwest Pacific areas. It was much more than merely a campaign to defeat the enemy by the use of a superior military force; it was much more than just a classic strategic military blow into the heart of our enemy occupied land.

My countrymen, the successful return of the American forces of liberation was a confirmation of our people’s abiding belief in the righteousness of their cause; a fulfillment of our people’s faith in the friendship and partnership with the great American people; and finally, a strengthening of our people’s faith in Collective Security arrangements such as our Mutual Defense Treaty with the United States.

To me personally, my countrymen, the return of the American forces of liberation was also a fulfillment of many things I believed in. I was then somewhere in my own province of Bohol lending assistance to our guerrilla forces. I heard very distinctly the first shots fired in the battle of Leyte Gulf. I felt then, as I do feel now, that each round fired in that initial assault signalled the return of freedom and dignity to our country and people.

It was a fulfillment to me personally because, as Senator of the Philippines at that time, I succeeded to exchange notes with our late President Quezon, who continued to run our government in exile in the United States.

My countrymen, permit me to quote in part what I wrote President Quezon on October 16, 1943.

“Indeed, I was exulted to receive your radiogram of September 9 in answer to my letter whereby, Your Excellency deepened our faith in America and our unshaken and unshakable belief in the ultimate and definitive victory of allies and the cause of Democracy and Freedom… Our soldiers experienced a rebirth of morale thus inspiring them to great endurance, higher courage, and sublimer spirit of sacrifice. Copies of your message are now all over northern Mindanao and Eastern Visayas….

In all parts of the country, Mr. President, allow me to inform you that there is only one voice, one hope, one sentiment, and it is the earliest return of America to the Philippines led by General Mac Arthur … “

It was a year later, almost to the day, when, instead of a written reply from President Quezon, the American forces of liberation landed in this historic province.

It is, well, my countrymen, that on this thirteenth Anniversary of the Leyte landing which marked the reaffirmation of friendship between two peoples sharing the same hopes and ideals, that we reappraise the significance of this historic event.

If I had to dwell and belabor on the details of my personal attachment to the significance of this event, it is because I feel that certain fundamental precepts should be restated, especially those that relate to the traditional friendship between the American people and our people.

Both as a matter of personal conviction and as a fundamental precept of national policy, I have always believed in the strengthening of that friendship.

This, I want to make emphatically clear that as long as I am the President of this Republic, it shall be my high purpose to further strengthen this friendship.

It is to the credit of our two peoples that out of this friendship was born a partnership between two sovereign nations. We now stand together with the United States of America as equal partners engaged in a common pursuit— that of the security, prosperity, and the happiness of our two peoples.

It is unfortunate that today certain elements of the nation are desperately trying to picture a deterioration of Philippine-American relationship, in the hope that they can discredit the present administration. It has become even more unfortunate that these elements of our Nation are at the same time trying to make a bid for our people’s trust and confidence. Their behavior, my countrymen, is tantamount to flouting with problems involving National Security. I can think of no greater disservice to our Country and people than the indiscriminate use of half truths and outright lies on matters involving vital national issues such as our relationship with friendly governments. Since the present administration took the helm of government in 1954, the relationship between the government of the United States and that of our own has reached its peak of mutual respect and the closest of collaboration in the pursuit of our common goals and objectives.

I urge you, my countrymen, to guard against these insidious manipulations of our national scene if only to keep inviolate the meaning and significance of this historic event we are celebrating today. I urge you not to yield to this systematic attempt of these forces of evil to tamper with the minds of our people through the use of a massive propaganda machine. I urge you to guard against these false prophets and Messiahs who, because of selfish personal ambitions, would now play with our hard-earned freedom with impunity. I urge you to look at them very closely before believing what they preach.

I have been informed that the United States Navy made available for the celebration today the United States destroyer Cowell better known as the Cow. It is now anchored alongside the Tacloban wharf. I would like to make mention of special guests in this celebration who participated in the landing operations during the initial assault. I have in mind at the moment Mr. George Aurell of the United States Embassy, Admiral Keith, Commander of Subic Bay, and the following Naval personnel now on duty with the Cow: M. E. Jones, W. R. Hill, and C. W. Odell. I consider the presence today of these veterans and that of the United States destroyer Cowell as an eloquent testimony of the warm friendship towards us by the American people. I would like to thank on behalf of my government and people the distinguished Ambassador of the United States, Ambassador Bohlen, for lending added meaning to this celebration of the Leyte landing.

At this juncture, I would also like to congratulate the Tacloban Lions for sponsoring this year’s traditional celebration. They have rendered a great service to your community and our country.

As we bring to a close another milestone of this historic event, I would now ask our people to keep faith and nurture the memory of those who gave their all on this sacred shore. For the saga that was Leyte is the saga of freedom for all times. I know I cannot pay enough tribute to the people of Tacloban and the province of Leyte who bore the brunt of battle in the fight to regain our lost freedom and dignity. To them are due the honors and the salute from a grateful people and of free men everywhere!

I thank you.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech on the 13th anniversary of MacArthur’s landing in Leyte, delivered Sunday afternoon, October 20, in Tacloban, Leyte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(20) , 7220-7223.