Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the First National Convention of the league of Provincial and CIty Health officers and the league of hospital chiefs

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, May 23, 1960]

IT IS a great pleasure to speak before you again on this occasion, and to the planners, organizers, and members of this convention go my hearty congratulations. This is the first joint national convention of provincial and city health officers and hospital chiefs to be held in this country. I am confident that this joint conference would not only foster stronger ties among you but also, pave the way towards more effective planning, programming, and implementation of health activities among public health and hospital entities.

Public health is a teamwork endeavor and is everybody’s concern. You, public health leaders, are in the frontlines of our government’s efforts to help our people attain and remain in a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being. It is gratifying to note that you are taking the time to make this annual conference possible and are determined to work towards positive accomplishments.

Let me review in passing the state of the nation’s health. Our most reliable statistics reveal encouraging results. The Disease Intelligence Center, a newly-created agency in this department and which is a step towards up-dating and compiling reliable data, gives us this information: There is a considerable decrease, on one hand, in the crude death rate from 12.68 per thousand population ten years before to 9.44 to date. On the other hand, our crude birth rate per thousand population reveals a considerable increase from 30.4 ten years ago to 33.15 to date. There are encouraging signs of improvement in health conditions as shown by a decrease in mortality and morbidity rates in the leading causes of death which are mostly infectious and communicable diseases. This improvement, however; should be no reason for complacency. We must keep in mind that the trend of disease is gradually shifting in nature from communicable to the inevitable degenerative diseases of an aging population. These are cardio-vascular diseases and cancer, now ranking sixth and eighth, respectively, among the ten leading causes of death. We must then gear our national health programs towards meeting these problems.

Industrialization brings the concomitant health problems of occupational hazards and diseases. Allied to this is the increase in accidents, which now rank seventh in the ten leading causes of death.

Our rural health services have become the model for Southeast Asia, thanks to your untiring efforts, your devotion to your duty, and your spirit of sacrifice, although, I am afraid, not all the personnel possess these qualities. For this reason, our country has been chosen as a ground for foreign country training and as the site of the Western Pacific regional conference on rural health services of the World Health Organization in August this year.

The budget for health has been increased for the fiscal year 1960-61. This step is a tangible proof of my administration’s desire to give all the financial aid possible to the elevation of our nation’s health standards.

We have entered the atomic age and great advances in medicine are daily occurrences in all parts of the world, Atomic energy is being harnessed so that what was once a harmful and devastating potential can now be used for peaceful purposes; such as, the diagnosis and treatment of certain diseases. You must have read about the laying of the cornerstone of an atomic research center under the National Science Development Board. A nuclear reactor has been donated to us by the United States Atomic Energy Commission. With the establishment of this center, we will soon engage in the production of radio-isotopes for the use of medicine, among other things.

In my address before you last year, I emphasized the fact that between the two alternatives of adhering to centralization or shifting to decentralization, the Congress of the Philippines had decided to adapt the latter not only in the Department of Health but also in other departments and offices of the government. Reorganization laws were approved to implant this new concept. It is therefore incumbent upon us who belong to the Executive branch of the government to implement these laws in accordance with the new concept of governmental organization. The sooner these are implemented, the faster we can readjust ourselves to the reality of things and the more effective our service will be to the people. The will of our people has been expressed through Congress and ours is to carry out that will as good disciplined public servants.

Let me express one last thought. Notwithstanding our impressive record of achievement in the public health and welfare to such an extent that the Philippines has become a model country in Asia, poor environmental sanitation is still a priority problem in almost all towns and cities in our country. We still have the unfortunate existence of unsanitary toilets, exposed garbage, unsafe water supply, slum areas, open esteros, dirty markets and surroundings, stray animals, and the like. Malnutrition is still a big problem and many of our people still have undesirable health practices. Our health and hospital facilities, supplies, and equipment are far from adequate to meet the growing needs and demands of the public.

Let this situation serve as the challenge to all public health leaders to spur them to new heights of achievements. The reward may not come in a materialistic form, but it must come from the satisfaction and pride that we have contributed to the building of a strong, healthy, resilient, progressive, and happy Filipino manhood—the best race in Asia.

Such is my dream, ladies and gentlemen, and I have faith that the personnel and leaders of public health and welfare, with their discipline, integrity and patriotism, will translate this dream into a beautiful reality.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library