PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE AN INFORMAL JAPANESE DINNER GIVEN BY THE PHILIPPINE CONSUL, GAIMUSHO, REPRESENTATIVE AND PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINE SOCIETY AT OSAKA, AT 7:30 P.M. (TOKYO TIME), THURSDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1958

THIS IS a felicitous occasion in the history of the relations between the Japanese and the Filipino peoples. As Chief of the Philippine State, it is my pleasure and privilege to reciprocate the state visit of your Prime Minister to my country last year. The many tokens of esteem and friendship from the Japanese nation which I have received both during this visit and before it are, I trust, a portent of things to come in the way of complete restoration of friendly relations and goodwill between the Philippines and Japan.

The theme of my address to you today is the expansion of trade between the Philippines and Japan. Two island countries like ours, whose human and natural resources have been endowed with different qualities by the Creator, have in the postwar years made of these differences a firm foundation for the conduct of an expanding and mutually profitable exchange of commodities. The sea lanes between our two countries are busy with ships carrying north the three great mainstays of our export trade to Japan—base metals, forest products, and abaca—as well as a number of other products, and carrying south the machinery, equipment, tools, and consumer goods which pour out in such confusion from the factories of this industrial country.

Japan today holds the enviable position of being the only industrialized free country in the entire ECAFE region stretching from Afghanistan to Hokkaido. Among its neighbors are many underdeveloped nations which have to industrialize in order to escape the pangs of poverty resulting from the upsurge of population and the heritage of colonialism. Japan has to play a role in this part of the world in order to enable its neighbors to increase their respective production capacities. Steps towards these ends in terms of credit facilities and technical cooperation would be dynamic contributions toward attaining a more prosperous Far Eastern region. Indeed, Japan would be a much greater country if it were associated with an indus­trialized region instead of the present cluster of underdeveloped economies. Sound and hard-headed economic policy operates in the light of the realization that in raising through expanded trade the income levels of a country’s trading partners will be mutually beneficial to both trade partners. Conceivably, external credits might take the form of government-to-government arrangements, credit lines through public and private financial institutions, or perhaps joint-ventures on the private firm level.

I look on such ventures not only as commercial propositions and as instruments for accelerating economic develment, but also as legitimate means of promoting greater intercourse among our two peoples, greater mutual understanding, and therefore greater respect for one another We know as we are privy to their deepest sentiments, that these would be the most effective means of wiping out the last war’s legacy of suspicion and hostility. I would be less than candid if I did not admit that the wounds of battle, despite the lapse of more than a dozen years, have not been completely healed. The leaders of government and public opinion of both countries should face squarely this fact and direct their common efforts to obliterate the remaining vestiges of mental reservations and bitter memories of the last war. I have no doubt that a demonstration in deeds of your friendly, honorable, and neighborly intentions to the Filipinos would go very far in reestablishing old confidence, esteem, and respect. I am positive that all your acts in this direction will find a ready response from my people.

It is essential for the free world, and especially for free Asia, that a complete reconciliation between all peoples in this region be brought about as speedily as possible, for we can no longer afford to act in isolation/from one another if we are to live an abundant life in this age. Extend to us the hand of friendship with understanding and without reservation show us sympathetic concern in the development of our industries and in the utilization of our natural resources, and you shall find that the surviving relics of wartime rancors will melt away and our people will meet you face to face as friends in an atmosphere of political security and economic prosperity.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library