Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the United Nations Day Rally for Peace

[Delivered at Luneta, October 24, 1957]

WE here raise today the flags of the eighty-two member states of the United Nations in symbolic reaffirmation of our faith in that world organization. The message that these flags carry on the twelfth anniversary of its existence is still one of hope against the awesome possibilities of our nuclear age; one of concerted labor for preserving the present uneasy peace against the stresses and tensions of our times; one of orderly progress and onward march to common prosperity against the background of prevailing conditions of misery and hunger in scattered regions of the world.

It is fitting and proper that we celebrate the United Nations Day in this spirit to indicate our resolve that against tremendous difficulties, the survival of mankind shall be our unceasing concern.

With authentic ring and telling effect, the great historian Arnold Toynbee predicted that “in the broad sweep, the twentieth century will be chiefly remembered in future centuries not as an age of political conflicts or technical inventions, but as an age in which human society dared to think of the welfare of the whole human race as a practicable objective.”

The solid accomplishments of the United Nations in varied areas of its constructive activities yield ample evidence of this happy prediction. In the field of technical assistance, the progress achieved by the United Nations has risen to record level. More than 6,000 experts from eighty countries have shared their skills and technical know-how with peoples of under-developed countries all over the world. Thousands of scholars and fellows have received the benefits of specialized training in scattered areas of the globe. At no time in the history of mankind has there developed a deeper sense. of common responsibility and international cooperation in bridging the gap between wealth and poverty and between progress and under-development than at the present era. Under the auspices of the United Nations, the goal of balanced economic and social growth for less fortunate nations is being progressively realized.

Our own share of the benefits of these constructive activities of the United Nations assumed impressive proportions. Year by year, we have our own allotment of technical men whose skills we employ in such useful projects as nutrition, rural and community development, public administration, and improvement of agriculture. We have received, too, a liberal share in the yearly allotments of the UNCEF which, together with our matching contributions in terms of money, personnel, and essential equipment, constitute a highly useful investment in the health and welfare of millions of Filipino children. We have drawn, too, heavily from the world’s bank in loans totalling more than ₱30,000,000.

If the benefit we have received from the common pool of resources of the United Nations is to be a fair index of what other countries similarly situated have enjoyed, you can readily see to what extent in terms of geographical areas and populations has the United Nations spread the mantle of its beneficent services.

The progress it has achieved in the fields of human rights and fundamental freedoms holds out equal promise of a brighter future. It has succeeded to formulate the Universal Declaration and the Draft of International Covenants on Human Rights. It has now initiated an “action program” on certain definite rights of man in the form of concrete studies thereon designed to promote keener appreciation of those rights and a better delineation of their spheres of practical implementation.

The progressive realization of the principle of self-determination for dependent peoples has yielded similar evidence of gratifying results. Through the intercession of the United Nations, the Netherlands transferred sovereignty to the Republic of Indonesia on December 27, 1949. The first of the eleven Trust Territories, the British Togoland, has attained its independence as an integral part of the new State of Ghana! The Italian Somaliland, marching in orderly process, is due for independent existence in 1960.

Two developments of unprecedented significance likewise attest to the growing usefulness and efficacy of the United Nations. Through the uniting for peace resolution, it has overcome its organic weaknesses, and has successfully pooled the military resources of its member states to arrest unlawful aggression in Korea. The United Nations Special Emergency force which was established last year in swift and unique response to the requirements of the Suez Canal crisis has shown the capacity of the United Nations for decisive action in the interest of peace.

With all its frailties inherent in any such human institution, the United Nations has proved in its twelve years of existence that it can survive the stresses of the times, that it can persist and carry on in its mission of peaceful settlement where it has often floundered, and that it can advance with steady strides towards its goal of orderly progress even in times of acute political division.

But even as we gather today to reaffirm our faith in this world organization, sensational developments in nuclear science and rocketry have cast upon mankind dark shadows of anxiety born of their fearsome potentialities. Even as we gather here today, a man-made satellite is whirling in the outer space with all its ill augury for the future of the human race. The present astonishing developments in technology have brought into the hands of man power for infinite good or unlimited evil. They hold out for him either a promise of a more abundant life or the peril of total annihilation.

The alternatives thus posed by our present nuclear age constitute, too, an urgent challenge to the United Nations. Could the United Nations capably play the vital role its founders had envisaged for it under present conditions of turmoil and the threat of extinction of the human race that misdirected science poses today? Could the United Nations continue to marshal its moral force and authority to the end that law and justice shall prevail among men? Could it successfully induce in the world of today an attitude of willing submission to the precepts of its Charter?

In the affirmative case, mankind is assured of survival; in the negative case, mankind faces the peril of extinction.

Let us here resolve today that, in concert with the other freedom-loving countries of the world, the United Nations shall continue to gain strength and vigor to meet the challenge of the times.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech at the United Nations Day Rally for Peace on the Luneta, October 24, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(20) , 7228-7230.