PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE INAUGURATION OF THE NEWLY RECONSTRUCTED MUNICIPAL HALL OF SAN JUAN, RIZAL, AUGUST 28, 1959

Governor Rodriguez, Mayor Ibuna, my good friends from San Juan:

ABOUT two years ago, on this neighborhood, I made a promise that if elected I would help in the construction of a new municipal building for San Juan in order that you may have a bigger, and better edifice that will serve your various and growing needs. I come before you today to participate in the inauguration of that building in the midst of general jubilation of the people of this bristling town. Let me express the hope that this achievement of the town will not be the last, but only the beginning of an era of growth and expansion of San Juan in all aspects of human progress.

Somehow, the problem faced by San Juan with regard to its old building is typical in scope and extent with the problems faced by other municipalities in our country. In the case of San Juan, the old building could no longer serve the expanded needs of a prosperous municipality that has grown more than twenty times since the construction of the original building 48 years ago.

In many other places the problems are more complex. They include outmoded ways of making a living which could no longer meet the demands of a growing population, the attendant sociological, political, and health problems that arise from a marginal economy. The needs of these municipalities may be concretized not in the form of new municipal buildings but in the more immediate forms of irrigation projects, waterworks for potable water, more efficient systems of agricultural production, more feeder roads to take produce to markets, cottage industries to augment the family income, better public services in the form of sanitation measures, and rural health services.

In social services alone, the growing needs of our people have led us to increase our expenditures by 70 per cent since 1953. These services include education, health, labor, welfare, and hospitals. In round figures, the Liberal administration spent ₱193 million for such services, and in sharp contrast, your administration for the same social services had spent ₱366 million last year.

Some of my critics have taken advantage of my busy schedule to misrepresent my economic program as sidetracking the welfare of our rural masses, those who live in the barrios particularly. I do not wish to take part in any petty debate with detractors of my administration. Your President is too busy attending to your needs and the multifarious problems of the nation. If I try to answer all criticisms, I shall have no time for something else,

But for your information and so that the rest of our people may know, I wish to reiterate certain statistics that will give the lie to the charge that I have neglected the rural areas and at the same time show that my administration has done more for the barrios than any other administration in the past.

Our late beloved President Magsaysay was the first President to launch community developments projects on a nationwide scale. This community development program, by the way, was an unknown or at best a forgotten project during the Liberal administration. When President Magsaysay met his untimely death, there were only 641 barrios covered and 2,121 community development projects generated.

Today, the PACD serves 5,231 barrios and generate a total of 20,254 projects with an aggregate value of ₱17,916,254.90. In other words, community development in the rural areas has increased and expanded tenfold since I assumed the Presidency.

The value of these projects which is ₱18 million in round figures did not all come from government funds.

The philosophy behind our rural development program is self help, and the tremendous success of this program may be gleaned from the fact that of the ₱18 million cost of the projects currently being undertaken, ₱11 million has been contributed by the barrio people themselves in the form of labor, material,, arid cash for the projects that directly benefit their barrios. This again, is a testimonial to the initiative and reliability of our common people. It also shows that confidence and trust of our rural folks in the present administration.

I say these things here, I repeat, not to debate with my critics but to, set the record straight. Our people have shown their maturity time and again, to differentiate between fact and fiction. And I am confident that you will once more rise to the occasion and do justice by those who have your welfare at heart. I stand on my record. Let the opposition equal this.

My good friends of San Juan, this is a festive occasion for this first class municipality. Many other municipalities do not enjoy the prosperity of San Juan, Rizal. It is my hope, however, that given time and God’s grace, and with the unstinted cooperation now being manifested in the rural areas between our people and our government, all the other municipalities in the country will grow prosperous enough for all sour people to enjoy the blessings of a decent, comfortable, and happy life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library