PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE COUNCIL OF FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK DELIVERED AT 5:15 P.M., TUESDAY, JUNE 24, 1958, NEW YORK TIME (6:15 A.M., TUESDAY, JUNE 24, MANILA TIME)

I WOULD like to speak to you today on some aspects of foreign relations that are of vital interest to the United States of America and her allies in the free world.

These views are those of the government of a committed nation, a country that has openly elected the side of freedom in the current struggle of ideologies. It should, perhaps, be remarked in passing that these views are by no means widely shared in Asia and Africa. They are, however, tenaciously held by the vast majority of the Filipino people who feel confident that these opinions will be borne out by present and future developments in the international sphere.

This is a time of great anxiety and trouble, and the problems before us are many and grave. The solutions which this country are called upon to make are of deep concern not only to the American people but to the peoples of the free world who look to America for leadership in the struggle for freedom.

Of the many problems before us, there is one that has graver implications for mankind than any other. This is the two-fold problem of the defense of human freedom and the assurance of human survival in the atomic age. We are all aware of the growing tendency to separate these two objectives and to present them to a frightened world as if they were alternatives that mutually exclude each other.

I am sure I do not misjudge the temper of the American people when I say that they would never be a party to this cruel deception. The real choice before us is not between freedom and survival but between survival as free men and survival as slaves. We must believe that the instinct of survival is as strong in our adversary as it is in ourselves, and that before long he will agree to seek earnestly with us the appropriate and effective means by which our common right to life can best be safeguarded.

This belief needs to be backed by infinite patience and indomitable courage. We need patience to study every proposal that is advanced by the other side ostensibly in the interest of peace, and more patience still to advance our own and to revise them, if need be without sacrificing our vital interests. And we need courage to preserve and, if possible, to extend the frontiers of freedom, as well as to counter any attempt to diminish them by force or guile.

The boast of the totalitarians is that they have caught up with the armed might of the free world and that they will shortly surpass it in the domain of industrial power. They may well have the statistics to support the claim. But even if they do, they cannot have studied too well the comparable statistics of the miracles of sacrifice and endurance that free men can accomplish when liberty is at stake. Nor can they have considered carefully a fact which is never reflected in statistics, namely, that economic progress inevitably sharpens man’s inherent desire for individual liberty. Thus, the totalitarian state which initially achieves economic progress by despotic measures is doomed to discover that it bears within itself the seeds of its own destruction.

It is in this conviction that we should meet the challenge of communism. It is a conviction based on the certain knowledge that it is the inborn instinct of man to opt for freedom and to reject slavery whenever and wherever he can exercise the liberty of choice.

It follows that it is the chief concern of the free world to maintain this right to choose. In the certainty that this right would be exercised in favor of freedom, we can, and we should, accept the challenge of communism to an open and peaceful competition for the minds of men. This is the kind of struggle that communists can never win with all their vaunted army divisions and sputniks in the sky.

The feeling of universal revulsion aroused by the ruthless chrushing by Moscow of the Hungarian revolution, and lately by the execution of Premier Imre Nagy and other leaders of the 1956 uprising, is proof of this statement. I address these thoughts to you on behalf of a nation that has opted for freedom. The Philippines was the original laboratory where the American policy towards another people desirous and determined to be free was first developed. I believe that Americans and Filipinos have a right to take pride in the outcome of their joint experiment. We have shown to the world that two peoples, dissimilar in race, history, and traditions, can nevertheless share a common faith in democratic ideals based on equality and mutual respect. We have demonstrated the fallacy of the ancient doctrine that there are inherently inferior or superior races or that there are nations destined to rule over others. Together we have helped to make the twentieth century a century of colonial Iteration.

The lessons evoked by our example have changed the world. The first great lesson, of course, is that it is possible for a dependent people to win its freedom by peaceful means. The second is that it is possible for such a people to do so without a bitter aftermath of hate.

Other lessons are still in the process of manifesting themselves. One is that it is possible for a former dependent country to overcome the colonial mentality produced by a long period of subservience, developing the contrary vices of hyper-sensitiveness without suspicion. This lesson is for us to give to the colonial or former colonial peoples. Another is that it is possible for the former ruling state to deal with the former dependency on a basis of equal sovereignty, having due respect for its peculiar traditions and institutions, and a sympathetic understanding of its problems and difficulties. This lesson is for America to give to the colonial powers.

Others who have come before me have argued persuasively the case for neutralism and non-commitment. But if I may, I would like to present very briefly the case for commitment, the side of those who stand engaged to the cause of freedom in the world. In doing so, I speak on behalf of a people who have irrevocably elected the side of freedom and have supported their conviction with deeds. I do not feel that I have to apologize for them to anybody anywhere.

The Filipino people have exercised their liberty of choice. They have chosen the side of freedom. They believe that this right should be accorded to all peoples. They believe further that if accorded this right, they too would elect the side of freedom. Above all, they believe that humanity’s chance of survival in the atomic age would be diminished to the extent that survival of itself becomes the sole objective of our policy. This is so because it takes a great deal more courage these days to asset one’s right to freedom than to affirm one’s desire to live. The hand of the adversary may be stayed by a resolute determination on our part to defend freedom, but if he knows that we quail before him in fear of our lives, he might be tempted to undertake rash adventures that could lead to universal catastrophe.

The diplomatic and military posture of the free world is a defensive one, and the other side knows it. He knows that the initiative in either field lies in his hands and that our strategy is essentially based on our capacity for riposte and retaliation. In this power equation, it would appear that a policy of neutralism has the net effect of abetting the aggressive purposes of international communism, whether it seeks to achieve these by armed attack or by subversion. The proof of this is to be seen in Asia and Africa where neutralism is a much-favored philosophy, and where, consequently, communism has been encouraged to make heavy inroads by stealth or by armed intervention. On the other hand, in Western Europe, where neutralism has been rejected, communism has found it less easy to pursue its objectives.

This, in brief, is the case for the committed nations that dare to stand up and be counted. It is, I think, an honest and forthright position which should entitle them to at least as much solicitude and consideration as those who prefer, with the best of intentions, to stand aside in the conflict.

I hope I may be permitted at this juncture to express to the American people the grateful appreciation of the Filipino people and their government for the military, economic, and financial assistance which we have received from them since the end of the last war. I trust that the people of this country will feel recompensed by the thought that this assistance has been used effectively to combat communist dissidence and rebellion in the country, to rebuild our agriculture and industry which lay in ruins after liberation, and to help maintain educational, cultural, and health standards commensurate with the needs of our expanding population.

Americans will be equally gratified to know that we have given priority to the building of hydro-electric power plants in our drive for a modest scale of industrialization, and that for their part, private Filipino and American investors have established more than 800 industries in the last five years under this program.

But the pressure of our expanding, needs upon our available resources continues to be great. We believe that the answer to our problem is not a hand-out of a grant-in-aid but a development loan on a strictly business basis, a credit line that would permit the execution of specific projects previously studied and approved by American and Filipino experts.

From this you can see that the committed nations have their problems too. For them it is not a question of an inducement or an invitation to join the ranks of freedom, but the tougher and more prosaic problem of having the strength and the means to remain free.

The Philippines is a small country whose only desire is to work out its own destiny in freedom and security. We covet nothing and have no designs on anyone. We deeply want peace, but freedom even more, and we would count the loss of freedom as a price too high to pay for peace.

In this faith, I give this pledge on behalf of the Filipino people: That we shall stand with the American people in the defense of freedom, as we have stood with them in the past loyally, without counting the cost.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library