Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the inauguration of the World Health Organization Building

[Delivered on September 26, 1958]

TEN YEARS AGO last May, with the echoes of the world’s most destructive war still reverberating all over the globe, a new organization was born which has since achieved a success transcending all political, cultural, and social boundaries.

That body was the World Health Organization, one of mankind’s eloquent testimonials to the universal desire for the betterment and the improvement of the human race. More than any quasi-political body, more than any of the so-called entangling alliances with which our globe is ridden today, the World Health Organization has proved itself to be an effective instrumentality for promoting the cause of world peace.

Because the human body is a common denominator among all peoples in all lands, because it possesses an inherent capacity for suffering that is not differentiated by race, creed, or nationality, the World Health Organization has achieved that rare universality which gives promise of a longevity that may not be the lot of other global groups. And for having been invited to become a member of this august organization, the Philippines continues to be grateful.

Today, as we proceed with the inauguration of this new building, this eloquent symbol of our desire and our wish to participate actively in all efforts and activities for the benefit of mankind, I am gratified beyond measure to note that our membership in the World Health Organization has been producing, and continues to produce, outstanding results.

Ten years of close collaboration with medical progress, as exemplified by the World Health Organization’s signal leadership, have produced salutary effects in the lives and in the health of our people. The evidence is everywhere for us to see. But, because good health is something most of us take in stride, we rarely appreciate it until it is no longer ours.

The great scourges of our country, like tuberculosis, are now on the decline. Effective control and preventive measures have reduced to the minimum epidemics.

Malaria is almost exterminated. The mass communicable diseases, which only a few decades ago held our people in mortal terror, have been vanquished.

In the overall tally, our people have become healthier, taller, heavier, more resistant to disease and more aware of the same health habits which are so necessary in the tremendous job of nation-building. The importance of this can never be underestimated.

You and I know that before a nation can engage in productive work, before it can even start to blueprint plans for the advancement of its people, it must have healthy men and women to form the nucleus of its efforts.

That we have such a constantly growing nucleus today is perhaps one of the greatest blessings that this country could ever have. It is a natural wealth more precious than even material riches. Without health, without the vigor and vitality to push forward the ambitious undertakings that we have planned for ourselves and our people, our work would be meaningless.

The signal achievements in the field of health that this country has made are due, not only to the great vigor of our people and of our government, but to the World-Health Organization as well. As a coordinating and assisting agency in international health work, the WHO has ignited the spark that led to the effective development of national health planning and action. That vital spark lit the flame which has now illumined our country.

And in our gratitude for this invaluable help, we are trying our utmost to keep abreast of all the world developments which may one day have a bearing on the lives and the existence of people everywhere.

Let me mention just one:

The world health situation is posing a problem to economists and demographers alike. Declining death rates and lengthening of the average life span have combined with a continuing and an increasing birth rate to bring about an enormous increase in world population.

This naturally means more people to feed, to clothe, and to shelter. The disequilibrium in population and economic resources becomes even greater in countries that are less developed. A balance must be struck which will ensure a decent living for everyone and preserve world peace.

In this age of the atom and of space travel, man can find the answer to his pressing elementary needs in science and technology. There is need for a continuing search which will keep mankind not only alive but living well.

Dr. Milton Eisenhower of the Johns Hopkins University, speaking on behalf of the President of the United States before your Health Assembly at Minneapolis in May this year, underlined the importance and the value of research. The most tangible concern which he gave to it was the voluntary offer by the United States Government of an initial amount of money for spurring research under the auspices of the World Health Organization.

The United Nations and its specialized agencies are proving to be effective instruments in international efforts at collaborative activities in various fields. I understand that the World Health Organization, one of the specialized agencies of the United Nations, has 88 Member States. It is perhaps the one specialized agency that has the most number of members. One is heartened to know that at least in the health field, peoples everywhere seem to unite readily and cohesively in the pursuit of a common universal purpose.

In our region in the Western Pacific, the Philippines is strongly committed in its adherence to the Organization. This building which we are about to open formally is our modest contribution to the cause of the health of the peoples within the region. I am extremely gratified to know that aside from the amount set aside by the Organization as its contribution to the construction of this building, the countries within the region have given separate individual contributions which will permit the construction of an additional floor.

I wish to make particular mention of the inscription in the plaque which is exhibited in the Office Building that we are now inaugurating and which reads as follows:

“This building is dedicated to the principle declared in the Constitution of the World Health Organization that the ‘health of all peoples is fundamental to the attainment of peace and security and is dependent upon the fullest cooperation of individuals and states.’ Its creation has been made possible by the generosity of the World Health Organization, notably those of the Western Pacific Region.”

Again on behalf of the Government of the Philippines, I welcome you cordially. I am informed that in the course of your session, or after it, you will be observing some of our health activities and centers. I hope that you will find in them something which could be useful in your own countries, that you will give them, in turn, the benefit of your suggestion and advice.

I take much pleasure now in opening this new building and in welcoming you all to your ninth session.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the inauguration of the World Health Organization building, on Friday, Sept. 26, 1958. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(26) , 6582-6584.