Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the 14th General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel Organization (IOUTO)

[Delivered at the Senate Session Hall, November 20, 1959]

DR. BERNECKER, DISTINGUISHED DELEGATES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM happy to welcome you to the Philippines on behalf of my countrymen. I also wish to thank you for accepting my invitation in Brussels last year in which I suggested that this year’s General Assembly of your organization be held in this country.

I must acknowledge that at the time I had some misgivings as to whether you would seriously consider the Filipino bid for this meeting, first because I noticed that only twice in the past fourteen years have you held your annual conference outside the European continent; and second, because I realized only too well the enormous distance that must be covered by anyone travelling to the Orient.

I am, therefore, extremely grateful for your decision to honor this country as the setting for this 14th General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel Organizations, devoted exclusively to the advancement of international tourism. It is my earnest hope that the countries in this region will also derive immense benefits from your deliberations in this session hall of our Congress. More than half of the world’s population lives in Asia. If only for this reason, I am certain that the rest of the people of this region share my exultation over your decision to bring your tremendous influence into this part of the world.

The goals you seek as an organization are precisely the same goals and objectives that, until now, governments working together, or independently of each other, have eagerly sought but have so far failed to attain for one reason or another. What until today is an unrelieved predicament for international diplomacy—the attainment of real understanding and peaceful cooperation among nations—you may be able to bring about with your work of promoting trade and cultural intercourse among the peoples of the world. For more than any single factor, it is peoples’ increasing contacts among themselves that will effectively remove the barriers of prejudice, suspicion, and fear and develop mutual respect and understanding. In this noble task you have found a great ally in science whose rapid developments m the last decade have provided the world at large with easier and faster means of travel.

I commend you for the noble aims of your organization and for your unceasing labor in overcoming the complex problems confronting you in the task of helping set up a community of world neighbors.

For our part, we are moving vigorously and steadfastly the direction of the goals you have set. Nearly a decade ago, while I was Vice-President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs, I had the opportunity of being an active sponsor in launching the Pacific Area Travel Association. This organization is now doing a good job in the entire Western Pacific region. Believing earnestly in the future of cultural intercourse through tourism and seeing a developed tourist industry in one country as an excellent source of universal economic and cultural benefits, I have lent every possible support to the development and promotion work initiated by Commissioner Farolan through the Philippine Tourist and Travel Association and now, more systematically, through our Board of Travel and Tourist Industry.

As in the field of economy itself, we have in these past years begun to share the growing conviction, evident in every nation today, that government has a special responsibility in providing direction to the development of tourism and its concomitant benefits of trade, culture, and commerce. Three years ago, realizing, that we must forbid ourselves an attitude of laissez faire in this all too important endeavor, our government assumed full responsibility for the development of our travel and tourist industry. As a consequence, the annual volume of our tourist traffic has increased from 10,330 in 1952, when tourist promotions here began as a mere civic movement, to 21,643 in 1956, when the government initiated a tourist program through our Board of Travel and Tourist Industry, and finally to 30,859 in 1958. Under the government-sponsored tourist promotion program, therefore, the Philippines saw an average yearly increase of 27.75 per cent in tourist traffic.

Needless to say, we have under this program gained a substantial increase in foreign exchange receipts. I shall not pretend that this has not been of tremendous economic value to our country. From 1952 to 1956, foreign exchange receipts from our expanded tourist program had a yearly annual increase of 110 per cent. We estimate that on the basis of these figures our foreign exchange receipts of $14,097,625.56 for 1958 represents an 833 per cent increase during the three years of the government program, or an average yearly increase of 227 per cent.

Uppermost in our minds, however, is the incalculable value to us in terms of a better understanding among foreigners of our land and our people. The increase in the volume of tourist traffic into our country represents not so much new economic opportunities as new opportunities for us to provide the world beyond our shores with more knowledge of the Philippines and of the Filipinos than had till then been impossible.

This World Tourist Conference will stimulate us even more in pursuing these goals. In your respective countries you have done magnificently to attract and draw increasingly large streams of travellers in your direction and we have shared in the enjoyment of your rich scenic and cultural offerings.

May I now ask you to turn your eyes—and the rest of the travel world’s eyes—eastward to Asia and the Pacific. May I take this opportunity to initate a step that my draw your attention and the interest of the rest of the world to know more and to see more of our still largely unknown region. With the Jet Age, Manila and almost any part of the Orient can be reached today in just a matter of hours. With still more developments in air technology promised to us by the present pace of scientific advancement, we may foresee greater opportunities to move into an era of world neighborhood.

It seems to me that with all the physical facilities that modern science can afford us today and in increasing number in the future, all that remains to be developed are the opportunities inherent in the spirit of man—the willingness to open doors to greater understanding and active cooperation in all beneficial fields of human endeavor.

I wish, therefore, to take advantage of this opportunity to invite you, and the peoples whom you represent, to permit yourselves closer association with us. I wish to invite you to join us in proclaiming 1981 as “Visit the Orient Year.” Together, let us create the opportunity and provide the occasion for the rest of the world to come to see us ail in our homelands, to observe our progress and unique traditions, and to get acquainted with distinctive cultures and our wealth of natural resources and attractions. I propose to proclaim 1981, during which we will commemorate the first centennial anniversary of the birth of Dr. Jose Rizal, our great national hero and a revered apostle of freedom in Asia, as “See the Philippines—Visit the Orient Year.” It is my hope that other neighboring countries will join us in a common move to focus the world spotlight on our area and, thus, to induce the tide of large-scale travel in our direction.

Individually and through separate efforts, we will never be able to obtain a decent share of the travel dollars afloat abroad and awaiting to be coaxed to land upon friendly and hospitable shores. But, collectively and working in harmony, according to an agreed pattern of promotions and publicity, we can effectively bring an increasingly sizeable segment of world tourist traffic to earn an ever larger fount of foreign exchange for our respective countries. Together, we must go hard after this tangible and substantial wealth, which should be a formidable transfusion into anemic economies.

Let us unlock the “mysterious” and “magic” box, that is the Orient, and exploit its enchantments and charms to entice more travellers in quest of pleasure and adventure. In this enterprise, we are extremely favored by a generous Nature, which has lavishly endowed us with the exotic and the spectacular in scenery that make of our region a true tourist paradise. Between now and 1961, we will have ample time to organize programs and coordinate schedules to make travel to the Orient alluring, memorable, and enlightening to the visitors. We can start now to plan appropriate festivals and spectacles, putting together the best we can show of our fine arts and native crafts and producing a wider variety of our distinctive souvenir and gift goods to satisfy and please our guests.

Our common aim should be to provide a fascinating year-round program in each of our countries during 1961, so that wherever in our region the world traveller may go and whatever the season, there will always be something for him or her to admire and enjoy, something instructive to learn, and something useful and interesting to acquire and take home as souvenir. All these can be immensely profitable, besides contributing to a keener appreciation of our native cultures and the various roles that we play in contemporary history. All these can bring about greater mutual understanding and, in the end, harmony and peace, especially among those who don’t now know enough of each other, because they don’t see enough of one another, and have yet to learn to value other people’s better qualities and capabilities for contributing to the sum total of civilization and human progress.

This is my contribution towards the attainment of the objectives of your self-assigned task. This is the Philippines’ offer of service towards bringing nearer your goal of larger and farther-ranging travel for mankind’s happiness and for the world’s richer economy. In fine, this should attest to our awareness of the need for imagination and initiative in the common drive to get going a more massive movement of peoples of all races and nationalities from one continent to another and within each one of them, for common profit.

As to our share of the responsibility to help facilitate travel, I am pleased to announce that in the last special session of our Congress, the Philippine Senate ratified the U. N. Convention on Tourism and Customs Facilities. We have since deposited our ratification papers in the U. N. Secretariat. I pledge our government’s unfaltering assistance and support to further reduce or remove altogether as rapidly as our economy and finances permit, other travel barriers I wish further to assure you of our wholehearted support of your proposal for the United Nations to convene an international diplomatic conference to ease some more, to simplify and to render uniform, travel regulations throughout the world in a manner to cope with the obvious demands of rapid and massive movement in the Jet Age. In dosing I reiterate my best wishes for success in your deliberations. It is my fond hope that you will find your sojourn in our islands both enjoyable and rewarding. Our people are happy hosts to you; we have opened our hearts to welcome you; and, as we say in the Philippines our homes are yours while you are in our midst. The best we have in God’s wondrous creation, and the finest products of our minds and hands are all yours to enjoy to contemplate, or to take along with you as mementoes of your visit here when you go home.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech at the 14th General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel Organizations (IOUTO) delivered on November 20, 1959, at the Senate Session Hall. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(47) , 9862-9866.