Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the opening of the Convention of the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities

[Delivered at the Pines Hotel, Baguio, February 16, 1961]

WHEN I was invited to address this distinguished body of educators, I readily accepted the invitation because I knew that I would be speaking to men and women who have dedicated and are still dedicating their learning and their energies to the noble task of nation building. You have done well in deciding to hold your convention in this city, for with the bracing climate and the beautiful surroundings that you find here, you will not lack the vigor and the inspiration you need for the discussion of your common problems.

It is gratifying to note that one of the aims of the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities is to raise the standard of instruction in our private schools. I agree with you that there is a real and pressing need not only of upgrading but also of updating our curricular standard. The last war created a break in the education of our children. Because of the troubled conditions in the country during the trying days of the Japanese occupation, thousands of children had to stop their studies. Consequently, after the liberation, the number of children that needed to be accommodated was enormous, and since the government could not open enough schools to accommodate them because of its depleted finances and our shattered economy, private schools mushroomed everywhere in order to meet the demand of the people for educational facilities for their children. Unfortunately, some of these schools were not properly equiped and staffed for effective instruction owing also to the economic prostration after and because of the war. True, the very poor ones have since been closed, but even then it is still necessary to keep on improving those that remain in order that our children and young people will derive the greatest benefit from their schooling.

The need for this improvement gains in strength and urgency when it is remembered that most of our students in the higher levels of our educational system are enrolled in private schools. In my last message to Congress on the state of the nation I stated that 60 per cent of the secondary students and 90 per cent of those on the college and graduate levels are enrolled in private institutions of learning. That, to be sure, is a very significant portion of our student population. But how this improvement can best be brought about is a matter that needs serious study. That is one of the biggest problems this convention is confronted with.

One of the recommendations I made in that message was to create or elect a committee or board that can help in the supervision of private schools. The question which I believe would come up and would need to be threshed out is the proper relation that should exist between this board or committee and the Bureau of Private Schools, which to this day is the exclusive office that is charged with the duty of supervising and regulating the operation of private schools.

Another problem that may come up concerns the implications for private school supervision of the constitutional provision that “all schools shall be under the supervision of, and subject to, regulation by the State.” Does this provision make it mandatory on the part of the State to exercise exclusive supervision over the schools, public as well as private? If so, if the supervision and regulation of private schools has been imposed upon the State as a duty by the sovereign will of the Filipino people, can the State renounce completely or share partly that duty in favor of any private entity? In other words, can the supervision and regulation of the private schools be entrusted wholly or partly to accrediting associations created and maintained by the private schools themselves, as is being done in the United States? I pose this question for your careful consideration.

I understand that the theme of this convention makes reference to the contributions of private education. I need not touch upon your contributions in the past because you know them better than I do. Permit me, however, to point the direction which the efforts of the private schools might take in their desire to contribute to the improvement of the social and economic conditions in this country. This contribution is to be expected because the school or educational institution, being a social institution, must be of some positive service to society and the nation in which it exists and from which it derives its sustenance.

One of the things our people are working for these days is the attainment of our economic independence. Until about a decade and a half ago our dream was to be politically free. But when we finally obtained our political independence in 1946, we found out that, in order to enjoy its blessings, we must also gain our economic independence; we must be our own masters economically. This is not the case today, since a high percentage of our domestic trade and 70 per cent of our export business are in the hands of aliens. And so, to correct this defect, we have adopted the Filipino First policy, a policy which has won the enthusiastic support of our people. As I have explained on a number of occasions, this policy is neither chauvinistic nor exclusivistic. Nor is it anti-foreign. In fact, foreign business men are welcome in this country so long as they engage in lawful enterprises and they respect our laws. All that the policy seeks is to have our nationals given a dominant position in our economy, for as citizens of this country they should be entitled to this preferential position.

But it is easy to see that this movement for economic freedom will gain force and effect only it it receives the continued all-out support from our people. Without such support, it will sooner or later lapse into desuetude. And so, I can call upon our schools, public and private, to help in enlightening our people on the meaning and importance of this policy as a means of promoting the welfare of our country. Since the private schools have under them more than one-half of our secondary students and most of our college students, theirs is the opportunity as well as the responsibility to impart life and dynamism to this nationalistic policy among the youthful and thinking elements of our people. Political independence can endure only on the granite foundations of economic independence.

A second contribution which our private schools may make is to add to the existing fund of human knowledge. This it can do by conducting scientific studies and investigations. Across the centuries man has been able to move forward because of this continuous efforts to harness the forces of nature to his higher purposes. Goaded by intellectual curiosity or impelled by the imperatives of survival, he has peered into the realm of the unknown in this search for solutions to the problems that beset him at the time. Thus did Newton discover the law of gravitation, Galileo the law of falling bodies, and Enrico Fermi the method of splitting the atom.

Traditionally, it was the university, as a community of masters and mature scholars, which assumed this function-of adding new knowledge and pushing outward its frontiers: Because of the exigencies of modern life, other entities, such as the research departments of manufacturing firms, have shared this work with the universities, especially in the area of practical application of scientific principles. Our universities in this country have in the main been teaching institutions to transmit knowledge. However, the time has come for the universities to broaden their sphere of action so as to include, besides the transmission of knowledge, the creation, the deepening and expansion of knowledge. I can state emphatically that in this great field of university function our private universities have a signal opportunity to make a notable contribution to the welfare and prosperity of the nation. They would do well, therefore, not only to take advantage of the grants given by the National Science Development Board to research workers with meritorious research projects, but more importantly, to establish and equip their own adequate laboratories for research and scientific explorations.

There should be no dearth of problems in this country for the diligent worker to investigate. For instance, in agriculture, our scientists could direct their genius to the discovery of ways of making our country more than self-sufficient in food by developing new high-yielding varieties of rice and corn through plant breeding, by a more effective control of pests and diseases, and by scientific soil analysis and judicious application of fertilizers. They can also study how we can improve our production of livestock .Then, too, there is the dreaded kadangkadang of the coconut and the mosaic of abaca which should be controlled or eradicated if our copra and abaca industries are to survive.

In industry, the subjects for investigation are inexhaustible. For one thing, there is the search for possible sources of paper pulp out of local materials so that we would not have to depend upon other countries for our supply of paper. For another thing, we need to discover how we can utilize the by-products and wastes of farming as well as of industrial processing. Thus, it has been found that bagasse can be made into newsprint. Further research is needed to find other uses of this material, which today is merely going to waste. Research is also needed to discover how to get the full value of the timber that is removed from our forests. It has been estimated that about 75 per cent of the wood that is cut is lost in the different operations necessary to convert it into a finished product that can be placed on the market. To put it in another way, three fourths of the timber is wasted. Science should tell us how this waste can be made into pulp, paper, wallboard, and other products that have cash value. Other industrial uses of sugar, coconut, abaca, ramie and other fibers, tobacco, and thousands of medicinal plants should be discovered in these laboratories and experimental institutions.

But science alone will not save the world. In fact, it can be a double-edged weapon. It can be an instrument for good or for evil. It can be a boon to mankind or it can be used to wipe out our civilization. The key to the world’s continued well-being lies in the proper orientation of the youth. In this our private schools can make an outstanding contribution. They can shape the ideals and attitudes of our young people so that they will accept the moral and spiritual values that have guided the thinking and actions of our forebears. It is a matter for regret that many of the customs and folkways of our people are showing signs of weakening. Family solidarity has loosened up considerably; filial and religious duties are less observed. Take the time-honored national trait of honesty. According to a Chinese writer in the thirteenth century, our ancestors used to get goods on credit without receipts from the Chinese traders and then pay their obligations upon the return of the latter. Today I wonder if that can be said of our people. But today this trait seems to be giving away to evasion and opportunism. This attitude has even crept into the minds of some people in the government service, and so we are today waging an unrelenting war against this evil. Since I assumed the presidency of our Republic, about 22,000 administrative cases have been initiated against officials and employees of the government. Those found guilty have been meted out the corresponding punishments regardless of whether they are “big fishes or small fries.” Bribery has become a one-way traffic when the taker is pilloried by public opinion but the giver is idolized by, and lionized in, society. There are even self-styled reformers who would make the President assume responsibility for all the crimes and corruptions committed during his term. In which cases men become morally and legally irresponsible who feel free to commit any crime or corruption knowing that some one else will go to jail or to hell for his misdeeds.

But these actions are, at best, merely punitive and remedial. What is needed is a more positive approach to the problem, one that will so condition the minds of our young people that they will of their own accord do the right thing and will not even think of doing anything that would be either legally or morally wrong while they are serving the people. Now, it must be admitted that the best time to do this is during the early years of life when the minds of the youth are still pliant and impressionable. It is for this reason that the private schools are in a strategic position to imbue their students with the highest ideals of conduct and behavior. And this is the reason why in my last message to Congress I urged the broadening of curricular freedom in private institutions so as to permit educational diversity within educational unity.

Lastly, our universities have the responsibility of preparing the leadership of the nation. In all areas of human endeavor—government, business, industry, education, or agriculture—the need is for competent, resourceful, imaginative, and upright leaders, if our country is to continue to make progress. But since all but one of our universities are under private initiative, you have the rare opportunity to do your part in this task. I challenge you to take full advantage of that opportunity.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate you on the accomplishments you have made so far. I also wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart that you have collaborated wholeheartedly in the educational efforts of my administration. It is because of these integrated efforts of our government and private institutions that now the Philippines can justly claim to have the best educational system among all the countries on the entire continent of Asia. On the basis of these accomplishments resulting from the cooperation and team work between my administration and you, I find new inspiration and resurging determination to continue steering the Ship of State, should that be the mandate of the Filipino people in the forthcoming election. (Applause) I am pleased to see you putting your heads together in an effort to find the answers to the various questions that are being raised in connection with the upgrading and updating of our private schools. You have convened here not merely as heads of universities and colleges but as nation builders determined to build the House of the Nation upon a rock. “And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and beat upon that house and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.”

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the opening of the Convention of the Philippine Association of Colleges and Universities, held at the Pines Hotel, Baguio, Thursday morning, February 16, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(10) , 1746-1751.