PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE AIRCRAFT TURNOVER CEREMONIES AT THE MANILA DOMESTIC AIR TERMINAL AT NICHOLS FIELD, SATURDAY MORNING, AUGUST 31, 1957

AMBASSADOR. BOHLEN, FRIENDS, AND COUNTRYMEN:

ON behalf of the Filipino people, I wish to thank once again the American people through their very distinguished Ambassador for their abiding concern in our security and welfare. The requirements of modern warfare have made it necessary for smaller nations to pool their potentials together with friendly allied powers. It is our good fortune to have such an ally whose assistance makes it possible for small nations to manifest a determination to resist aggression; otherwise, they will be utterly at the mercy of ruthless aggressors. Moreover, the sweep of history has brought out two peoples together in the common pursuit, preservation, and defense of similar ideals.

It has been the lesson of contemporary history that ties that bind one nation with another have been threatened with disruption, unless such ties have become also so tangible as to serve notice that they are indestructible.

As the world knows, the Filipinos and the Americans fought in Bataan, in Corregidor; suffered ignominous ordeals; and many died, in Capas and other concentration camps, and in nearly all nooks and cramies where the enemy thought of erasing completely the vestiges of Filipino-American relationship. When American assistance became nil and our country finally reeled under the over-powering impact of military might and conquest, the Filipinos suffered—but the spiritual ties that bound the Philippines with America endured and remained unsullied. Our people, even in suffering, registered in the history of the fight for freedom the fact that we, Filipinos, are not merely fair-weather friends.

From such a lesson, this simple but very significant ceremony of accepting the assistance of the United States to bolster the Philippine Air Force is a tangible expression of a practical wish to make Filipino-American relationship worthy of being more cherished by both peoples. Indeed, this occasion has a triple significance because this assistance of the United States to the Philippines shows that she is concerned in the safety of our people and in their innate capacity to resist aggression; that, despite the smallness of the Philippines, the United States sees in her a partner in a common cause to help preserve the free world by further strengthening its defense against communism; and that, in a larger sense, even small nations are co-important in the common effort to preserve the freedoms of man wherever he is.

I am sure that the assistance that our Air Force gets today will go a long way towards preserving what we have thus gained; and it is our hope that it may also serve as a deterrent to communist resurgence in our country and as a prop to the defense of our institutions and our way of life, I have full confidence in the ability of the officers and men of the Philippine Air Force to make effective use of these equipment and facilities. As a tangible manifestation of this confidence, I have authorized the immediate release of P200,000 for the housing project of officers and enlisted men at the Basa Airbase.

Finally, there is reason to look forward to a more effective US-PI air defense effort in this country and in this part of the world. It is my hope that such an effort should not only be coordinated but integrated as well into one air defense team.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library