Ladies and gentlemen:

I LOOK upon this privilege of opening the Atom-for-Peace exhibits as a distinct honor for which I thank the officials of the National Science Development Board and the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission.

I recollect that some two months ago, on this very same spot, it was my privilege to deliver an address on the occasion of the opening of the UNESCO exhibit on energy and its various transformations. In that exhibit the emphasis was placed on the more conventional sources of energy.

This evening it is once more my privilege to open another exhibit on energy, this time exclusively on one kind—a new form of force unequalled perhaps by any other in the tremendous impact it has wrought on humanity’s political, social, and economic thought.

It is rather unfortunate that atomic energy made its bow to the world in the form of an awesome military weapon, for the average layman could not thereafter think of this new force without conjuring the spectacle of a holocaust of death and destruction. The peaceful potentials of this form of energy paled before the dark spectre of its fearful capacity to destroy.

And yet the years following the dawn of the atomic era saw rapid progress in technological development for the utilization of atomic energy in man’s peaceful pursuits. These were advancements for the welfare of humanity—less attended with drama but of equal if not greater significance to man.

It is a paradox of each advance in knowledge—illustrated in its ultimate sense by atomic power—that what can destroy can also build, and that it remains only for man to choose to what end he shall direct the fruits of his creative genius.

Thus, man learned how to split the atom. Out of this knowledge he spawned the nuclear bomb and its implications of total destruction and death.

Yet out of that very same knowledge has come hope—hope in the form of a new source of power to replenish our dwindling fuels, new methods of treatment for man’s ancient diseases, better breeds of plants arid animals to feed the hungry, new techniques for our industries, new knowledge to help cloth, shelter, and satisfy the wants of the world’s teaming millions.

Out of the same knowledge that rained death in Hiroshima have come answers to secrets that may someday enable man to banish misery and hunger from this earth forever.

Faced with the alternative of his own extinction or the the chance for a better world, we declare here our great faith on man’s good judgment of choosing the course that would lead to his own ultimate good. We express here our unshakeable belief that man will use nuclear power to serve, rather than annihilate, himself; that using his faculty of reason, man will, in the words of a famous writer, not only endure but prevail.

It is our belief—and prayer—that the world has made its choice and that the awesome secrets man has discovered will not be used to destroy but to build, that mutual destruction has cancelled out total war, and that the fury of the struggle between totalitarianism and freedom will more and more confine itself to gaining the allegiance of the world through means for the realization of a better life.

Thus, we witness a delirious race not only for supremacy in atomic weapons. Presently going on is a struggle for the loyalty of the uncommitted millions through technical and financial aid designed to increase food supply, lessen disease, raise production, and improve’ social institutions among underdeveloped countries.

And in the latter—as in the former race—science will be a foremost battleground.

The Philippines, heir to centuries-old problems of ignorance, want, and population, has, like ail other countries, turned to science as one of the strongest hopes for the solution of her problems.

Independence, intensified methods of communication, the universalization of basic education, and the efforts of our government as well, have given to our people a scale of values and aspirations that are definitely higher than those of our forbears. Many of our people, inured to near-hunger, near ignorance, and disease, have realized suddenly that a better life is possible and can be theirs, ought to be theirs.

We have sought to foster those aspirations. And we have sought to help our people achieve them. We have dedicated the Administration to helping the great masses of our people realize a greater and greater portion of their dreams. In the face of a population that is growing at the phenomenal rate of 2.9 per cent every year—breeding new problems and compounding old ones—we are attempting a production and industrialization program intended to render us a little less dependent on foreign sources for staple foods and finished goods. We are pushing roads through forests, building better ones where inadequate facilities existed. We have explored the possibilities. of utilizing to the fullest our mineral and agricultural resources. We have tried to accomplish, and are on the verge of producing, enough of our basic staples for the first time in several generations. We are trying to spread out among as many of our people the benefits of greater knowledge and greater awareness.

These and a thousand others, this administration is attempting—and attempting it at a pace that is both frenetic and inspired. This generation is seeking to achieve in decades what has taken other countries hundreds of years to accomplish.

And yet we realize only too vividly that these goals could never be achieved at a pace that is desired without seeking newer, faster, and more effective tools and methods than are available to us today. The old methods just will not suffice. It is in this thought that our country, as the world has done, has turned to science. Our resources are not limitless, our land grows not no matter how fast our population expands. What remains for us is to produce more food, more clothing, more crops using the same lands, the same resources that we have. We are seeking for a maximum of production from a minimum of materials—a goal only science can achieve for us.

I, therefore, take the greatest pride in the knowledge that this administration has not only realized this truth but acted upon it with dispatch. In its last session, the Congress enacted Republic Act 2067, known as the Science Act of 1958, which provides for the first time for a truly coordinated and truly national science program. The scattered and often duplicated research efforts of both public and private agencies can now be given that degree of integration that can help produce the greatest results at the lowest cost.

In amplification of the constitutional provision that the State shall foster science, Republic Act 2067 has declared it a policy of the state to “promote scientific and technological research and development, foster invention, and utilize scientific knowledge as an effective instrument for the promotion of national progress.”

In the implementation of such a policy the Government is committed, among others, to;

(a) Stimulate and guide scientific, engineering, and technological efforts towards filling the basic and immediate needs of the people;

(b) Survey the resources of the country and formulate a comprehensive program for the development and maximum utilization of such resources in the solution of the country’s problems;

(c) Strengthen the educational system of the country so that the same will provide a steady source of competent scientific and technological manpower; and (d) Promote coordination and cooperation in research in order to secure concentration of efforts, minimize duplication, and thereby achieve maximum progress.

This is the pervading reason behind the Act: That the almost limitless aids and. resources which science can offer be concentrated into the solution of our problems.

As an instrument of such a policy, the Science Act created the National Science Development Board primarily as a body to set policies and coordinate programs in scientific research and development. It also set up the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission and the National Institute of Science and Technology as implementing arms for the development and pursuit of research in their respective fields of endeavor.

Our science program, therefore, will concern itself with research and development which will help improve the national economy and produce immediate results. Our first researches are designated to solve some of the many complex and urgent problems of Philippine agriculture, industry, medicine, biology, and engineering.

With particular reference to nuclear science and development, researches utilizing radioactive materials which are of immediate urgency and application will be pursued.

Thus, some of the first activities of the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission will consist of studies on the breeding of more, resistent and high-yielding rice varieties; the discovery of cures for coconut diseases, particularly cadang-cadang which has almost crippled the industry in certain areas of the country; studies on fertilizer; the absorption of sugar by plants and weed-killers; nuclear engineering processes, and physiological studies on domestic animals, utilizing in all such studies nuclear techniques and processes.

Of immediate importance as well is the establishment of the Philippine Nuclear Research Center, the core of which will be a $500,000-reactor facility granted to the Philippines under the United States-Philippine Bilateral Agreement of July 27, 1955. Presently, negotiations are going on for the implementation of the U. -S. grant and subsequent final acquisition of the research reactor from American manufacturers. For its part, the Philippines under the Agreement is committed to provide the building and facilities to house the reactor and bear the operational costs of the reactor project. The construction of the reactor building and supporting laboratory facilities is scheduled to begin about the early part of next fiscal year.

Our long-range nuclear program will consider the technology and economics of nuclear energy with respect to our power program. The prospects of greater industrial growth in our country has often been discounted owing to our alleged lack of power resources. Nuclear power may well provide the answer to this lack.

Also in the class of future plans are the expansion of the use of radioisotopes in research on medical therapy, food preservation, especially fish and meat, control of native plant pests and diseases, and improvement in our crop plants by induced mutations and greater availability of power.

It will be noted that the Philippine nuclear program is geared to the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The Philippines—and we consider this a boon—has neither the resources nor the predilection to engage in researches on nuclear warfare.

This administration, through the Science Act of 1958, has given concrete proof of its stated intention to foster science and utilize its techniques more fully in the search for better and more effective solutions to our many economic problems. Republic Act 2067 of itself is most explicit in these intentions, and the developments during these last few months, one of which is the coming establishment of a full-pledged nuclear research center, should leave no doubt as to the course which this government has taken with regard to science.

This administration considers the evolution of new and more effective scientific processes and methods as one of the greatest hopes in the solution of our country’s many problems. Consequently, we bind ourselves to give the country’s science effort the measure of financial, moral, and administrative support that it deserves.

Realizing that superior scientific skill is as much subject to the play of market forces as any other commodity, this administration shall endeavor to attract the best minds to the service of our government’s science program by means of substantial emoluments, grants, scholarships, awards, and promotions through merit and other incentives for dedicated service to science.

Knowing that the success of a coordinated science program hinges upon the creation and the maintenance of a core of excellent and well-trained scientists and technicians, this administration shall endeavor to foster the growth of such group through scholarship for brilliant science students, training grants abroad, and better opportunities for service in the government.

Mindful of the fact that scientific research and development can proceed only with the necessary financial support, this administration will seek to- provide our scientific agencies with enough funds to pursue a creditable program of scientific research and development geared to our defined objectives.

Cognizant of the pressing needs of our economy, we shall direct our immediate program of research and development to discovering solutions to such problems as presently beset it, leaving for tomorrow the pursuit of projects of longer range and future application.

Realizing that scientific research and development can never be a monopoly of the government, we shall seek to foster cooperative efforts in research between our public agencies and private institutions. We shall also, whenever feasible, support, through financial and technical aids, worthwhile researches by qualified private scientists.

Knowing the multitude of uses to which nuclear energy can be applied and the still burgeoning growth of its areas of use, this administration will seek to expand our present nuclear research and development program so as to give the people the full benefits of its powerful and versatile force of nature.

At the start of this presidential term, we outlined to our people several goals that we would set out to achieve—God willing—during the short time given us. Nothing less than the united labors of all social, economic, and political sectors can help us accomplish them. The government can only lead, or guide, or help—it cannot accomplish everything. So much room for purposeful action is left to our private institutions and our people.

One of such goals has been increased economic growth. Within the powers granted us—and using the processes that are available to democratic governments—this government will strive to give our people a little more food, a little more vision, until we arrive at that aspiration of reasonably self-sufficient independence that has evaded us for centuries.

In seeking to attain this end, we have called, and we shall call, to the forefront the thinker, the executive, the teacher, the farmer, the industrialist, the worker—-the scientist.

To the last especially, we here state that it shall be one of our primary intentions to let the scientist assume a greater and more dynamic role than that which he had before. We have provided him with the agencies within which to labor. We have given him—and hope to give him more—of the incentives and support with which to evolve from nature’s unknown recesses knowledge that can help his countrymen live in greater satisfaction and dignity.

It has been given our times to witness hard challenges. But hard eras breed great dreams—and great dreams a great generation. In these troubled times, we have been courageous enough to set for ourselves the vision of emancipating, within our life time, the greater portion of our people from our heritage of want and ignorance. The goal is great and noble and the reward less than that history shall remember this generation as one that gave to its sons—through its courage, brawn, and intellect—the legacy of a richer and fuller life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the Formal Opening Ceremonies of the “Atoms-for-Peace” Exhibits. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(34) , 7884-7889.