Ladies and gentlemen:

IT IS with the deepest pleasure that I congratulate all of you for your initiative and perseverance in holding this national conference of our nation’s leaders in public health. I am confident that your meeting of minds has not only forged a greater unity among you, but has also increased your collective determination to raise our people’s health standards through a more effective, more efficient organization of forces. And it is deeply encouraging to the nation at large that you have gathered here to rally yourselves into a much (more concerted campaign to fight the scourge of disease in our country.

The significance of your conference cannot be overestimated. Our public health leaders are in the frontlines of our government’s battle against disease, and are responsible thereby for carrying out the government’s obligation to protect the health and life of its citizens. It is an obligation that arises from the firm and immutable principle which our Christian society upholds: that human life is of inestimable value in itself, and that health is essential to a full and happy life. As the World Health Organization defines it, health is “a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease and infirmity.” We can never be thankful enough to you— our public health leaders—for your splendid devotion to the realization of this lofty humanitarian goal.

It is largely through the efforts of men like you, with the unfailing cooperation of our private health institutions, that the menace of disease is gradually but surely being conquered. This is easily proven by the rather vigorous fashion in which our population increased by more than four million during the past dozen years or an increase annually of about 700,000. A glance at our most reliable statistics will show that this increase was due to a decrease in the crude death rate accompanied by an increase in the crude birth rate. The crude death rate per one thousand people in 1947 was 12.68; in 1958 this dropped to only 9.44. On the other hand, our crude birth rate per one thousand people in 1947 was 30.4; by 1958, this had increased to 33.15.

There has also been noted a heartening drop in infant mortality rate. The rate per one thousand five births recorded in 1947 was 111.5; by 1958 it had gone down to 80.01. By the same token, the maternal mortality rate per one thousand live births dipped from four in 1947 to 2.92 in 1958.

Though our faith in such figures must be somewhat qualified owing to the absence of more reliable data-gathering methods, nevertheless they are an inspiring indication of the advances that our country has made in the process of controlling and eventually eradicating our pernicious diseases. The most dramatic example perhaps is the smashing blow that malaria has received from the all-out anti-malaria program that we have been intensively and extensively carrying on. Although this disease used to be one of the top four killers during the years after the war, it is now making an exit out of the list of ten most fatal diseases. The spectacular reduction of malaria should certainly serve as a pattern for the wiping out of the other leading causes of death in the Philippines.

Notwithstanding the progress we have made in the control of other diseases, we must face the fact squarely that pneumonia, tuberculosis, gastro-enteric diseases, beri-beri, and bronchitis have been scourging our people in still distressing proportions. Last year, of every one hundred thousand people in our country, approximately 130 died of pneumonia, 104 of tuberculosis, 86 of gastro-enteritis, 75 of beri-beri, and 73 of bronchitis. Although the relative mortality scores of tuberculosis, beri-beri, and bronchitis have gone down considerably during the past decade, infectious communicable diseases are still our major problems. This should drive us all the more towards intensifying our search for more effective approaches to their control and eradication.

As far as recorded figures seem to show, the general relative reduction of infectious diseases seem to accompany a rise in non-infectious degenerative diseases. Cardio-vascular ailments and cancer ranked 6th and 8th, respectively, among the leading causes of death last year. Whatever may the explanation for this rise be, our experts are faced with the compulsion of directing more attention towards these diseases.

Doubtless we have many other problems to tackle; such as, the (minimizing of occupational hazards and diseases concomitant with our growing industries, and the education of the people on matters concerning the care of their bodily health. I shall not venture to enumerate them to you, inasmuch as your acquaintance with them has been derived from first-hand experience.

But you are also familiar with the extensive program of public health administration which our country has pursued, especially during recent years, featured by certain bold plans that are perhaps unparallelled in most Southeast Asian countries. May I refer, for one, to the widespread extension of health services to the rural areas all over the country from as far north as the Babuyan Islands to as far south as Tawi-tawi. The passage in 1954 of Republic Act 1082 enabled our Department of Health to increase the existing 81 pilot rural health units to a nationwide network which now counts more than 1,300 such units, manned and operated by more than 5,500 doctors, midwives, nurses, sanitary inspectors, and helpers. Making the wonders of modern medicine available to the poor people in the remote Barrios is by all standards one of the most constructive advances that we have made in the field of social amelioration.

The government’s growing concern for the health of the nation can likewise be discerned from the 20-million-peso increase in expenditures for health purposes from 1956 to 1957, and from the fact that, the per-capita expenditures for health increased from 47 centavos in 1947 to ₱4.09 in 1957.

Needless to say, no amount of expenditures will do any substantial good unless they are handled with consumate wisdom and foresight, proper programming, and flawless organization. This is the moment when I should stress the urgency of strictly and vigorously adhering to the reorganization plans decentralizing the Department of Health as called for by Republic Act number 997, as amended by Republic Act number 1241. This Reorganization Plan, as you well know, is founded on the unquestionable principle that centralization of public health is unwieldy and unsatisfactory for a big population that is widely dispersed among our many separate islands. Moreover, delegating more authority to the regional units and to the field men would not only stimulate initiative and resourcefulness, but would also enable them to apply the proper remedies for peculiar needs of their respective localities, wherein they are better judges than the men at the central office. Decentralization would relieve the central office of considerable burden as well as minimize delays in action. For local officials are only as fast in acting as they are free in making the decisions to act.

Let me assure you that given another four years, the Administration will exert all the necessary leadership to put into effect the long-range plans envisioned for the Department of Health by the Reorganization Act. My insistence on the implementation of this plan arises from nothing but my firm conviction that it is based on a sound and visionary philosophy of public health administration. I believe that the carrying out of this plan is one of the prime imperatives of progress in the field of public health.

Concentration of attention on local regions should not, however, lead us into adopting a provincial or parochial mentality in our approach to our problems. This is a time life when our public health officers as a whole cannot afford to isolate themselves from the rest of the world and lose contact with the universal efforts to protect the whole of mankind from the threats of sickness and infirmity. This a time when we must expand our horizons, join hands with other nations, learn from their researches and experience, contribute what we can to the universal fund of knowledge concerning diseases, and forge closer ties with health organizations all over the world, especially those that fall funder the aegis of the United Nations, if only to show to the world our respect for the principle that concern for health and happiness knows no geographical bounds, that disease and ill health are common dangers, and that humanity is one family for whose welfare we as a nation are determined to work.

Ladies and gentlemen, we all realize the many problems— some of gigantic magnitude—which we still have to surmount. And yet there is every reason for us to feel proud of the amount of progress that our country has achieved within the past half-century, and especially within the past decade. Our health conditions are undoubtedly among the best, if not the best, in Southeast Asia, and our public health program has been so impressive that a few years ago, the United States Senate incorporated into its congressional record the full reprint of an article on the Philippines health program published by the New York Times. This was a manifest tribute to the efforts of our country to push through what the wirte called—and I quote—”a program based on long-range planning, hard work, dedicated self-help, and substantial assistance from the United States.”

Needless to say, our assessment of our achievements is not intended to glorify ourselves but simply to set the perspective for the long, hard task ahead. We have a bold program to pursue, and that demands the services of imaginative, creative planners and the exertion of the utmost physical efforts to make our country stand out as the model of public health in this part of the world. Let one remind you that our public health program can be greatly enhanced if you—the custodians of our country’s health—take full advantage of the opportunities afforded to medical research by the Science Act of 1958. No effort should be spared, no chances should be by-passed in our massive campaign to make our land a pleasant, sunny haven of health.

My administration is thoroughly determined to work with relentless vigor towards attaining this goal. I am sure that our public health officials, under the leadership of Secretary Valencia, will continue with increased devotion their splendid work of stamping out the menace of disease and of building a healthy country through a healthy citizenry.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). The President’s speech at the National Health Conference, Manila Hotel, Friday Evening, July 24, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (32) , 6362-6365.