PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE MANILA ROTARY CLUB DELIVERED AT 1 P.M. JULY 11, AT THE MANILA HOTEL

MY FRIENDS OF THE MANILA ROTARY CLUB, LADIES OP THE INNER WHEEL CLUB, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

ONLY last week, I performed the pleasant assignment of inducting the officers of the Baguio Rotary Club. That itself pleased me very much, but the additional opportunity of rendering a similar service for the Manila Rotary Club and Inner Wheel Club gives me even greater pleasure. Not only am I delighted to be with you, as I was delighted to be with the Baguio Rotarians, but I also hope that after officiating at so many induction ceremonies, I shall myself, with your support, have the good luck to be inducted in the not too distant future.

I sincerely congratulate the new officers, not so much for the honor which has come to them, for I know that they are used to such honors, but more for the expression of faith and trust in their ability and leadership, and for the opportunity which is now theirs to serve their organizations and, through them, the people and the country.

I am indeed very grateful for the invitation you have extended to me to be with you today. Your luncheon meetings have become the most popular forum for the discussion of public issues. This is quite natural. Having in your membership men of broad and deep interest in public affairs, you are the logical pilot audience for the entire nation. This being the case, I appear before you today to discuss unfinished business as well as new business. It is a good policy, I think, to wind up any unfinished business first before starting new business.

The unfinished business I have in mind had its start with two addresses, one delivered before this Very Rotary Club right in this very place, and the other, before the Baguio Lions Club. Although at the Baguio Rotary Club, last week, I already delivered what I believe was a complete answer to the address delivered here, I have observed that only small portions have so far been printed in the papers, and some of these portions have been picked out of context and given different meanings. I therefore request your indulgence and your permission to begin my talk by touching upon topics which have already been discussed but which still need to be clarified.

By the use of official figures and facts, I should like to nail down once and for all the fallacies foisted upon the people concerning the budget, public indebtedness, American aid, and a few other matters.

Our administration was charged with foisting upon the people an unbalanced budget. The official figures show the exact opposite: The previous Liberal administration, from 1946 to 1953, foisted annual budgets upon the people with fantastic deficits. In 1946, the deficit was over ₱156 million; in 1947, over ₱189 million; in 1948, over ₱55 million, in 1949, over ₱89 million, in 1950, over ₱154 million; in 1951, over ₱42 million; in 1953, over ₱50 million.

In contrast to these deficits, the Nacionalista budgets from 1954 to 1956 have always shown surpluses. The surplus in 1954 was ₱10 million; in 1955, nearly ₱2 million; and in 1956, nearly ₱2 million.

It would seem that to keep our budget balanced, we should protect it against the proven Liberal deficit-spending policy and continue to entrust it and its established soundness to the present administration.

When it comes to loans, the past administration’s record borders on recklessness. Not only did it borrow the huge amount of ₱208,200,000 to spend on ordinary operations of the government but it also illegally took more than ₱152 million from the government’s fiduciary, trust, special, and sinking funds, making its total borrowing more than ₱360,200,000. In addition, government obligations totaling over ₱205 million were not recorded in the books and remained unsettled.

In contrast, our administration’s record shows that we have been able to pay off ₱157,915,000 of the Liberal administration’s budgetary loans and return all the pilfered funds from the fiduciary, trust, special, and sinking funds, except ₱8 million.

It is quite evident that if the Liberal Party is again allowed to get its hands into these funds, which are being accumulated to meet obligations maturing in the future, they will not be filtered partially—they will disappear completely.

It has also been charged that “economic aid from the United States has steadily decreased, primarily because of the failure of the Nacionalista policy-makers to properly and efficiently program such assistance.” It is amazing that this statement has come from the highest official of the Liberal administration directly in charge of American aid. The records show that up to Fiscal Year 1956, the total American aid received by the Philippines from ECA and its predecessors was $172,600,000. While, of this sum, $72,600,000 was received during the Liberal administration, $100,000,000 was received during the Nacionalista administration. Furthermore, for Fiscal Year 1958, the United States government has proposed to give the Philippines $35 million, an amount greater than that previously given during any single year.

This administration, furthermore, recently concluded the Agricultural Commodities Agreement, under which the Philippines will acquire essential commodities for pesos amounting to $10,350,000. The commodities thus acquired will supply the raw material requirements of our expanding industries without expenditure of Philippine foreign exchange. In addition 51 per cent of the peso proceeds are earmarked for loans to the Philippines for economic development.

On the-basis of foreign exchange receipts figures, the American aid grants, assistance, and expenditures from 1951 to 1953, under the Liberal administration, totaled only ₱431 million, while from 1954 to 1956, under the Nacionalista administration, it totaled P422 million.

Lest I bore you with figures, essential though they are for the understanding of the matters under discussion, I should now like to get away from them. It was right in this hall, I believe that the Liberal party spokesman charged our administration with incompetence and lack of managerial ability, implying thereby that the Liberal administration had been matchless and perfect in its efficiency, effectiveness, leadership, and statesmanship. Rather than give my own opinion on this matter and thus be accused of prejudice and bias, I shall limit myself to quoting from the famous report of the Bell Mission in 1950 which came to the Philippines in the middle of the Liberal administration in a frantic attempt to shore it up and save it from total economic and political collapse.

This is what the report sail of the Liberal administration:

“The mounting deficits of the government during these years of high national income and inflationary pressures is indicative of the lack of forceful policy on government finances , . . . It indicates a failure on the part of the public to appreciate the grave monetary and economic dangers that flow from a breakdown of orderly government finances.”

In another place, the Bill Report had this to say:

“The Liberal Party’s fiscal administration has been ruinous and their fiscal reports are of no value to anyone except those interested in historical facts . . . . In 1950, the Secretary of Finance did not have the necessary information from which to determine currently just what is the real financial condition of the Philippine government.”

If the words of the Bell Mission are to be believed, not only for its neutrality but also for its unchallenged competence and good will to the Philippines, then it is the Liberal administration which must be branded inefficient, incompetent, and lacking in managerial and administrative ability.

With this, I close my discussion of unfinished business and begin the new business.

The Nacionalista administration, I am glad to be able to reveal to you, has perfected a Five-Year Economic and Social Development Program covering the period from 1957 to 1961 which, when implemented, will generate, directly and indirectly, a total of 1,500,000 new jobs, or an average of 300,000 annually. This will be the best answer to the charges that the employment situation is worsening. Up to a few months ago, we had only been able to contain unemployment; we were able to maintain the number of unemployed already existing under the Liberal administration at a more or less stationary figure. But this year we begin to aim at the target of full employment, and expect to hit it by 1961.

We believe that we can do this under the Five-Year Economic and Social Development Program which has been the result of exhaustive study and programming by, the National Economic Council. The program proposes, first, for the government itself, to undertake a program of public investment; and, second, for the government to establish and consistently implement coordinated public policies and encourage and enable private enterprise to perform its rightful role in the economic development of the country. As manufacturing grows in the number of establishments and in the scope of output, its capacity for employment will correspondingly increase. Our total labor force employed today in manufacturing industries is only 11 per cent as against from 21 per cent to 47 per cent in the more highly developed countries. Under our Five-Year Economic and Social Development Program, the aim is to acquire a similar balance in the proportion of employments in farms and factories.

Expanding employment is of course, only one of the objectives of the program. In its scope, it includes the intensification of production in all sectors of our economy. This goal, in turn, can only be achieved by making available reasonably easy credit and sufficient capital. And the latter, in turn, must be attracted by fair and reasonable conditions before it will venture into the channel of production and commerce.

To avoid further misinterpretation and misrepresentation, although its existence should be understood, the Nacionalista administration has had a comprehensive economic develop­ment program since 1954. This was revised and updated in 1955-1956, resulting in a new composition of the National Economic Council when disagreement on some aspects of the program made it necessary. The plan was later supplemented with a five-year fiscal plan and foreign exchange budget, together with a system of industrial priority. All these plans have now been consolidated and coordinated in the new five-year Economic and Social Development Program. However, in the nature of things, plans and programs cannot be ironclad; they must be altered according to the dictates of experience and the demand of the situation.

Under the previous plans and programs, the Nacionalista administration was able to record a substantial achievement and this is supported by the important statistics of the nation. From the end of 1953 to the end of the 1956, the gross national production, representing the total output of goods and services of the Philippine economy, went up from ₱8,002,000,000 to ₱9,415,000,000 or an increase of 17.7 per cent. Under the previous Liberal administration, 1951-1953, the increase was only 8.6 per cent. While the per capita income in our country at the close of the Liberal administration in 1953 was only ₱341, the corresponding figure in 1956 under the Nacionalista administration was ₱371. With an increase in per capital income of 9 per cent under the Nacionalista administration in 1953 to 1955, the Philippines, today, enjoys one of the highest living standards in Southeast Asia.

Production has also increased considerably. At the close of the Liberal administration in 1953, the combined index of the physical volume of production, the year 1952 being taken as 100 or normal year, was only 108 as against 141 under the Nacionalista administration in 1956. The index of agriculture was only 107 in 1953,, whereas it was 135 in 1956; mining was only 102 in 1953 while it was 122 in 1956; and manufacturing was only 113 in 1953 but 160 in 1956. Surely, in spite of the determination of many to rock the boat, we are sailing on smoothly to the port of sufficiency and prosperity.

The same port is the goal of my having vetoed Senate Bill No. 167, more popularly known as the Dollar Retention Bill. When I disapproved it, I announced that I would create a body of competent persons to search more carefully for the best ways and means of providing incentives to producers. This study will inevitably take into its scope such other matters as dollar and import controls and other arrangements, permanent or temporary, which are related to these matters. The aim is to be fair to all concerned, impose no harm or hardship to any one, and get our economic development program on the straight road to our overall goal of improved individual incomes, rational prosperity, and intensified progress. Before I close, I cannot resist the temptation of citing a statement which appears to be the key to the new Liberal party’s campaign strategy. Manila Rotary was told, and I quote:

“The paramount objective of government is to promote the welfare of the great masses of the people. The masses of our own people live in poverty.” This is irony at its worst. During its eight years in power, the Liberal administration, whenever it thought of the country and the people, had in mind only the inhabitants of the cities and towns. It took the Nationalists administration to discover the rural areas, the barrios, the common tao, the masses.

In his inaugural address on December 30, 1953, the late President Magsaysay declared: “Heretofore, social justice has raised fervent but frustrated hopes in the hearts of our less fortunate citizens . . . . My administration shall take positive and energetic measures to improve the living conditions of our fellows citizens in the barrios and neglected rural areas and of laborers in our urban and industrial centers.”

This has been the key to the> Nacionalista administration’s program; without in any way neglecting the national welfare as a whole, it has looked with the sincerest and deepest concern upon the improvement of the health, the diet, the education, the environment, the implements, the technical knowledge, and the whole economic and social well being of the masses.

In one of his last messages to the Congress on the state of the nation, the late President Magsaysay declared, and I quote: “We believe that what is good for the common man is good for the whole country. Every policy of our administration has, therefore, been directed to his welfare. We have anchored our national destiny to the common man.”

Under President Magsaysay’s energetic and dynamic leadership, the vast program of rural reconstruction is already going apace. As his humble successor, I have pledged myself to its all-out continuance and, if possible, its further expansion, not only as a matter of loyalty to my successor but also as a matter of deep conviction and personal feeling, having myself come from the ranks of the masses,

My friends, ladies and gentlemen, the year 1957 marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Nacionalista Party. It is the party that has had the greatest experience in government, that has in its ranks the men and women who have had the most comprehensive an£ most extensive service to our people and our country. When for eight years, from 1946 to 1953, a new party without experience in government took over the administration of the nation, the result was disappointing, if not disastrous.

The problems of our Republic are partly the common problems of the post-war world and partly the natural problems of a young nation. We cannot afford a second period of fumbling and bungling in the attempt to seek their solutions. It is common sense, it is logical, it is enlightened self-interest on the part of every Filipino, and is a measure of self-preservation for the nation as a whole to continue the present administration so that it may carry out the vast program of economic development it has already started auspiciously to its logical and successful conclusion.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library