PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE BOY SCOUT OF THE PHILIPPINES FOUNDATION DAY, OCTOBER 31, 1957 AT THE BSP BUILDING

FELLOW SCOUTERS, MY FRIENDS:

WE are gathered here today to celebrate the twenty-first anniversary of the Boy Scouts of the Philippines. It is a momentous day for you as it is for me, your Honorary President, considering that the approval of Commonwealth Act No. Ill on October 31, 1936, marked a new era for Scouting in this country.

With the independence of local Scouting we have attained an enviable position in the Scouting world today. Our membership has placed us among the five biggest National Scout Associations and our leaders, volunteer and professional, have brought prestige and glory to our nation and organization. The eyes of Scouts and Scouters all over the world are focused on the Philippines especially because about two years from now, ours will be the privilege and honor of welcoming our brothers from overseas when they come over for the Tenth World Jamboree which will be held in Fort McKinley.

To an individual, the first twenty-one years of life are a period of preparation for his role in the adult world. He goes through a long and arduous training and apprenticeship to the end that he may be fully prepared to play his part as a participating citizen when he attains the age of majority. The state, the home, the church, and the school pool their resources together to insure thoroughness in the training. Other agencies in the community like the Boy Scouts, the Jaycees, the Lions, and the Rotary Clubs supplement and complement this training to enrich the entire program and make it interesting and attractive to the boys. How well a boy responds to this program, determines the kind of man he will be.

In like manner, the local Scout organization has just completed its period of apprenticeship as an independent National Scout Association. It has weathered the storm and the stress of the years and has emerged triumphant over the trials and tribulations of the growing-up process. It has gone through the period with care and decision, and now it stands among its fellow Associations with a stature that commands respect. It behooves all Filipinos, irrespective of whether or not they are affiliated with Scouting, to extend active support to the movement so that its prestige will be maintained to the everlasting glory of our country and people. It is also incumbent upon us who belong to the local Scouting ranks to continue forging ahead so that our contribution to the building of our nation will be more substantial and thus more attractive of public support. Every day should be a challenge for all of us, boy and adult alike, so that we may blaze new horizons of service for the Philippines and for Scouting.

Scouting plays an important role in every civilized community today. Besides its efficacy as a program for character building, it is an effective antidote to juvenile delinquency. At a time like today when the names of teenage gangs are crudely painted on immaculate walls of buildings, gardens, and other structures and broken window and counter panes, mutely attesting to the recurrence of juvenile crimes, such a program as Scouting assumes greater significance. It is an accepted fact that in communities where Scouting is a vital force in the lives of local boys there is no delinquency among young people By this token, it becomes imperative for communities with serious teenage problems to incorporate Scouting in their program for combating juvenile crimes. And we who are actually in the movement and realize how much Scouting can do for boys, must exert every effort to bring Scouting into the lives of problem boys. Besides doing our bit to solve a social problem, we shall be doing our traditional Good Turn by sharing the benefits we derive from Scouting with others not so providentially fortunate.

Let us also push the frontiers of the movement beyond its present confines. Let us go to the barrios and the settlements in the hinterlands and make our program available to boys in the rural and other less-fortunate areas. There is need for a program like ours to enrich the lonely and drab lives of the boys in these places. In this way, our farm boys will develop greater appreciation for farm life and its opportunities for carrying out our program in a natural setting—the wide, open spaces. The extension of Scouting to these places will perhaps help check the unhealthy tendency of most farm boys to desert their homes and go to cities and other population centers, when they grow up. For such a thing to come to pass will mean greater economic stability and prosperity for our country and people. And that will be one lasting contribution that we can leave for the coming generations of Filipinos.

On the international level, we also have an important part to play. A little over two months ago, I formally invited, in your behalf, the International Scout Conference to hold the Tenth World Jamboree here in 1959, and it pleases me to know that at the conference in Cambridge, England, last August, that invitation was overwhelmingly accepted.

The selection of the Philippines as the site of one of the most important international Scouting events, at which is expected an attendance of no less than 30,000 Scouts and Scouters from all over the free world, was by no means due to luck or to machinations behind the lines before and during the last International Conference. It was really an official recognition of our performance in the last twenty-one years. It was an accolade bestowed on us, a tribute to the vision of the founders of our organization and the zealous and dedicated labors of our volunteer and professional manpower during the period.

Our achievements have attracted the attention of our brothers Scouts and Scouters from overseas. Those in Far Eastern countries, especially, look up to us for guidance and leadership. It is our moral obligation, therefore, to accelerate our present pace so that we may maintain this interest and live up to the expectations of our brothers in other lands.

As your Honorary President, I share in the pride and happiness that today’s celebration has brought on all of you. I commend the founders, the volunteer and professional forces, the Scouts for whom we are dedicating our efforts and labors, and the entire Filipino people who have unstintedly extended assistance and support to us as we strive to insure for our country, in the days to come, a citizenry that will be “physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight.”

May the succeeding years be even more glorious ones for the Philippines and for local Scouting, so that Scout training may always be the privilege of every Filipino boy and an important part of our way of life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library