PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE AMERICAN VETERANS LEGION (PHILIPPINE DEPARTMENT), AT OLONGAPO, ZAMBALES, JUNE 4, 1960

My friends, members of the American Veterans Legion, ladies and gentlemen:

It is a distinct honor and a privilege for me to be here today to address this distinguished gathering. I am deeply touched by the warm welcome you have extended to me. I know that you, as veterans of a great war, have a deep and abiding love for freedom and democracy, and I am confident that we share these same ideals.

We in the Philippines have a long and close relationship with the United States. We fought side by side during the last war, and we have worked together in the years since then to build a better future for our two countries. We are bound together by ties of history, culture, and mutual interest. 

Ito ay isang relasyon na dapat nating pangalagaan at palakasin. Dapat nating tiyakin na ang ating dalawang bansa ay patuloy na magtutulungan upang makamit ang kapayapaan, kaunlaran, at katarungan sa buong mundo. (This is a relationship that we must cherish and strengthen. We must ensure that our two countries continue to work together to achieve peace, progress, and justice throughout the world.)

I am particularly grateful for the assistance that the United States has given to the Philippines in the field of economic development. Your aid has helped us to build roads, schools, and hospitals, and it has helped us to improve the lives of our people. We are committed to using this aid wisely and effectively, so that it will benefit all Filipinos.

I know that there are some who question the wisdom of our close relationship with the United States. They say that we should be more independent, and that we should not rely so heavily on foreign aid. I respect their views, but I believe that they are mistaken. We cannot afford to isolate ourselves from the rest of the world. We need the help of our friends, and the United States is our most important friend.

Sa panahon ngayon, kailangan natin ang pagkakaisa at kooperasyon ng lahat ng mga bansa upang harapin ang mga hamon ng ating panahon. Ang mga hamon na ito ay malaki at kumplikado, ngunit naniniwala ako na kaya nating malampasan ang mga ito kung tayo ay magtutulungan. (In this time, we need the unity and cooperation of all nations to face the challenges of our time. These challenges are great and complex, but I believe that we can overcome them if we work together.)

I am confident that the future is bright for both the Philippines and the United States. We have a great deal to offer each other, and I am confident that we will continue to work together for many years to come. 

Maraming salamat po. (Thank you very much.)

AMBASSADOR HICKERSON, ADMIRAL CARSON, ADMIRAL SPRING, FRIENDS OF THE CONVENTION:

MRS. GARCIA and I are indeed very happy and grateful to be with you on this auspicious occasion of the Convention of the American Veterans Legion. The situs of this convention right here in Subic Naval Base is a happy choice taking into account the fact that this place has also become a veritable base of a working Fil-American mutual understanding and cooperation in a people-to-people relationship. It is to the lasting credit of the American people represented here by such men as Ambassador Hickerson, Admiral Carson, and on this base by Admiral Spring and the men of his command that there exists here a people-to-people harmony and understanding transcending the bounds of mere diplomatic relationship. It is something of the heart and therefore warm and uplifting. It is a cause for satisfaction for both Americans and Filipinos.

The efforts being exerted by Admiral Spring to bringing Philippine-American relationship to the practical field of deeds and performance are of far-reaching effect and significance not merely in Subic but also all over the country. I dare say all Asia will take note of it. The success of his experiment in public relations here indeed shows that the seeds of goodwill and human understanding and democratic approach sown in the hearts of men bear more abundant fruits than the best of treaties, agreements, and covenants.

We have, for instance, three written agreements that link militarily our country with the United States. Much has been said, either doubting or confirming, about the sincerity of the United States in fulfilling her commitments in these treaties to the Philippines. To my mind, there can be no better words of reassurance regarding the goodwill and sincerity that motivated the United States in binding herself with the Philippines in mutual defense and assistance than those of President Eisenhower, who said in his last inaugural address, and I quote:

“… We hold it to be the first task of statesmanship to develop the strength that will deter the forces of aggression and promote the conditions of peace. For, as it must be the supreme purpose of all free men, so it must be the dedication of their leaders, to save humanity from preying upon itself.

“In the light of this principle, we stand ready to engage with any and all others in joint effort to remove the causes of mutual fear and distrust among nations.”

Moreover, during my last state visit to the United States, it has been made abundantly clear the sincere desire of the American government and people to help us set up here an adequate national defense and also the determination of the United States to help us repel instantly any aggression against our country. This is categorically reflected in the Joint Communiqué signed by President Eisenhower and myself on that momentous occasion which among other things reads as follows:

“They reviewed, in this connection, the important role played by the Mutual Defense Pact between the Philippines and the United States. They agreed that the aggressive intentions and activities of Communism in the Far East and in Southeast Asia render the maintenance and strengthening of these defensive arrangements an absolute necessity. President Eisenhower made clear that, in accordance with these existing alliances and the deployments and dispositions thereunder, any armed attack against the Philippines would involve an attack against the United States forces stationed there and against the United States and would instantly be repelled.”

The preceding paragraph, at least as far as the present administration in the United States is concerned, makes automatic and immediate American action to come to our assistance in the hour of aggression. Personally, I have no doubt but that this interpretation of our mutual defense pact to which President Eisenhower himself has solemnly committed will be adopted by all American administrations as long as the mutual defense pact and our bases pact between the Philippines and the United States are standing.

Ambassador Hickerson, Admiral Carson, and Admiral Spring and his command, as I have said, are typical examples of men whose attitude and behavior inspire the confidence and faith in the nation they represent and in the treaties and commitments they help to implement.

The American Legion, Philippine Department, composed as it is of Filipinos, and Americans whose bonds of comradeship were forged in the crucible of war, constitute a strong link in Philippine-American relations. They who had absolute faith in each other in the midst of perils in battle continue to have faith in each other in the struggle to win enduring peace. This is the kind of faith that transcends geographical and political boundaries. Thus united in spirit, and thus backed up by the entire power and influence of the great American Legion in the United States, you have been partly instrumental in shaping the generous attitude of America towards the Philippines translated in terms of veterans benefits, pensions, gratuities; in assistance to the realization of our gigantic reconstruction and rehabilitation program which we completed in ten years following the war; in war damage compensation which is being augmented by $73 million by the American Congress now; and in many other invisible and intangible but nonetheless effective ways. This American Legion with the backing of their comrades in the United States will, I am sure, continue relentlessly to fight for the equalization of benefits to veterans who served under the American flag regardless of their nationality.

And what is even more important to our people in the context of recent world events is that the American Legion exert its influence for the early modernization of the Philippine Armed Forces through the Military Assistance and Mutual Defense Pact. Let it not be said that the lessons of Corregidor and Bataan were in vain.

My friends, your convention assumes added significance in the light of recent world developments which have ushered in another period of uncertainty and apprehension. The summit conference of the leaders of the big powers was foredoomed to failure even before it started. The failure of that projected meeting, which was designed to be another splendid means to ease the tension generated by the cold war, has brought with it a fresh challenge to all free nations, big and small. The challenge is for all of us to strive with increased vigor and greater enthusiasm to keep the peace of the world.

Those in the ranks of the veterans bear a greater degree of responsibility for the success of this crusade for world peace. Because we have tasted the ordeals and sufferings of war, we should be more disposed to undergo personal sacrifices for the sake of peace. Our passion for peace should be as intense as our abhorrence of war. Our aggressiveness for peace should match our gallantry in war. Our will to win, in peace as in war, is inalterable.

For our part in the Philippines, I would like to reiterate my oft-repeated assurances that a greater part of our efforts would be expended towards helping ensure a more certain and lasting peace for all mankind. As a member of the United Nations, we are pledged to support any just, reasonable, and honorable move to promote the ends of peace. For this reason, we hail the decision of both the United States and Russia to try and settle their disputes in the United Nations Assembly or in the United Nations Security Council. We rely on the efficacy of the United Nations as an instrument of world peace; we believe in the potency of SEATO as an instrument of security and progress in this part of the globe”. And in these two instruments of peace, security, and progress, we have faith in the leadership of the United States and in her sincerity as a true friend and ally.

This naturally brings us up again to the issue of the wisdom of maintaining United States military bases here. In this connection, I would like to take advantage of this occasion to remind all and sundry that during the debates in our Senate of which I was then a humble member on the ratification of these agreements, it was adverted that on one hand these bases might serve to draw to Philippine soil attacks of American enemies. But on the other hand, these American bases serve as effective deterrents to powers who may have aggressive intentions against us. Between these two alternatives the Philippine Senate unanimously ratified the treaties. We sought the revision of these treaties to update them, and with the exception “of a few vital items we have been given what we wanted; such as, the return to us of the title of ownership to the base lands, the return to us of inactive bases, the shortening of the life of the lease from 99 years to 25 years with bilateral administration of the bases, etc.

But as to the essentiality of maintaining these bases under present circumstances, my administration has gone on record for it. As stated in the joint communiqué between President Eisenhower and myself last June, 1958, we agreed “that the aggressive intentions and activities of Communism in the Far East and in Southeast Asia render the maintenance and strengthening of these defensive arrangements an absolute necessity.”

My friends, thank you again for your kindness in giving me this opportunity to visit this Base and to share some of my earnest thoughts with you. I trust that, as it had been in the battlefields of the last war, we shall continue to work hand-in-hand towards the realization of our common goals of permanent peace and prosperity for both our peoples and for all mankind. I wish you all a most pleasant and fruitful convention.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library