PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AFTER SIGNING HOUSE BILL NO. 6584, JUNE 19, 1957, OUTLAWING THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF THE PHILIPPINES AND SIMILAR ORGANIZATIONS

I have signed into law the bill outlawing the Communist Party of the Philippines.

With this law, our people have not only officially made the fight against communism a matter of national policy but we have also acquired a potent weapon in the fight against subversion.

Successful as we have been in breaking the backbone of armed communist resistance, we find ourselves seriously handicapped in countering effectively the more insidious activities of communists who have ostensibly forsworn violence and sought expediently the protection of the very laws of the land which they seek to destroy.

Thus, even with our success in the military field the congressional Committee on Anti-Filipino Activities, after conducting the most comprehensive and authoritative study ever made on the problem of communism in our country, concluded that communism remains a real and continuing threat to the national security. It is to the credit of this Committee that the bill outlawing the Communist Party was conceived and recommended. It is, likewise, to the credit of the champions of civil rights in Congress that necessary safeguards were made such that the legitimate exercise by citizens of their rights shall remain inviolate. What the present law punishes is not dissent or heresy but subversion and conspiracy.

Communist sources, as well as the evidence of our own experiences, establish the fact that the objectives of communism are the destruction of our social, political, and economic system, and their replacement by a foreign and godless ideology guided and directed, from abroad. These same sources, as well as our experience, establish the communist means of achieving these objectives as including armed force, sabotage, espionage, and the many sinister forms of subversion. Far from contenting itself with seeking victory, as do other political minorities, by legal democratic process, communist doctrine flatly denies the possibility of legal success and prescribes criminal conspiracy as its orthodox tactic.

Under the circumstances it is clearly the right and the duty of this Government to invoke the police powers of a sovereign state to protect itself and the institutions entrusted to its care from criminal attack.

The passage of this law reaffirms the position which our government has taken, and will take, vis-a-vis communism: a firm, unequivocal, and uncompromising stand against freedom’s most odious and implacable foe.

In this vigorous and reasoned counter-offensive to communist aggression, I feel that we are serving the cause of the Free World as well as our own best interests. If our neighbors can derive benefit or guidance from our experiences and approach, we will have made a substantial contribution to the peace and security of this area.

I assure lovers of freedom and democracy’s friends everywhere that during my incumbency as president of the Republic of the Philippines I shall not only see to it that the anti-communist program of my illustrious predecessor, Ramon Magsaysay, will remain intact, but I shall also push it through with the same dedication and with unrelenting vigor.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library