PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE FIRST REGIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE ASIAN UNITED NATIONS ASSOCIATION DELIVERED AT THE WHO BUILDING, JULY 6, 1959, AT 10:30 A.M.

I AM happy to have this opportunity to welcome you to the Philippines and to this conference. This assembly is the first of its kind to be held here. It aims to step up the effort on the part of Asian countries to sit down together to discuss their programmes and their common problems. In that sense, this conference is historic. The Filipino people are proudly happy that you have elected the Philippines the seat of such an important conclave.

The United Nations, of which our countries are a proud part, has been conceived to set up a new world order to achieve world peace, world democracy, and world prosperity. Established to promote respect for the rights, the dignity, and the worth of the human individual, and founded firmly on the principle of equal justice for big and small nations alike, its charter authorizes regional arrangements under which such great objectives may be given special concentrated regional attention. Hence this conference.

The United Nations is regarded as an indispensable instrument of peoples working together for evolving a more just, free, and economically secure world order. The goal is still far away. But so far its accomplishments in the sphere of world security and peace and in the field of social and economic wellbeing are so impressive that humanity justifiably calls it its greatest hope.

The Philippines, a young and, I like to think, a brave Republic, is a strong believer in the principles of the United Nations, and consequently, a staunch supporter of the organization’s activities. In 1950, when the reckless invasion of South Korea put the United Nations to a crucial test, the Philippines was among the first to respond to its call for aid—all in spite of the fact that at the outbreak of that crisis, the Philippines was at the height of its own armed campaign against the worst internal threat to its security that it ever had. Our expeditionary forces had the privilege of fighting with your forces and those of other members of the United Nations at the inception of that war, and like yours, the forces of this Republic did not abandon the battlefield until the forces of aggression had been halted, and the security of Southeast Asia secured.

Bataan and Corregidor, which you probably will like to visit during your brief stay in the Philippines, are more than the citadels of liberty for which they are known today. They are incontrovertible proofs of how intensely the Filipinos and the Americans together believe in and treasure Freedom. They are perpetual reminders to all that small nations are capable of great actions in defense of freedom and of their God-given right to live as a nation. What we did here lead to our independence, and we like to believe that the grant of Philippine independence by America started a chain reaction leading to the independence of India, Indonesia, Ceylon, Burma, and lately Malaya. Thus we see the solidarity of our destiny, for when we fought for our freedom we also fought for yours, and when you fought for your freedom you also fought for ours.

We have our own internal problems but we have succeeded in overcoming most of them; and now in comparative peace, the Republic is pursuing its future along the lines in which the United Nations has chartered its activities. We are not relenting our vigil against aggression and subversion. And just as the United Nations is taking positive action in the pursuit of world peace and in the uplift of man’s social and economic life, this Republic, besides contributing in other ways to the United Nations’ efforts, is dedicating its resources to the development of its undeveloped areas and to the social and economic amelioration of its masses. By this, we hope to help, as your own countries are undoubtedly helping, in the attainment of the United Nations’ objectives.

The conference that we are about to open here is significant in that it constitutes one step forward in the effort to make peoples the world over understand the United Nations’ principles and support the organization’s activities. It is a timely awakening to the need for a more vigorous group action on the problems confronting Asian countries. I have no doubt that you realize the magnitude and the importance of the work before you. I have no doubt, either, that you will be equal to the missions of this conference. On behalf of the Filipino people, I welcome you once more to the Philippines, and with God’s blessings and the best wishes of the Filipino people, I hereby declare this conference officially open.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library