Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Japanese Diet

[Delivered in Tokyo, December 2, 1958]

I DEEPLY appreciate the opportunity to speak to the Japanese nation through their constitutional representatives in the Diet. This is a high distinction you have so generously accorded on my humble person.

I have come to your beautiful country upon the gracious invitation of His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor of Japan, and His Excellency, the Prime Minister. The invitation struck a responsive chord in my heart because it betokened a genuine and sincere desire on the part of the Japanese government and people for the restoration of the normal relations of friendship and amity that had existed for centuries but which, unfortunately, were interrupted by the last war. The fact that this state visit I am making has received the unanimous endorsement of the Council of State of my country, the counterpart of your Council of Elders, bespeaks a similar desire on the part of my government and people. It is true that the lapse of twelve years has not completely healed the wounds and erased the last vestige of ill will that had been engendered by that cataclysmic event, but calm reflection has led to the conviction among our people that renewal of cordial relations would be the wisest course of action to follow at this juncture.

We have been encouraged to take this view by two significant developments; namely, Japan’s agreement to make reparations payment and her renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy. The first revealed the willingness of the Japanese people to make amends and to pay at least partially for the damage, material and otherwise, suffered by my country and people as a result of the war. The second manifests a realization of the wisdom of friendly intercourse and serves as an assurance that the policy of waging wars of aggression has become a thing of the past. We in the Philippines welcome this development, for it agrees with the temper of my people, who made this same renunciation through our Constitution more than two decades ago.

Last year we had the honor of a visit from His Excellency, Premier Nobusuke Kishi. It was a fruitful visit, for it paved the way for better understanding between your people and mine. I am returning his visit in the hope and confidence that by so doing I shall be helping in strengthening further the desire of our peoples to live together as good neighbors in this part of the world. It is my aim and desire to lead my people in writing a new chapter in Japan-Philippine relations, one that shall be characterized by friendship and cordiality. It is a happy coincidence that my trip is being made close to the Christmas season, which in my country and the rest of Christendom is the season for reconciliation, for forgiving and forgetting.

Geographical propinquity as well as historical affinity would seem to make it logical, not to say necessary, for our two countries to be on friendly terms. In the first place, both countries are close neighbors, being separated by less than two thousand air miles, a negligible distance in this age of the jet plane. Both of them lie at the crossroads of trade between the East and the West. And both occupy strategic positions in the defense of Southeast Asia and the Pacific basin. These are the inexorable fact of geography which cannot be ignored without doing violence to the realities of our actual situation.

Then, too, historians tell us that Japan-Philippine relations are of long standing. These relations must have started before the coming of the Spaniards because when the latter found Manila in 1571, there was already a small Japanese colony in the locality. And at the outbreak of the war thousands of your countrymen were living in my country to trade and to engage in agriculture and fishing. And because of this association, the impact of your culture has had an enriching influence upon our own.

Thus it can be seen that there are compelling reasons for the maintenance of friendly relations between our two peoples. This overriding consideration in this relationship is our mutual security, for a portentious drama of titanic proportions is unfolding in our midst. By the imperatives of geographical location, your country and mine are within the orbit of that danger. We have active roles to play in this drama. As two of the countries in the Far East that have come under the beneficient influence of democracy, it would be to our mutual interest to keep a singleness of purpose to the end that peace may be preserved in this area. I cherish the hope that my visit will serve that end and will help in ushering in a new era in Japan-Philippine relations—one of peace and friendship that shall grow stronger and stronger each passing year.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library