PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE RURAL BANKERS ASSOCIATION’S 4TH ANNUAL, CONVENTION, SATURDAY MORNING, MAY 18, 1957, AT THE PINES HOTEL, BAGUIO CITY

MR. PRESIDENT, MEMBERS OF THE RURAL BANKERS ASSOCIATION, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

YOUR tenacity in cooperating with the government to alleviate the conditions of the rural folks is very encouraging. Undoubtedly, it is worthy of emulation. Your spirit of sustained efforts to improve the welfare of the rural folks poses a challenge to the government which is your partner in the enterprise of rural amelioration. The government, not wishing to be accused of being recreant in its duties, can do no less than the enthusiasm and vigor that the private sector has shown in the development of rural banking in the economy. Towards this end, the government will continue to provide the proper incentive, encouragement, and environment to the healthy development and growth of rural banks in this country. I want to retiterate that this policy of private rural bankers-government partnership shall be encouraged under the most harmonious conditions which will prove conducive not only to the greater initiative of private businessmen, but also to the expansion of rural banks which will ultimately redound to the economic and social well-being of the people.

When the Nacionalista administration was put into office by an overwhelming majority by the people in 1953, one of the foremost commitments made by the party to the people was the rural amelioration program which was designed to improve the lot of the common tao and bring back the government nearer to him. The development of rural banking was one of the measures designed to bring to fruition a commitment intended to enhance immediately the productive capacity of the rural areas, to improve the social stature of the barrio folk, and to make him feel once more as part and parcel of the government. The rural banking program was mainly designed to improved the productive and earning capacity of the small farmers and tenants in the country. Rural banking is one of the facets by which the government is trying to increase productive efficiency and bring improvement to the rural areas. This is only a part of the concentrated effort to free the rural folks from economic stagnation due to the lack of opportunities and facilities for the development of their faculties, resources, and capacities. Alongside with the development of the rural banks, the government has relentlessly invested big sums of money for fertilizers, portable irrigation pumps, construction of irrigation systems, establishment of agricultural extension service, and improvement in education and rural health. The role of rural banking in the promotion of the well-being of the masses is vital not only because it deals with money, but also because the effects of its operation are more pervasive and long enduring to the man of the barrio. Rural banks now provide the heart throb of economic activity in the rural areas, giving the spark of economic movement and also sustaining the continuous and smooth economic transition of the country.

Concerned over the rural areas’ stultifying stagnancy and its profound implications, the Administration has greatly centered its policies and measures to rural amelioration and development to impart greater meaning and positive attitude to the massive 75 per cent of the population which composes the bigger portion of the dichotomous structure of the economy. Confronted with the vexations problems of poverty, disease, ignorance, and civic inertia, a formidable task looms ahead to crash successfully through this four-headed barrier. Several attempts in the past to reconstruct the area have failed principally because of the failure to recognize, as a formidable weapon, the transformative force of community development through the spirit of self-help. This “sense of belonging” is thus intensely exploited to weld together the community and serve as the springboard for self and community improvement.

The many-sided socio-economic ills in the rural areas have exercised a drag on rural progress. Low per capita farm income has kept the area in perpetual poverty. The causes are rooted in a number of unsatisfactory conditions. Inequitable distribution of landholdings has kept 700,000 out of the 1.6 million individual farmer-tenants subject to exploitative tenancy conditions and unequal share-cropping arrangements. Antiquated cultivation methods employed have produced insufficient remunerative returns. Alien-middlemen control of marketing facilities have enabled them to dictate prices and manipulate the market to exploit the farmer of very limited financial resources, In this respect, capital assumes a vital role. The dearth of credit facilities has thrown the farmers into the vicious clutch of usurious private money lenders. In effect, the impact of lack of credit on tolerable terms has fundamentally distressed the very segment of our population which has long been neglected, ignored, and taken for granted.

Other factors have strained the rural sector. The relatively set ways and low level of education found among the rural population cry out for improved facilities for general education and for vocational training that can help them become more skilled workers and earn larger incomes. The task of overcoming the set ways has assumed massive proportions; as superstitious belief has prevented them from fully appreciating the benefits to be derived from the proper use of modern facilities. Improved health and nutrition should be promoted to raise productivity and improve their economic status.

Against this backdrop of nagging ills, rural banks have been thrown in to tackle the most pressing economic need of the area—provision for adequate amounts of credit at easy terms and within reach and access of the farmers. As financial institutions, rural banks encounter the complicated task of granting credit free from orthodox bias. The stubborn emphasis on property as basis for the extension of credit definitively disqualifies the very segment of the population needed to be alleviated. In most cases, loans and advances have to be based on character alone.

Rural banks have served a two-pronged purpose: that of minimizing the pernicious practice of usury and maximizing production to bring farm income to a fair level. These banks tend to promote a strong agricultural sector to provide basis for progressive industrialization.

The unrelented promotion campaign conducted by the government through the Central Bank of the Philippines has resulted in a tremendous progress in the establishment of a strong system of rural credit designed to meet the short-term credit needs of small borrowers. The year that has just passed has been noteworthy for the rural banks development in this country, not only in the establishment of new rural banks, but also in the magnitude of rural lending operations. Numerous government entities such as the Central Bank, the Philippine National Bank, and the Rehabilitation Finance Corporation continued to assist the numerous rural banks through the rediscounting of commercial securities and the subscription to the capital stock which greatly bolstered their lending capacity. As of today there are 84 rural banks in operation all over the country, 37 of which were organized during 1956. At present there are 49 banks accepting current account deposits. In addition to these rural banks now in operation, 31 other rural banks have been authorized by the Monetary Board to operate as of April 10, 1957, but which have not started actual operation. Applications to establish rural banks have been continuously received by the Central Bank from other groups of investors.

The present geographical pattern of the rural banking system is mostly concentrated in Luzon. Without hampering the further growth of these banks in this area, the government will try to encourage the establishment of more rural banks in the Visayas and Mindanao regions which, heretofore, have utterly lacked the banking facilities that could help the people improve their economic lot. Rural bank lending during 1956 can also be pointed out with great pride. Total loans granted by the rural banking system aggregated more than ₱18 million as compared to ₱6.7 million in 1953. The bulk of these loans went to agriculture, accounting for as much as P11.7 million during the year. A healthy feature of this growth in the lending operation of rural banks is that most of the loans were for small amounts, generally not more than ₱500.00. This candidly points out the fact that rural banks, on the overall, have been serving the purpose for which they have been created. It is likewise worthy to note that the institution of rural banking has been slowly accepted by rural bankers as part of their economic life. Greater confidence and reliance on these banking institutions will further boost the business of the private entrepreneur and at the same time help the rural folks attain their dream of economic advancement. The progress so far made by the rural banks, has been heavily promoted by the government not only by means of financial assistance but also by the extension of a program of rigorous training and technical guidance of bank personnel, through farm advisory service and by periodic check-up and supervision by the Central Bank. Modern banking practice as observed in other countries where more advance and well developed rural banking techniques exist, has been made in integral part of the training program of bank personnel. In this connection, the supervisory echelon of rural banks has been advised to give primary consideration to the character and capacity of the borrower rather than to the adequacy of the security covering the loan.

I wish to reiterate my desire to give the program for rural advancement sustained emphasis and to continue the efforts that my predecessor has effectively exerted in bringing the program to more concrete and tangible terms. My critics and political detractors notwithstanding, I shall sustain the policy of the Administration of assigning top priority to the amelioration of the economic and social status of the inhabitants of the rural regions, thereby making them more conscious of the development and well-being of the nation. Rural development has attained a dynamic character that is sweeping the whole country side, awakening the people from their long lethargy to the opportunities of advancement in the form of higher income, better education, and an improved standard of living. It is the expectation of the Administration, that these areas, through the energizing effect of the rural banks, will soon be progressive and self-sustaining communities with people who are happy, contented, and imbued with greater civic consciousness. There will be no let-up in the government’s effort to push through this program which has been successfully started by the late President Magsaysay and which has gained the acceptance of all the people of the country.

The spirit of self-help has taken root among the barrio people. Local management of the rural banks has aroused the pride and awareness of the community in these banks. The rural bank in many communities today has become the symbol of their combined effort—pooled savings and untiring devotion to improve the community. The government in partnership with private enterprise can only do so much for the barrio people. By necessity, they must also help themselves. The rural banks must never feel that they are self-sufficient unto themselves. On the contrary, the rural banking business is only a piece of the overall program, a part of the general economic development of the nation. It is compelling that for the rural banking business to succeed, some close working relationship between the managers of the bank representing the private enterprise and the government must exist at all times. It is incumbent, therefore, upon the former group to support and follow the government policies, especially those dealing primarily with credit and monetary stability so that we may spread the maximum good to the greatest number of beneficiaries. The government, therefore, would expect the rural banks to forge ahead with greater vision, zeal, and interest and in closer cooperation with government policies.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library