PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE 49TH COMMENCEMENT EXERCISES OF THE PHILIPPINE NORMAL COLLEGE, SATURDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 30

PRESIDENT NAVAL, MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASS, LADIES AND GENTLMEN:

IT is with great pleasure that I have come in response to your invitation to participate in this year’s commencement exercises as your guest speaker. At the outset allow me to congratulate the graduates on the happy termination of their studies in preparation for their chosen career. This occasion takes my mind back to the days when I myself was a classroom teacher in my home province of Bohol, where I taught for a few years. As I look back wistfully to that pleasant experience of mine in the days of my youth, I realize more and more the importance of the role which the teacher plays in our democratice society. It goes without saying that democracy thrives best where there is an enlightened and militant public opinion. Since it is the school which is charged with the task of enlightening the people and of teaching them about their rights and obligations as citizens, this social agency has a great deal to do with the moulding of public opinion; so it occupies a strategic position in our social structure. So strong is the influence of the school that our national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, referred to it as the book in which is written the future of the nations. And since it is the teacher who determines what the school will be like, it follows that he is the central figure in the writing of that book.

I am fully aware of the recent expansion of the sphere of activity ofthe Filipino teacher. Whereas, in our days the teacher devoted practically all of his time to the teaching of children, today he has to attend to other duties which, although important, are not germane to the traditional function of the teacher. Society is making heavy demands on his time and energy. He is called upon to serve during emergencies like fires, floods, volcanic eruptions, and outbreaks of epidemics. He is called upon during election time to see that the real voice of the people in the choice of officials who are to hold the reins of the government is correctly and honestly registered. Through the giving of lectures and in other ways he helps in the collection of taxes. Then, too, under the community school idea, the teacher is expected to be a social leader. He goes about among the people in community and stimulates them to study their own problems and work out their own solutions in order that the community will become cleaner and more healthful and the people’s lives richer and more abundant. He acts as a catalyzer of community action, utilizing group dynamics in the attainment of carefully defined goals.

In other words, the competencies which a teacher these days must posses in order to succeed have greatly increased because he is no longer merely a mentor and guide of children but also a leader of adults in community improvement. However, the Philippine Normal College, as an institution for the preparation of teachers, has successfully developed these competencies in you, graduates, during your four years of study so that you can now face thefuture with confidence.

And so, as you prepare to leave the halls of your alma mater to perform the delicate task which society has assigned to you, let me ask you to give your attention for a’ moment to a consideration of a vital question; namely, the question of how education may be used to help insure our national security and survival. This is an important question at this time because there are indications pointing to the existence of forces within and without which pose a threat to the safety and permanence of the democarcy we have set up in this country. It is fortunate that self-preservation is one of the most powerful urges of man. It is also fortunate that what is true of the individual in this regard is likewise true of the whole nation. The Filipino people today constitute a nation which is fully conscious of its collective personality and justly proud of its common history and traditions. It is our fondest hope that as a people we shall be able to weather the storms which endanger our national existence.

The determination of our people to lead an independent life was amply shown during our more than three centuries of association with Spain when on more than one occasion we made manifest our desire to be on our own. The revolts led by Dagohoy, Tamblot, Diego Silang and others and particularly the Philippine revolution in 1896 are clear evidences of the existence of this desire. We demonstrated it during the American regime when in the halls of the United States Congress as well as directly before the American people our national leaders asserted in no uncertain terms our right to a place in the council of the free nations of the world. And we clearly proved it during the Japanese occupation when we rejected serious overtures which were made to win us over into the orbit of the much-vaunted co-prosperity sphere. It is to the everlasting credit of the Filipino people that we emerged from these trying experiences more united and more determined than ever to be our own masters.

Now that we are an independent nation, with freedom to shape our own destiny as a people, it behooves us to see to it that our young Republic, which was born amidst the throes of human suffering and which we have so tenderly nurtured these recent years, shall live and endure. As the beneficiaries of the relentless struggles and the untold sacrifices of our forefathers, it is the duty of the present generation to keep the torch of liberty aflame and to pass it on, with even greater brilliance, to our children and our children’s children.

In this very important mission, our schools have a definite role to play. In the first place, our institutions of learning should help develop in our children and adults a deep and abiding love of country. Call it nationalism or patriotism as you wish, but we have to develop and nurture it. For a country whose people profess no love for it may be likened to a mother who is so unfortunate as to have ungrateful children who are indifferent to her welfare and who, in her hour of need, may leave her to her fate. We want our people to be so closely attached to the land in which they first saw the light of day that they will do everything in their power, even to the extent of making the supreme sacrifices, to defend it against all possible dangers.

This is not to say that internationalism has no place in our educational program. It has, for in this age of the jet plane and of the atom bomb, distance has been all but annihilated and the world is being converted into one community. As a matter of fact, we are a member of the United Nations organization. But it is to be expected that a Filipino should love his own country and people more than he should love any other country and people. And so we should teach in our schools love of country and appreciation of its ideals, traditions, and culture without in any way showing lack of respect for the cutlure of other peoples.

In the second place, our schools need to work for greater economic competence and self-sufficiency on the part of our people, for a contented and prosperous citizenry is not likely to lend aid and comfort to any move designed to weaken the foundations of our national structure. No prosperous citizen would be likely to exchange his comfortable present life for one which is uncertain or even unknown and untried. If we were to make a social and economic survey of present-day conditions in this country, we would find that there is much to improve. The methods of work and the standards of living of the masses of our people, particularly in the rural areas, are loudly crying for remedial measures. The teachers of the public schools deserve much credit for going out of their way to help themselves. And, of course, the Government has been doing its part to improve the welfare of the masses. The building of roads to facilitate travel and the transportation of the farmers’ products, the construction of inexpensive homes for low-salaried employees, the introduction of more effective methods of farming, and the provision of safe drinking water are but a few of the things the present Administration is doing in its desire to ameliorate the living conditions of the common man.

It is with a view to improving the economic condition of our people that this Administration has been giving much encouragement to our vocational schools. In the belief that an educated man must be able to pull his own weight in society, that parasitism is a social evil which should be rooted out, we are giving our young men and women every opportunity to get the training they need in order to be able to add to the productive capacity of our country and at the same time have an honest means of livelihood. It has been shown that there is a close relation between the degree of education of a people and the living standards they maintain. For instance, Columbia in South America is rich in natural resources. Its soil is fertile. It has rich oil deposits. It has extensive forests. And its climate is almost perfect. But because the people lack the technical training needed to develop the country’s natural resources, the standard of living in that country is quite low. On the other hand, there is Denmark, which a hundred years ago was one of the poorest countries in Europe. Much of its soil is sandy. It has a short growing season. But its people have now attained a high level of education. Its workers possess superior technical training. The result is that Denmark has a high standard of living, and the per capita income of its people is one of the highest in the world.

It is a deplorable fact that the earning power of a great portion of our people is very low; as a matter of fact, it is one of the lowest in the world. Certainly, something must be done to improve this condition. The encouragement being given by the Administration to the development of home industries is one way of helping our people to increase their earnings and thus raise their standards of living. In consonance with this policy, training centers were organized by the Bureau of Public Schools in different parts of the country for the training of teachers and other persons who were interested in learning how to make useful articles which can be exchanged for cash. With proper organization so that the marketing of the finished products can proceed in an efficient and orderly manner, it should be possible to make these home industries contribute toward our economic prosperity. And I repeat: economic prosperity is a great asset toward national stability.

Lastly, we need to strengthen the character of our people. It is a sad fact that on every hand we hear disturbing comments regarding the decline of the moral standards of our people since the last war. And only recently we read reports in the papers about the misbehavior of young men of tender age who have committed acts bordering on criminality. This unfortunate behavior is a symptom of a malady that afflicts our social fabric and vitally concerns all of us. We cannot dismiss the matter with a shrug of the shoulder’s and say it is none of our business. It is our business because we are convinced that the surest guarantee for national strength and survival is sterling character. We need to develop in our children a deep appreciation of the meaning and value of democracy, not only as a form of government but also as a way of life. Then, too, we must have discipline. Discipline is not incompatible with democracy. We often associate freedom with democracy and we say that there can be no democracy without freedom. The freedom that is meant here, however, is freedom within the law—that is, freedom to do what is right. Irresponsible freedom will only lead to anarchy and chaos.

Ladies and gentlemen, in the midst of seemingly conflicting concepts as to what constitute the good life, we need to look to the eternal verities, those bedrock principles which from time out of mind have served as the mainsprings of human conduct—honesty, truthfulness, respect for authority, obedience to law, and consideration of the rights of others. These are safe guides for us today as they will be safe guides until time shall be no more.

To conclude: if education is to serve as a means of insuring national survival, it should work for the development of sane nationalism, economic competence, and sterling character. But of the three, character is the most important, for the most precious wealth any nation can have is a strong and upright citizenry which is ever loyal and devoted to the welfare of the country. Our constitution requires all schools to develop, among others, moral character, personal discipline, and civic conscience. Indeed, the first duty of the teacher is not to impart knowledge to his students but rather to build character. The nature of this task raises the level of his calling above that of a mere occupation. It is even higher than a profession: it is a mission.

I close with the words of the famous American orator, Daniel Webster: “If we work upon marble, it will perish; if we work upon brass, time will efface it; if we rear temples, they will crumble into dust; but if we work upon immortal minds, if we imbue them with principles, with the just fear of God and love of our fellowmen, we engrave on those tablets something which will brighten to all eternity.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library