Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Manila Rotary Club

[Delivered at Manila Hotel on July 2, 1959]

I THANK you for the opportunity to address this gathering of distinguished businessmen and civic leaders and members of the Manila Rotary Club. I shall make use of this worthy occasion to expound on the action measures which my Administration believes are necessary to uplift the nation from pressing economic problems. This uplifting is our common responsibility, requiring the utmost understanding and cooperation of government officials and private individuals alike. We all belong to one nation, and if we do not stand by her in moments of crisis, then we all have to fall with her.

With this in mind, I present to you the economic stabilization program of my Administration. A frank appraisal of the situation today should convince us of the urgency to act quickly if we are to avert the danger that our problems grow to unmanageable proportions.

The two most critical problems facing us today are those of inflation and low international reserve. They have arisen as a consequence of rapid economic development characterized by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. That we have indeed made economic progress is attested by the rise of real per capita income from ₱308 in 1953 to P377 in 1958.

While these two pressing problems of inflation and low international reserve are common to underdeveloped countries today, it is, however, still true that unless checked, they will nullify the gains we have struggled hard to achieved. Retail prices of selected consumer commodities in Manila already stand 6.6 per cent higher than in 1955. Of course world inflation cannot fail to affect the Philippines because no ‘country now can live in an economic vacuum whether it likes or not. The peso is now worth only 93.8 per cent of its 1955 value. Our international reserve has been hovering around $150 million for the past year and a half now. If the drain on our foreign exchange resources and the inflationary pressure should be allowed to go unchecked, we may have to pay later a much heavier sacrifice than what is needed now to prevent or forestall it.

These two economic problems facing us have originated from expansionary expenditures from both the public and the private sectors of the national economy. To satisfy the aspirations of our people for economic and social development, public and private credit have been utilized to finance investment projects. Increased spending has been made possible, therefore, not so much from current savings as from the growth of money supply. Since the rise of national production cannot keep pace with the flow of expenditures, prices have surged upwards, and the demand for imports have continued to press on our foreign exchange resources.

The time has therefore come to make decisive moves to stabilize our economy. We can no longer afford to allow these unbalancing forces to distort and even to threaten our economic progress. Realizing the urgency of immediate remedies, this administration has proposed corrective measures to arrest the rising tide of inflation and the drain of our international reserve.

To curtail public expenditures, the Five-Year Fiscal Year Plan of the Administration has been revised downwards. In particular, restraints have been imposed on public credit. Programmed public borrowing now stands as follows: FY 1959—₱83.7 million; FY 1960—₱126.2 imillion; FY 1961— ₱133.2 million; FY 1962—₱135.7 million; and FY 1963—₱79.6 million. The use of public debt to finance economic development has been limited to the most essential projects, or those which has been started and those which it would be wasteful to abandon. In addition, bond financing will increasingly tap the savings of the economy which will not be inflationary. Our fiscal stabilization policies have also included measures to raise more revenues through a more equitable tax program based on capacity to pay.

The national budget has been increasingly criticized every year. We should realize, however, that some increases in expenditures are mandatory and normal for a nation that is undergoing economic and social development. The budget for a child one year old would not be sufficient when it is grown to be a man. Similarly our budget in 1946 when we were one year old as a republic would be far from sufficient now that we are 14 year-old as a republic with phenomenal growth achieved in all aspects of our independent national life. These expenditures are the costs of providing our people, especially in the rural areas, with the services and facilities for a better life. The Budget primarily designed to meet the expanding governmental functions of the State, has also been oriented to harness the economic potential of our country.

Complementing fiscal stabilization policies are monetary measures to restraint private credit. The rediscount rate of commercial banks have been successfully raised from 2% in 1957 to 6-1/2% starting February this year; more selective rediscounting is implemented. Available data indicate that banks have felt the impact of these measures. Their borrowings from the Central Bank declined from ₱20 million

last January to ₱13 million the following month. The bulk of Central Bank loans to commercial banks in the past year were for productive purposes.

Reserve requirements against commercial bank deposits were also hiked from 18 per cent to 21 per cent early this year. Furthermore, a selective credit system has been enforced on the loan operations of banks. Credit for essential purposes has thereby been facilitated, while credit for nonessential projects has been restricted.

To check the origin of domestic inflation and the drain on our international reserve, the Administration has proposed a margin over the selling rate of foreign exchange. The margin is expected to exert a deflationary impact on money supply so as to bring about a balance between our demand for, and supply of, goods and services. At the same time, the margin proceeds will provide the government with funds which shall be used to retire a part of the public debt, as well as to augment the Securities Stabilization Fund, the Account to Secure the Coinage, and to finance social and economic projects in rural areas. The amount made available to the General Fund would go a long way towards assuring accelerated development within the framework of monetary stability. In short it will stabilize our currency, arrest or minimize inflationary pressure and stabilize the fiscal position of the government by balancing government expenditures with income.

The complex of measures, both fiscal and monetary, in the fields of tax collection, credit restraint, and international transactions, which constitute our stabilization program, should enable our country to muster strength for the next great leap into industrialization free of controls with the private sector given the full play in its development. In other words, like an athlete preparing for the dash forward, we shall have to coil before the spring.

Our stabilization program will eventually result in a substantial relaxation of economic controls in three or four years and finally bring the nation back to the more normal operations of a free market economy. The scheme of gradual decontrol envisioned with the success of the stabiliza­tion program is simple. In the first year, all commodities falling under the “Essential Consumer” category of the Central Bank classification will be added to the present “Decontrolled” category. In the second year, about 20 per cent of the “Essential Producers” category will be decontrolled, with another 35 per cent to follow in the third year. In the fourth year the remaining essential producer goods, together with 25 per cent of the semi-essential producer goods, will be decontrolled. Thus, in the fourth year, all essential producers and essential consumers goods and about one-fourth of the semi-essential producers imports will be decontrolled. However, general licensing of foreign exchange for non-essential producers and consumers capital accounts and invisibles would continue but not for long in order to insure the channeling of resources to productive enterprises.

Licensing for capital accounts will remain also not for long, as their unregulated transfer abroad may result in another large and immediate drop in the reserve on account of the existence of a large reservoir of blocked funds. If the stabilization program is successful as I hope by the 4th or 5th year, we should be able to remove the import controls and rely solely on regulation by the tariff. Starting January 1, 1962, the tariff charge on U. S. goods, which have traditionally comprised the bulk of our imports will be 75% of the normal tariff. At this level, we may expect the tariff to become usable as a normal and effective weapon of economic order.

I must emphasize that the above decontrol scheme is possible only if the tariff will be fully used and if we avail of foreign loans or external assistance.

Concurrent with the gradual decontrol program, credit policies will also be liberalized to allow the private sector a fuller development under conditions of greater stability and freedom. At the same time during this period the Government can pursue an accelerated economic development program without the danger of a resurgence of inflationary pressures inasmuch as there would be available new non-inflationary financing for such outlays. Thus, the more aggressive government program will more than offset whatever hardships these stabilization measures have caused the masses in the form of greater social benefits and greater employment.

To supplement our domestic resources we shall have to increasingly tap sources of foreign credit. During my visit to the United” States in 1958, I was able to secure a substantial sum of such credits. With the recent steps have taken to bring about internal stability in our economy, we can hope that more credits will be forthcoming, since we have demonstrated our willingness and capacity to take the necessary, if unpalatable, measures to keep our economic house in order. Nationalism means that we have the pride to be relatively self-reliant and self-sufficient to stand on our own feet and paddle our own canoe and be a contributing member of the great community of free nations.

There still remains one sizable and immediate possibility of foreign exchange receipts which should be pressed right away. I refer to the negotiation and final liquidation of our unsettled “omnibus” claims on the United States. Recently, the just American people and government finally recognized one of those claims, the so-called gold devaluation claims, and appropriated funds to pay it. I have faith in the sense of justice of the American people so many times demonstrated in the past, that I can hopefully look forward to the eventual settlement of all these claims to the satisfaction of both countries. We received from Uncle Sam the grant of independence; we received generous aid to rebuild our country from under the wreck and ruin of the last war. This time I am certain America will give us justice.

My friends, we are in an exhilarating but crucial period of our national existence. We are grappling with serious, often perplexing, problems inherent in a young and developing nation. We know that the solution of these problems necessarily entails sacrifices of some form or another. There is no royal road to national success. But history eloquently attests to the fact that the Filipinos with their spirit of sacrifices have survived through four centuries of bondage, and with the instrumentality of freedom the same spirit of sacrifice will carry us through new and thrilling saga of growth, of achievement, of success and happiness.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech before the Manila Rotary Club at the Manila Hotel on July 2, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (26) , 4808-4812.