MY FRIENDS:

I ALWAYS find the time, in spite of the busy schedule that Presidents usually have, to attend ceremonies such as this in order to launch a worthy and worthwhile fund campaign. My heart bleeds, as yours must also, for the more unfortunate among us. And so, we are gathered here for the noble purpose of starting officially the fund campaign intended to strengthen further our efforts to curb that dreaded disease of cerebral palsy.

Sponsored by the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks since five years ago, our society has shown special and extraordinary concern for the Cerebral Palsy Project. I say special and extraordinary concern because the victims of cerebral palsy are mostly children whose usefulness to society and to themselves will forever be lost if nothing is done to cure their affliction. No sight is more heart-rending and nothing more tragic than that of a small child who is saddled with grief and the pain of his affliction because he has been temporarily deprived of the use of his limbs or because he is mentally retarded.

Statistics show that there are about 40,000 such children in the Philippines today. The records also show that some 1,400 babies are born every year suffering from this disease thereby swelling the number of the afflicted annually. These children if not treated and cured will remain as permanent burdens to their parents and to the community as a whole. On the other hand successful treatment would convert them into happy and useful citizens, definite assets to themselves and to their country as well.

This Cerebral Palsy Project of the Elks Club is a truly magnificent example of Philippine-American cooperation. Started only half a decade ago, the project has been able to establish complete clinic in the National Orthopedic Hospital Compound in Mandaluyong, Rizal, and only last year a branch clinic in Iloilo to serve the West Visayas region. Hundreds of patients have been and are still being treated in these clinics. Likewise, it has been found advisable to send Filipino doctors abroad to specialize in the treatment of this affliction.

I want to mention here also that I am impressed with the efficiency and dedication to duty with which the Elks Cerebral Palsy Project has been conducted. I understand that only five per cent of the project’s budget goes into administration and only two and two-thirds per cent for expenses for the fund campaign. And the balance of 65 per cent goes into actual treatment and care of the beneficiaries directly; 10 per cent for supplies and equipment; training of especialists, 8 per cent; maintenance and repair, four and two-thirds per cent; and finally educational campaign, four and two-thirds per cent.

This amazing financial record in minimum overhead expenses is something that should be emulated by other civic and charitable organizations engaged in projects that depend for their financial support from the contributing public.

To the people behind the Elks Cerebral Palsy Project, therefore, I say today, I am proud of your achievements and I am truly happy you are doing this kind of work in my country and for my people.

I now call upon all residents of the Philippines, be they Filipinos or aliens, all businessmen and civic groups, all government officials on the national, provincial, and municipal levels, all employees in the public service or in private enterprises, to give what they can and extend all the cooperation necessary to make this 1961 Educational and Fund Campaign of the Elks Cerebral Palsy Project a complete success.

I hereby declare the 1961 Educational and Fund Campaign of the Elks Cerebral Palsy Project officially open and I shall now hand my own personal contribution to your chairman.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the kick-off ceremonies of the Cerebral Palsy 1961 Fund Campaign. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(22) , 4082-4083.