PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE U. P. WRITERS’ CLUB, FACULTY MEMBERS AND STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES, NOVEMBER 7, 1957

PRESIDENT VIRATA, FACULTY MEMBERS AND STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES, MY FRIENDS:

I AM exceedingly happy for this rare privilege accorded me by the University of the Philippines through the initiative of the U. P. Writers’ Club to address you, the cream of the crop of our youth, who in the prophetic words of Rizal are “the fair hope of the Fatherland.”

Although I have not been fortunate to be an alumnus of the state university, I am proud to say that my only daughter is an alumna, and her husband is an alumnus, of this great university. To this I may add, I have advisers most of whom are U. P. alumni. I can therefore say that in a manner of speaking, my heart and my mind are U. P. conditioned like yours.

At the outset, I wish to restate categorically that the Administration has, but definitely, an economic and social development program, otherwise known as the Five-Year Fiscal Plan. This program was first announced by the late President Magsaysay on March 20, 1954. As everyone knows, this plan not being inflexible is being updated periodically on the basis of past performance, changing conditions, and prospects of further advancement. This is the economic and social development program which I am vigorously implementing through all the government agencies concerned. I shall discuss with you today not only the progress of our economic development, but, what is more important, the policies that we should adopt in the light of the shifting factors affecting our economic development.

It is timely that we make a sober stock-taking of our economy and its current problems. Thus, we may gain the proper perspective from which to view the work still to be done and chart the course of our future policies if the people so will after November 12 that I be worthy to continue to hold the highest office of the land.

When the Nacionalista Party took over the administration, it was committed to a development program of strengthening and broadening the base of our economic activities in order that a great number of our people could be employed in productive enterprises sufficiently diversified to supply our basic necessities and to raise the income of our people. It was with a conviction in mind that the agricultural economic system on which we had always depended could not support a program of an accelerated development, much less raise our depressed standards of living in the face of a rapidly growing population, that the Administration steered the country into the arduous but necessary path towards a “dynamic and balanced agro-industrial society.”

The past few years were ones of record achievements. We have come a long way from 1953. The record shows our national income increased at a steady rate from ₱7 billion in 1953 to ₱8.3 billion at the end of 1956. All important sectors of the economy have advanced in this respect; agricultural income rising from ₱3 billion to ₱3.3 billion; mining from only ₱107 million to ₱141 million; and manufacturing registering a spectacular surge from ₱834 million to ₱1.2 billion. The greater flow today of income from construction, trade, transportation, and communications activity is added testimony that we have travelled a long and vigorous way from the ruins of war. It is not surprising then that a recent United Nations report has described the Philippines as having the highest record of production in this part of the world during the past ten years.

Population has expanded by approximately 6 per cent since 1953, from 21.2 million to our present 22.5 million. Yet, in spite of the fact that we have 1.3 million more people today than in 1953, real income per person has gone up from ₱322 to ₱361, a 12 per cent improvement.

Since 1953, more than 6,197 factories have been established, many of which are producing commodities which we had to import in the past. A milestone and significant precondition to economic development has just been completed—the huge Ambuklao Hydroelectric Plant. Another great source of power, the Binga Hydroelectric Plant, is to be completed. Altogether, our eight hydroelectric projects form a base of power supply for industries now in operation, or which may be set up in the future and multiply the industrial potential of our country.

During the past four years we have seen the total goods and services produced domestically increase in real terms by 17.4 per cent. This development was generated by a phenomenal expansion of 13 per cent in mining, 47 per cent in manufacturing, and 25 per cent in agriculture. We also witnessed the establishment of almost 533 “new and necessary” industries granted tax-exemption privileges by the government under Republic Act 901, together with the expansion of old industries. Manufacturing employment also rose by 7 per cent during this period of progression.

Government institutions like the RFC, the PNB, and the ACCFA expanded the area of their operations to facilitate the channeling of the savings of the economy to production. Complementarily, private banks not only increased their respective volumes of business, but also their numbers and branches.

The fact that the Philippines is still far from producing all the needs of the country underscores the continuing importance of foreign trade to the economy. There are certain consumer goods which we cannot now produce or hope to produce in the near future, that are nevertheless basic to maintain standards of living and public health. Among these are medicines and certain essential foodstuffs . We also have to import machinery and some of the raw materials required by our domestic industries.

Since, however, our purchasing power abroad is limited by the size of our export earnings and our international reserve, the foreign exchange available to us from these two sources must be used as judiciously as possible to secure the maximum benefit to the economy. That we have succeeded to a certain extent in this can be gathered from the specific economic gains previously cited and the steady change in the pattern of our imports since 1949 when the government undertook to manage the country’s foreign exchange resources directly.

Of our total imports in 1949, 47 per cent comprised consumer commodities, a large portion of which represented luxury items and non-essentials; while capital goods and raw materials for industry made up the remaining 53 per cent. Today, only 23 per cent of our imports are consumer items, a large part of them being essential commodities. Industrial goods, on the other hand, comprise 77 per cent of total imports, a concrete evidence of the strong emphasis we have placed on industrialization.

Another favorable trend is exhibited in the decline of imports from ₱1.2 billion in 1949 to ₱1 billion in 1956 while our exports expanded from ₱508 million to ₱902 million. We also find that Philippine trade has diversified considerably since 1949. In that year almost 78 per cent of our total trade was centered on one country, the United States. Today, while our total trade has expanded from ₱1.7 billion in 1949 to ₱1.9 billion, we now channel 41 per cent of it to Europe, Central and South America, and some Asian countries. This geographical broadening of our trade is an encouraging sign of growing stability and lessened dependence on a single country as the source of our imports and the market for our exports.

In the main, our policy and efforts have been guided by the economic plan adopted at the start of the Nacionalista Administration which the late President Magsaysay announced on March 20, 1954, updated by the National Economic Council on January 3, 1957. The Administration fully realized that the problem of mobilizing the resources necessary to bring about the accelerated development was a difficult and complex task, but nevertheless, a task that had to be done if the country was to have an economic independence compatible with its political sovereignty. In the attainment of this objective the Administration has resorted to the use of national credit to cover the inevitable gap inherent in our underdeveloped country between the growth of output and voluntary savings and the rise in over-all demand generated by consumption and development expenditure. The development rate of the magnitude experienced in this country cannot, however, but unleash inflationary pressures, and a major task of the Administration had been to prevent such pressures from jeopardizing its development efforts and living standards of the masses. Yet, in spite of the inflationary implications of the program, domestic prices have been kept within reasonable levels up to 1956. For instance, using 1955 prices as a point of reference, the consumer price index of Manila, which reflects a consolidation of prices for food, clothing, house-rent, fuel, light, water, and several other consumption items, displayed relative stability. In 1949 the index was 101.6 points, and by 1956 it had settled down to 102.7 points after slipping down from the 1952 peak of 106.1 points. Such a phenomenon in prices, despite the existence of inflationary stresses, can only be explained by the drain in our foreign exchange reserves. In other words, inflation has not evidenced itself in terms of sharp domestic price increases, since the added demand generated by development expenditures were partially satisfied by increased supply of imports.

Like any other country undergoing development, we have paid the price of progress to a higher level of domestic productivity at some sacrifice to our international resources, especially without having resorted to substantial foreign assistance. The question of why our reserve has continued to decline in spite of the institution of controls finds an answer in the increasing tempo of development imports over the past years. The reserve has not been dissipated. The pattern of importation cited earlier clearly shows that it has been increasingly put to use to purchase the machinery and the tools of our industrialization without which no satisfactory solution to the problems of poverty and unemployment in our country would ever be possible. In addition, the reserve has also been used to import essential consumer items to stabilize domestic prices. However, we cannot continue to draw upon our dwindling reserve indefinitely at the present pace if the international value of the peso is not to be undermined and our development program to be completely set back at its crucial stage.

Complicating our problem of reserves are the inflationary pressures generated abroad which are reflected in a general rise of import costs of the industrial and consumer goods that we buy from foreign countries. For the same volume of imports, we now have to pay more dollars than we did last year.

In view of the developments abroad and the problems inherent to our economic progress at home, we must retrench and consolidate our resources so that the gains we have achieved will not be jeopardized. We must admit that we are now confronted with certain problems which are a natural consequence of our unprecedented growth during the last few years, and of our compelling desire to keep on growing. However, we must also remember that while these problems exist, our economy is today better balanced and, in physical terms, is in a better position to meet them domestically, and also to attract foreign assistance in the form of long-term loans and new investments.

Economic problems are not solved in a day, and foreign assistance unfortunately does not jump at the immediate back of opportunity. We must therefore face the fact that we shall have to resort to our own devices for a time if we are to continue our development. It is clear that we cannot continue to draw on our international reserve at the present rate. This will have to be slackened to a point where our exports may possibly begin to pay for our basic import demands. But a slackening for a time of our consumption of dollars would mean either cutting down our imports of machinery and raw materials—or sacrificing more of our consumer imports in favor of the industrials. The cause of economic progress constrains us to take the latter course, even while efforts are now being exerted to explore sources of new capital from abroad. There is no other road to economic development than a compulsory rise in the share of the national income which is withheld from consumption and devoted, instead, to investment. This implies a policy of voluntary austerity on the part of our people since we are a democratic nation.

However, we understand how difficult it is in a free and democratic economy to persuade people even for a short period of time to give up the level of consumption to which they have long been accustomed—in exchange for the prospects of a brighter future. The cultural and social resistances to be overcome are tremendous. Yet I know that there is an inherent reasonableness and love of country in our people, and if they fully understand the issues they will be willing to close ranks for this common cause.

On the domestic side, the Administration has tried to counteract the prevailing situation fraught with considerable inflationary potential by tightening its credit, fiscal, and import policies, notwithstanding the effect this would have on certain groups and interests during this election year. The credit policy we pursued was one of general restraint without prejudice to the function and progress of essential productive sectors of the economy. During the early part of the year, our credit policy intensified previous selective control policies directed to meet the genuine requirements of trade and industry while ruling out the use of credit for non-productive and speculative activities.

So far, I have elaborated on what has been accomplished and what has taken place in our economy in recent months. The question that now poses itself is: What would be the direction of the policies we should now adopt in the light of the shift in the underlying factors of our development?

If we are to sustain our economic progress without retrogressing into stagnation, I would like to call for your full cooperation in adhering to the following guiding principles for action:

1. Self-sufficiency in primary foodstuffs.

We must attain self-sufficiency at least in the basic foods, especially in staple crops like rice and corn. Blessed with vast expanses of fertile land, we have the basic means to stop the recurring food shortages which the country is periodically forced to satisfy through importation.

2. The fuller utilization of our natural resources in economic development.

Our main hope of providing more employment to our people lies in the fuller utilization of our abundant natural resources. It is essential that existing as well as new industries make greater use of our available raw materials and develop those that can be produced locally. We should, therefore, give continued emphasis to industries and enterprises that will utilize more of our available materials and resources, as against those which are largely dependent on imported raw materials.

3. The continued stabilization of the fiscal position of the Government. We should pursue vigorously the study of the aspects of our fiscal organization with a view to having our government revenues continuously meet the increasing demands and requirements of public service. We must finance the total government sector by a sound and judicious balance between taxation and public borrowings, restricting the use of government bonds to high priority public projects.

4. More redirection of available credit resources to immediately productive enterprises.

We must direct all our credit resources to enterprises that are immediately productive and could bring into the market within a short time goods needed by our people. In this way, the demand generated by our development projects will be mopped up and the inflationary pressures will be minimized.

5. Expansion of our exports.

We must seek to boost our dollar earnings by exploring means of expanding the volume and variety of our exports as well as their markets abroad.

6. Increased domestic processing of local raw materials. The approach most likely to yield immediate results in augmenting the foreign exchange earnings and work opportunities of the country lies in more domestic processing of local raw materials whose production or extraction has already undergone some development. Generally these materials for local manufacturing will emancipate the Philippines from being a mere raw-material exporting country.

7. More efficient utilization of our foreign resources.

We must try to get the optimum advantage out of our limited foreign exchange resources by directing their usage to those industries that could contribute most to our national income. Over-crowding in many industries needing imported capital equipment, investing in many lines of production not so basic to our development, and importation of non-essential consumption goods are unnecessary drains on our foreign exchange.

8. Greater consumption of locally produced goods.

We must try to use more locally produced items instead of those imported from abroad. We must help our own manufacturers by channeling more and more of our demands towards locally manufactured goods and evidencing pride in our own products.

9. Attraction of foreign investments, assistance, and financing.

We must concretize our thinking on our foreign investment policy and laws and strive to keep the proper investment climate of our country in order to attract bona-fide foreign investors.

10. Full exploitation of foreign trade instruments other than controls.

We must fully utilize the instruments of trade diplomacy open to use in the form of trade agreements and intergovernmental financial arrangements in order to secure the best markets and terms for our trade, together with the initiation of measures which would lead to a gradual lifting of our own controls and restrictions.

My Friends: I have presented before you the true picture of the state of our economy. I have shown you what the Administration has done to promote our economic development by implementing an economic program, and what more can be done to bring about the fulfillment of the dream of every Filipino, which is to make our people happy, prosperous, and progressive.

You know that our economic strides have been made possible by this Administration which has dedicated itself to the service of the country. I am sure that you all would like the progress we have achieved to continue unimpeded until we have reached the pinnacle of our aspirations. We cannot afford to stand still. We cannot retrogress. We should keep in power the Nacionalista Administration, the Administration which has served the people faithfully and well.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library