Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Seminar on the Economic Development of Mindanao and Sulu

[Delivered at Xavier University, Cagayan de Oro City, January 31, 1959]

IT IS a special pleasure for me to be with you this afternoon to open your seminar on the Economic Development of Mindanao and Sulu.

I have always believed that the initiative and the motive power for fulfilling the promise latent in our country’s resources must come primarily from the people themselves. This gathering demonstrates the hopeful fact that in Mindanao, the people are awake to the opportunities and are equal to the challenge of their own tremendous potential.

The rest of the country must be watching your efforts with eager anticipation. Mindanao is the second largest island in the archipelago and its three-and-a-half million people comprise fully one-seventh of our total population. The development and prosperity of so large segment of the nation cannot but give a massive boost to the economic well-being of the whole country.

In Mindanao we find a virtual storehouse of wealth for the country. This island is replete with natural resources which exist not only in great abundance but also in great diversity. The region is blessed with a rich soil and a moderate climate and, with vast territory it encompasses. Mindanao can be a veritable dynamo of progress.

The topography of Mindano makes it conducive to a variety of agricultural operations. The highlands are suitable for the development of commercial tree orchards; such as, coffee, cacao, citrus, and other fruits. In the lowlands, abaca, coconut, ramie, cotton, and vegetable crops may be grown in abundance. The Malabang area in Lanao is considered the most ideal region in the world for growing cassava. The swamplands, with adequate water control and irrigation, can be converted into rice lands which, and we have this on good authority, can rival the Central Plain of Luzon.

The large coastal area of Mindanao makes the construction of fishponds feasible and profitable. In the interior, the vast pasture lands of Bukidnon and Cotabato open up prospects for large-scale ranching.

Mindanao has the biggest concentration of timber stands in the Philippines. With moderate cutting operations, her forests are continually refurnished and prospects are that this will be one of the most important permanent resources of the region. At the same time, the excellent climate of Mindanao makes it the only place in the Philippines where rubber can be grown successfully.

Mindanao possesses rich mineral resources. Taking Surigao, alone, reports of mineral deposits found there have been most encouraging. I am informed that Nonoc Island has a potential ore reserve for iron alone of about one billion tons while nickle-bearing ore reserves have been discovered in abundant commercial quantities. Mindanao possesses the sources of power necessary to transform the minerals of the earth into the metals of industry. The situation, in fact, seems to contain all the ingredients necessary for the development of basic industry and manufacturing.

The wide variety of products which even now are being supplied in abundance from Mindanao give testimony that the promise of the region is not a remote dream but a proximate reality. Already there are food items, export crops and minerals which are being turned out in large and increasing quantities. Rice is being brought from Cotabato. Pineapples are shipped out of Bukidnon. The Agusan River is teeming with log rafts to be carted away to points overseas. Mindanao’s seaports are humming with vigorous activity, as stocks of abaca, copra, cacao, coffee, corn, cassava starch, and rubber are piled high ready for shipment. Fish is even now being airlifted to Manila. The industrial center around Maria Cristina Falls is beginning to grow every day.

All these efforts which are already impressive in their results barely touch the surface of this region’s deeper and more tremendous potential.

But the fuller development of this area must depend in large part on its ability to sell its products and to integrate itself with the rest of the Philippine economy. With the greater emphasis which we hope to be giving to local autonomy, sources of local finance must assume ever-increasing importance. For this area to fulfill the high expectations which are being held out for it, there have to be great improvements in two crucial fields in Mindanao’s economy. These improvements will incidentally provide better prices for Mindanao producers help to lower the cost of living, especially in urban areas, and furnish the base on which to continue to expand the gains in production that have been so far registered.

I refer to the problems of marketing and transportation and communications. Needless to say, both are intimately related. As I see it, the problems of marketing involves the collection of the growing output of the island and its conveyance to consuming centers such as Manila and Cebu. We very often observe that the products of Mindanao’s soil—the cereals, the vegetables, and the fruits—exist in abundance and at low prices at the points of origin, but are found to be scarce and high-priced in places of concentrated population. Obviously the problem here is one of marketing. It seems to me that this situation is ripe for the entrance of better marketing methods and organization. We have low prices and large supplies at points of production, high prices and short supplies at points of consumption. Whoever can bring the two into closer contact with one another will be benefiting both producers and consumers, while earning a substantial reward for his efforts. If necessary, the government will get its marketing agencies, such as NAMARCO and ACCFA, to move these commodities and thereby quicken productive life in the area. I said in my state-of-the-nation message last year that NAMARCO should place greater emphasis on the marketing of domestic commodities and less on that of imported commodities. This is one area where that principle could very well be applied.

Related to this, of course, is the problem of transportation, both with other islands and within the island. In inter-island shipping, the government would do well to systematize shipping schedules and to follow the public utility principle in granting franchises so that pioneer shippers would be protected in their lines, while at the same time the public would derive the benefits which come from increasing traffic, larger cargoes, higher production, regular schedules, and lower freight costs.

With regard to land transportation on the island, we will continue with our program of building more roads, especially those that will contribute to the tapping of regions under production or the opening up of new areas of production. I must confess that this is difficult, perhaps more difficult than it would be for any other large island in our country because of its vast scope and topographical problems. But we have to maintain and accelerate our efforts with regard to roadbuilding even as we now have more than 2,000 kilometers of first class roads and 4,500 kilometers more of other types crisscrossing the island. Eventually, perhaps, if our resources permit, the southern main line of the Manila Railroad may be projected south through Sorsogon, Samar, Leyte, and finally Mindanao by a system of connecting ferries. That seems far distant now, but if we are able to mobilise the necessary foreign and domestic financing for these multi-stage ventures, then eventually Mindanao will not only have a shipping link but a land link as well, with the rest of the country.

I have touched upon but a few keystones among the many possibilities latent in the development of Mindanao and Sulu. This region is destined to play a crucial role in the progress of our country. It is in seminars such as this one now being held that the potentials, resources, and capabilities of this region may best be discussed and projected. On the part of the Administration, I pledge to you wholehearted interest and cooperation of the government in your laudable efforts.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the Seminar on the Economic Development of Mindanao and Sulu. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(7) , 1167-1169.