Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy in Baguio

[Delivered on April 19, 1959]

ON this auspicious occasion of your graduation I share with your joys and jubilation and that of your loved ones derived from the spiritual satisfaction of a job well done. With these congratulations goes my felicitation to the members of the faculty and to your Alma Mater who, I am sure, are proud of you and have high expectations of you. The nation and the Republic who spent thousands of pesos for your education are happy that at long last you have made yourself competent and qualified to serve in the highest mission of life—defense of country. You are now heroes in the making who preserve and add to the glorious tradition of Gregorio Del Pilar, Antonio Luna, Vicente Lim, Tomas Claudio, and many other glorious names who wrote in astral fire in the firmament of fame: “the Filipino soldier, bravest in the world.”

I was greatly impressed by the precise and disciplined performance put up by the Cadet Corps of this great institution which in the words of a great Filipino (Sergio Osmeña) is the foundation stone of our entire military establishment.

To a civilian—and no less than the constitutional Commander-in-Chief of the nation’s Armed Forces himself— nothing can be more impressive in peace time than a smart passing in review by the cadets of this Academy who are being trained for leadership in the military. To me the precise timing, the perfect and synchronized execution of every movement of the participating units are but a manifestation of the basic mental attitude which has been developed in every individual cadet—the attitude which impels him to subordinate his own interest to the interest of the unit to which he belongs.

In other words, my friends, military discipline is the unmistakable mark of the PMA cadet; and rightly so, because every cadet upon completion of his course is expected to render service in an organization where his personal interests are subordinated to the interests of the country. It is in this school where our tradition of individual liberty is reconciled with a strict disciplinary system, for while military discipline may be strict and exacting, it is not blind subservience to authority. Rather, it is the realization of each cadet that the requirements of the service he has chosen can be met only when every individual member accepts wholeheartedly the direction and guidance of lawfully constituted authority.

Sometime last month I had occasion to stress before a fine group of ROTC cadets the vital and urgent need for national discipline as a sine qua non for national progress. I said then, as I say now, that national discipline is not only for us who have been charged with running the affairs of government. It is also for the various groups comprising our society. In fact, national discipline should apply to all without exception.

In my talk I dwelt lengthily on the economic aspect of the subject. Today, I propose to define the role of the military in fostering or enhancing the development of national discipline in this country. As I have said, national discipline is the price of progress, and considering our present state of development, the strengthening of our national economy will, indeed, call for the highest form of discipline among our people.

My friends, I have defined national discipline simply as the nation’s desire and capacity for progress with that attitude which impels individuals comprising the citizenry to submerge willingly their personal interests for the general welfare. In the fostering of this form of discipline, you as members of the military establishment, steeped as you are in an even more exacting form of discipline, play a very important role.

I said important role because national discipline is built by example, and the disciplined life of an Army officer manifested in different acts of practical living in the community he lives attracts many more emulations than a hundred speeches. Deeds of righteousness, justice, integrity, and patriotism work miracles in inspiring and strengthening civic consciousness and social discipline. Thus ancient Rome and ancient Greece were great and mighty when their men by their lives set the example of bravery, love of country, and stoic adherence to justice and profound faith in the Almighty and in the infallibility of His eternal cosmic laws. But Rome and Greece declined and ultimately fell when their men loosened up their fidelity to the principles and ideals of life, yielded to the lure of materialistic life, and threw to the winds individual and social discipline. Babylon, Egypt of the Pharaohs, ancient Israel, Carthage have the same story of national rise and fall. If you are not religious minded and do not read the Bible which contains the most authentic history of ancient nations and peoples of a thousand centuries, then let these great historical saga I just mentioned inspire the graduates of this Academy to live exemplary lives. The life of one man alone too often changed the history of a nation or even of the world. The accumulated influence of the lives of the graduates of this institution is certainly a vast factor in the building of national discipline so necessary to strengthen our democracy.

It is one of the tenets of democracy that the government should be a government of laws and not of men. But let it not be forgotten that no government can rise higher than the quality of men that run or man it. Hence the need of model or exemplary lives. Many of you will be leaders in the regular Army. Yours will be the sacrosanct duty of defending the national sovereignty, national integrity, honor, peace, and freedom of our country. Too often your duty calls for the supreme sacrifice of life as your illustrious predecessors did so heroically. This requires the highest type of manhood. Some of you will be the leaders in the Philippine Constabulary charged with the duty of maintaining peace and order, defending the rights and liberties of citizens, and enforcing the laws of the country. This also calls for valor, strong moral fibre, and uprightness. Again this requires the highest type of manhood.

So at this juncture of our national development we need less of laws and more of men—men of principles, men of moral courage, loyal, upright, God-fearing, and faith-inspired men to enforce the laws of this Republic and perpetuate the institutions of a government of the people, by the people, and for the people.

But naturally you will ask what are the qualities that the highest type of manhood should have? Young men, the answer is embodied in all the teachings of Christ—faith, hope and love, but the greatest of them is love. Perhaps to the soldier what he needs most is faith. He must believe deep in his soul and visualize in his creative imagination that he can be what he in his heart desires to be; that he can do what he believes in his heart he can do. He must fill his soul with the faith that a good deed, an honest deed, a kind deed in accordance with the infallible cosmic law of cause and effect will always have its reward in the same way that a wrong, a lie, or a dishonesty will infallibly have its retribution. The miracles wrought by Jesus with his faith are recorded in the indestructible Tablet of Time. He restored dead Lazarus to live with faith; he commanded the elements with his faith. With faith he restored back to health and strength the thousands of those afflicted with incurable ailments. Jesus himself said this about the might of faith:

“Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast unto the sea, it shall be done. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.”

I venture to add that the power of faith is not only given to Messiahs like Christ. It is given to men made of common clay who abide and labor with the eternal cosmic laws. It was man’s faith also that made possible the discovery of electricity, radio, television and the atomic science, and of the many other wonders of Science. It was the nation’s faith and its leaders that made possible the crossing of the Red Sea and the Jordan, and Rizal’s supreme sacrifice at the Luneta, the Cry of Balintawak, and the epic stand at Bataan and Corregidor.

I laid this special emphasis on faith because in these materialistic times the faith of youth is being undermined every day in the press, radio, and television by negative thinking. The mind of the youth is being assailed every day with scandals and gossips, intrigues, lies, character assassination, stories of envy, jealousy, greed, and other iniquities. If your mind is fed every day with this stuff, you will eventually acquire a negative view of life, hopeless, faithless, loveless.

On the contrary, if you fill and thrill your heart with elevating stories of success, of great dreams come true, of the living romances in art and science wrought by faith and love, of great luck or fortunes which come as reward for acts of goodness, justice, loyalty, or honesty; of glory and laurels won by heroic men for their heroic achievements inspired by love of country or fellowmen, you are actually stockpiling in your soul positive thoughts, the stuff of which mighty faith, invincible hope, and all-triumphant love are made. These are the materials that should go into the building of our national character. These are the stuff with which are woven that wondrous fabric we call man’s true success.

Officers, my injunction therefore to you is: fight unrelentingly the influences of negative thinking. Fill your mind with positive thinking every minute of your life and believe in your heart that without fail you shall always gather abundant harvest out of the good seeds you have sown in the field of life. By the eternal law ordained by God, that you shall always reap what you sow, I assure you that on the wings of faith and hope and love, you can and you will rise to the sublime heights of your aspiration.

Gentlemen, all of these attributes of the highest type of manhood I am talking about can be developed by any man and more easily by disciplined men like the graduates of this famous Academy only in an atmosphere of freedom. Freedom is of the essence in character building.

It is therefore of the utmost importance that as young leaders in our national defense you should dedicate yourselves to the cause of perpetuating democracy in our country—the kind of government that enthrones human freedom as the supreme principle. Let there be a common determination among all Filipinos to defend our democratic way of life against all threats of a godless ideology, the ideology that undermines the faith of men and nations and the love of man to his fellowmen. Let our national institutions build up ramparts against ideology which cancels the human liberties and the inalienable rights of citizens and would convert them into herded peons of a totalitarian state. Let us build bastions against the influence of an ideology that tramples upon the principle of sovereign equality among nations and sanctions the rule of might over right to justify its aspiration for world domination. Let us build the national fortress to protect our own ideology which is the fountain head of our life, liberty, and happiness. Anchored as it is to our sublime faith in God who with His infinite justice, His infinite love, and His eternal truth, governs the universe, we know that no worldly power can destroy it; we know that it will “endure with the pulsings of Eternity.”

Finally, I wish to address the graduating class and, through them, the Armed Forces of the nation.

Closely akin to discipline is loyalty. The loyalty of graduates to their class and their loyalty to their Alma Mater are very human sentiments that have been recognized since time immemorial. Loyalty to your class manifests your desire for identity within the corps of professional soldiers. It is through this that you recall with a smile, your favorite plebe, your favorite yearling, and your favorite instructor. Your loyalty to your Alma Mater is a clear demonstration of your gratitude to the institution that molded you into what you are and gave you the potentials to be something and somebody in your chosen profession. These are sentimental loyalties. Sentimental in the sense that through them you joyfully retrospect on your formative years. You treasure the ties of friendship with your juniors, your seniors, and your instructors. You cherish the memory of the nooks and corners of the school compound.

These loyalties you must have.

It is against this backdrop that I shall now give you what I consider as my special message to you all of your graduation. My message is:

After you make your oath of office as second lieutenants in the Armed Forces of the Philippines, and your name is written down in the rolls of the Armed Forces Officers Corps, remembers that you accept, you have to accept, a higher form of loyalty. Loyalty that must transcend those dictated by personal sentiment—this is your loyalty to your country.

Should you in later years come face to face with a problem of reconciling loyalties, either between your class, your Alma Mater, the Armed Forces, and your country, there should be no question. There is only one honorable choice, a choice dictated by the very tenets on which your institution and all democratic institutions stand—and this choice must be in favor of your country.

There are graduates of this institution who, as against life itself, have chosen the country. Their names are now carried in the roll of honor of your alumni dead.

As your Commander-in-Chief, I urge you to bring this message with you wherever the Service may send you. Let it stay with you and let it form a part of your beliefs. For it is, when your honor dictates the truth of this conviction, that your cadet prayer has been partly answered—that you “have aspired to live above the level of common lives.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech at the Commencement Exercises of the Philippine Military Academy in Baguio, Sunday, April 19, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (17) , 3103-3108.