PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE JAYCEES, AT THE WINTER GARDEN, MANILA HOTEL, MONDAY AFTERNOON, SEPTEMBER 16, 1957

PRESIDENT YUCHENGCO, MEMBERS OF THE MANILA JAYCEES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM truly grateful for your invitation to be with you today. It is a relief to get away from the raging psycho-political warfare and to be with younger businessmen and professionals who, I am sure, are immune from the pervasive poison gas of propaganda, psychowar, false charges, and promises unlimited. You are too intelligent, too well-informed and far-seeing to succumb to or to be carriers of the current epidemic of misleading the people in order to get their votes and win a public office.

I am, as you know, also a candidate. I shall not, however, attempt to influence you one way or the other as to how you should vote. You are far too independent to be influenced by others in the proper exercise of your right to participate in the popular control of the government, which is the very essence of democracy. I feel that my mission among people of high intelligence and intimate familiarity with public affairs, like you, is to plead for assistance to the Government to insure a free and clean election on November 12. It is of utmost importance to us and to all free nations that the result of our voting will be a faithful translation of enlightened and intelligent Filipino public opinion.

Under ordinary circumstances, clean elections are the very life of democracy. The unusual contemporary circumstances of our infant Republic within and of the world without, furnish equally urgent reasons why we Filipinos should insist on honest and clean elections.

One of these reasons is the patent fact that we are still laying the foundation and setting down the precedents for our young Republic. To build an enduring nation, temporary advantages must often be sacrificed to those principles which are the massive bridge to sound and wise national growth. And our own generation has that extraordinary opportunity, vouchsafed only once to a race, of being the builders of our nation. We must not fail.

I commend to you and to our countrymen of this generation the unchallenged verdict of great historians on the basic reasons why George Washington, although admittedly not of the caliber of the intellectual giants of his time, was nevertheless the greatest nation-builder among them all. Collaborating together, two of America’s most respected historians have written the following penetrating evaluation of Washington: “This quiet, plain-speaking gentleman of Virginia glimpsed a truth hidden from his more talented contemporaries: that the means by which a nation proceeds, especially in its adolescence, are more important than the ends which it pursues.”

Only on basic and massive principles, not on sheer opportunism, can we build a strong and enduring Republic. This means among others a clean and honest election in which deceptive issues have been exploded and pseudo-messiahs, pseudo-economists, and pseudo-crusaders have been unmasked; in which voters can cast their ballots free of deception and fear; in which the will of the people is freely registered and honestly recorded. Any other kind of election is a travesty of democracy and republicanism.

The contemporary political situation of the world also demands of us the same scrupulous regard for the democratic process and the popular will. The clash between democracy and communism is total; to win, democracy must buttress itself where it is weak and, where it is strong, prove its soundness and wisdom by producing the maximum good. While the basic sin of communism is its frustration of the people’s will by the denial of human dignity and life, the strength of democracy is its recognition of the supremacy of public opinion by respecting and protecting the dignity and freedom of the human person. The expression of the public will through an election is no less than the cornerstone of democracy. To corrupt and subvert an election is therefore to undercut democracy and aid communism. In the total war, any disloyalty to democracy is no less than treason.

I urge you therefore and, through you, our people to do all in your power to insure the honesty and freedom of the current political campaign and the coming presidential election. As I make this request, you will perhaps allow me to elaborate on my own concept of honest and free election.

I do not minimize the importance of seeing to it that the conduct of the election itself will be free of fraud and other irregularities. Voters should vote in an atmosphere of free­dom and security, and the votes cast should be counted with honesty and accuracy. These are the obvious things to do and they should be and shall be done.

But the honesty and freedom of the election depends not only on what happens in the election precincts but also on what is happening between now and November 12. While we plead for a free election, we should also see to it that our people can exercise the right of suffrage in a truly free atmosphere. This will not be possible unless civic-minded individuals and associations like the Jaycees undertake a campaign of enlightenment to counteract the excesses of political parties and political workers, resulting in gross and unscrupulous misrepresentations and impossible and fantastic promises. If our people are mislead into believing untruths and falsehoods, they cannot truly vote in freedom.

Never in the political history of our country have our people been subjected as they are being subjected today to the barrage of half-truths and falsehoods that manage to find their way to print and over the air waves. Only the other day a letter from an indignant newspaper reader angrily decried the reporting of a rally staged by a candidate on the public plaza of Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental. The meeting had been previously reported in the newspapers as having been attended by 15,000 people and as having been publicly supported by the municipal officials. It turned out, according to the letter sent by the resident of the town, that the audience had not been 15,000 but 500, and that the public officials who had appeared on the stage had repeatedly and emphatically declared that they were participating only in the name of hospitality and that their political sympathies were with other parties and other candidates. This is typical of the high-pressure propaganda which the unscrupulous experts in psychological warfare and public relations have brought to the current political campaign.

Then, there is the insistent claim by other candidates, except Senator Recto, that they and they alone are capable of carrying out the program and policies of the late President Magsaysay. What is the warranty that they speak the truth? Can they produce an iota of proof? I hope it will not be construed as immodesty on my part if I state that I was a member of the Magsaysay team, constitutionally next to the late President himself and constitutionally his lawful successor upon his death. For others to claim that they are the heirs of Magsaysay is, I think, to lose the sense of balance and mislead and mesmerize the people.

I am just picking at random some of the examples of what I mean by the campaign of misrepresentation which you and other citizens of goodwill should try to counteract with a campaign of enlightenment. Another and perhaps one of the most unpardonable attempts at misrepresentation involves the public debt. The public debt is susceptible of documentation in depth, its figures being a part of the public record. Yet it has been misrepresented to the people not once but many times, not informatively but insistently during this political season.

It has been alleged that the public debt of ₱1,500,000,000 is the fault of the present administration and is proof of its extravagance. Yet it is a matter of record, supported by irrefutable public documents, that of this total amount, the Liberal administration had incurred no less than ₱1,065,975,000 while the Magsaysay and the present administration contracted only the amount of ₱469,465,000. Furthermore, of the indebtedness incurred by the Liberal administration, no less than ₱696,938,000 was expended for ordinary budgetary purposes and only ₱369,037,000 was invested in economic development. In contrast, the Nacionalista administration not only has used more than 65 per cent of its borrowings for long-range development projects intended to benefit the present and future generations, leaving less than 35 per cent used for budgetary expenditures, but it has also paid off ₱157,917,000 of the budgetary indebtedness incurred by the Liberal administration. Even official figures—even the venerable science of mathematics—are being twisted and tortured!

The attempt to mislead the people with falsehoods and half-truths is so frantic and so flagrant that it is getting difficult for the average, well-intentioned individual to get at the truth. For this reason, a campaign of enlightenment on the part of the civic-minded individuals and organizations has become an urgent need during this election campaign.

As if torturing and twisting the figures and the facts were not sufficient, the people are also regaled with promises so fantastic that no one with a modicum of conscience could ever make them. It is true, of course, that the political season is a season of promises during which candidates promise the moon and the stars and heaven, too, in order to snare votes. Nevertheless, individuals and organizations like the Jaycees can render a most necessary public service by assisting the people in distinguishing between a sincere and honest promise on the one hand and an impossible, insincere, and dishonest vote-getting promise on the other hand.

One of the parties has advanced the promise that, if it wins the popular mandate, it will bring prosperity to the country and people by the simple device of banning importation and printing money. You know and I know that the problems of our national economy are not so simple as to be susceptible of solution through economic and political quackery. What the country needs is a well-thought-out and practical economic plan such as our National Economic Council has developed and continues to update in accordance with new situations and new developments.

With the cocksureness of abiding innocence, we are promised low prices, full employment, high wages, abundant production, universal electrification, and what have you. The promises are poured forth as if they could be made to materialize by the flourish of a magic wand. In New York, there is an organization called the Liars’ Club. At its annual meetings, prizes are offered for the most stupendous lies that members can concoct. But, ladies and gentlemen, the guidance of the Republic, the responsibility of safeguarding the security and pursuing the happiness of 22,000,000 people, is far more complex, far more responsible, and far more serious than the chore of winning a Liars’ Club prize. We must make our people realize that candidates for public office can also be measured by the responsibility or irresponsibility, the sincerity or insincerity, the carefulness or carelessness, with which they make promises.

With the campaign of enlightenment must of course go hand in hand the efforts to make the election clean and honest. I notice with real gratification that the Manila Jaycees are sponsoring a nation-wide campaign to get out the vote. This is a commendable movement. The more of our qualified electors participate in the election, the more accurate is the public opinion registered and the more valid is the public mandate extended to the winning party. Democracy is at its best when all the citizens are interested in public affairs and all the qualified voters participate in elections. I wish you the optimum success in your highly-commendable campaign.

You may have noticed that the Government is also taking various steps to insure the cleanliness and honesty of the election. The Commission on Elections, the Constabulary, and the public school teachers are being mobilized in order to handle the election with efficiency, honesty and accuracy. I put my trust in these organizations. The public school teachers—and I was once one of them—will actually and directly handle the election by registering new voters, checking on the identity of those who vote, seeing to it that they vote properly, and counting the votes. They can be trusted to perform this task with sincerity, honesty, and efficiency.

I am so confident of this that I have invited the local and the foreign press to act as impartial observers and to report whatever information they may acquire freely and fearlessly. In this connection, you may have read in the newspapers that I have ordered the reduction of the press rates on telegrams from 3 centavos to 2 centavos a word so that the reports from the provinces may be ample and comprehensive. Our Government, however, has no authority to reduce the rates on cables sent abroad, but I do express the hope that the cable companies will follow suit. We want the rest of the free world to realize that we in the Philippines are sincerely willing and fully able to follow the basic practices and processes of democracy.

Our nation is one of the distant outposts of democracy in the East. We must keep it strong for ourselves and for the entire free world. Honest and clean elections are among the strongest bulwarks of freedom. For our own sake and that of our democratic allies, we cannot afford to repeat the elections of 1946 and 1949 that gave our newly-born Republic a black eye. I plead to you and to all our people to unmask the demagogues, free our campaign of opportunism, explode the fantastic promises and brazen lies, and help maintain an honest and peaceful election. This is our sacred duty to ourselves and to our way of life.

Others may find satisfaction and contentment in winning public office through misrepresentation, false promises, and fraud. I assure you that I am not one of them. A famous American editor once said, “I would rather be right than president!” Echoing his laudable sentiment, I say here and now that I would not want to continue as President of the Philippines unless I am elected in an honest and free election.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library