PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE INSTALLATION OF BAGUIO ROTARY OFFICERS AT THE BAGUIO COUNTRY CLUB, SATURDAY EVENING, JULY 6, 1957

I WARMLY congratulate the newly-elected officers of the Baguio Rotary and Inner Wheel Clubs. Their selection to the position of leadership in one of the country’s outstanding civic organizations is an honor which I know they fully deserve and will more than justify in efficient and whole-hearted service to their members, their organizations, and the country. More than felicitating them, I envy them: for them, the suspense and tenseness of a coming election is over,

In a way, however, I also sympathize with them and their members. Rotarians all over the world constitute community groups which I think, are the most alert, most intelligent, and most discriminating. Yet, they are often captive au­diences. Once a speaker has gained access to their forums, Rotarians have no choice but listen, and unfortunately the privilege can be abused. A speaker who has an axe to grind may recite half truths and inaccurate figures—or no figures at all—to support pre-meditated and self-serving fulminations; and, being good mannered, Rotarians must sit through the flimsy performance and keep straight faces. I assure you that I shall not knowingly abuse your hospitality.

A few days ago, your Rotary brethren in Manila and, through them, the entire nation were treated to a discussion of our dollar and import controls, the national budget, public debt, money supply, rising prices and unemployment. These are matters of vital interest to all citizens and they should be discussed as freely and as widely as possible. But they are also such sensitive parts of our economy that they should only be discussed intelligently and dispassionately and, above all, truthfully. To twist and torture them for political effect is to sacrifice the national welfare to personal ambition.

Rotary was told that “the over-all purpose of the control system is to stabilize the country’s exchange reserve position,” but that the “dollar reserves are approaching a dangerously low level.” Now, you know as well as I do that this statement reveals a misconception of the nature and scope of the objective of the dollar and import controls as well as a misrepresentation of the country’s truthful dollar reserves position.

The conservation of our dollar reserves is indeed one of the purposes of the controls, but an equally important objective is the optimum utilization of our country’s foreign exchange resources for our committed goals of economic development. Since 1953, we have managed our foreign exchange resources carefully and thoughtfully so as to give priority to the importation of capital goods without unduly reducing consumer goods, especially essential articles. Non-essential consumption goods do not contribute to economic development. It takes producers goods to equip our shops, our factories, our farms, our mines, and our public utilities and provide employment for our people. But indifferent, to if not entirely oblivious of, this objective of controls, the Liberal administration understandably dissipated no less than 52.1 per cent of the available dollars during the last semester of 1953 for the importation of consumer goods, a most typical performance. Our administration immediately and deliberately began to correct this anomaly, and by 1956 only 39.3 per cent of our import dollar had been allocated for consumer goods while 60.7 per cent had been channelled to capital goods for increased production. The latter continues to be undertaken, in accordance with a well-conceived and carefully-drawn up priorities plan, which is taken into consideration in the formulation of credit and exchange policies. By this shift in emphasis, the manufacturing plants in the country have increased from only 100 in 1953 to 138 in 1956 with, of course, a corresponding increase in much-needed industrial employment.

Rotary was told that the lifting of the controls should be accelerated—this, from the very people who had inaugurated them. The Liberal administration imposed the controls upon the country. They had been made necessary by the critical situation that had developed through their own economic and fiscal bungling, juggling, and mismanagement. It is no wonder, therefore, that they have had to continue in force up to the present time. The situation, although now greatly improved, was so critical and chaotic in the years 1949-1953, that, however much our administration has accomplished towards correcting and redressing past errors and sins, the present conditions do not yet fully warrant the abolition of controls.

The fact, however, is that someone has become a victim of political amnesia. In 1950, the same voices that now clamor for the accelerated lifting of controls said in an official report to President Quirino:

More experience has to be built up in the administration of the controls and greater efforts should be exerted to widen their acceptance by the public as an abiding feature of business life in the Philippines.

The Magsaysay and the present administration never, however, believed that controls should be “an abiding feature of business life in this country.” For this reason, we have utilized the controls themselves, in conjunction with dollar means, to create the conditions that will enable us to forego them without harmful consequences to the economy. We have done this by giving priority in dollar allocations to such capital goods imports as can augment the national production and increase employment opportunities.

Although no figures whatsoever were offered, Rotary was also told that “our dollar reserves are approaching a dangerously low level.” Again, I am afraid there was here another instance of political amnesia.’ In 1950, the fiscal authorities of the Liberal administration did not consider $130,600,000 as “dangerously low.” For of the $260,000,000 which they fixed as a safe level, $130,000,000 would consist of funds borrowed from abroad. Our position today is certainly sounder and better than this, for bur international reserves are nearly $200,000,000 of which only $15,200,000 consists of borrowed foreign fund.

The national budget was not spared in the generalizations without supporting figures. It is hard to believe that anyone has the audacity and recklessness to discuss the national budget without offering a single figure. But this was the remarkable case; you were simply told that a “fantastically unbalanced budget has again been foisted upon the people.”

Yet the figures are available to the general public. According to the Auditor General’s report, while the Liberal administration incurred deficits from 1946 to 1953 ranging from ₱42,715,742.07 to ₱189,726,239.89, the Nacionalista administration showed surpluses every single year from 1954 to 1956, ranging from ₱1,876,591.40 to ₱10,597,956.98. The complete figures are the following:

Liberal Deficits

Nacionalista Surpluses

Under the Liberal administration, only the operational expenditures of the Government appeared in the budget. The capital expenditures were not only excluded but were so poorly coordinated that the Government never at any time knew its actual and correct financial position. This is not my own opinion, the Bell Mission of 1950 said so. Its report stated: “The Secretary of Finance does not have the necessary information for him to determine currently just what is the real financial condition of the Philippine Government.” It added that the Government’s fiscal reports “are of no value to anyone except those interested in historical facts.”

The Nacionalista budgets, however, include both the operating expenditures and economic development investments, thus presenting a clear and complete picture of the country’s true financial situation. The current budget, for instance, carries ₱886,000,000 for the operational expenses of the Government, and ₱427,000,000 as capital investment in productive economic projects. The sum set aside for operational expenses is well within the Government’s estimated income. However, the expenditures for capital investment, being for the further promotion of our long-range economic development plan, will legitimately be financed from borrowing and foreign assistance. The present administration has, in fact, a well-coordinated five-year fiscal and exchange budget. For the first time in the history of Philippine budget preparation, an inclusive financial plan has been formulated, which presents in clear terms the total expenditures of the Government, by program and purpose, along with detailed measure for their financing and for cushioning their impact on the economy.

By carelessly and matter-of-factly indulging, in deficit spending even for ordinary current operating expenditures of the government, the Liberal administration inevitably accumulated huge annual deficits. It was then that it also resorted to figure juggling. Not only did it contract budgetary loans aggregating in the huge sum. of ₱208,200,000, but it dipped its hands, illegally and surreptitiously, into the Government’s fiduciary and trust funds, special funds, and sinking funds, dissipating in this manner the additional total sum of ₱152,339,715.32.

Following are the exact figures of the Liberal’s huge loans and illegal fund dissipations:

Please note that the loans and pilferings were for current operating expenditures, not to accelerate economic development. Note also that the misuse of fiduciary, trust, special, and sinking funds were veritable acts of illegal misappropriation. Yet when the Liberal administration closed on December 31, 1953, there remained a net deficit of ₱175,531,543. But this was not all Government obligations totalling ₱205,705,628.32 were not booked and remained unsettled for lack of funds. So confused and chaotic were the fiscal years 1949, 1950, and 1951 that even the salaries of school teachers could not be paid by the National Government, and Treasury Warrants issued by the National Treasury were being dishonored. Confidence in the Government had been lost.

But let a competent and disinterested authority on the situation then obtaining testify. The Bell Mission of 1950, after four years of the Liberal administration, had the following to say:

The mounting deficits of the government during these years of high national income and of inflationary pressure is indicative of the lack of a forceful policy on government finance. It indicates a failure on the part of the Government to recognize its responsibility to levy taxes and to provide an administrative enforcement staff that can collect taxes. It indicates a failure on the part of the public to appreciate the grave monetary and economic dangers that flow from break-down of orderly government finance ….More recently, as the deficit has grown and continued, the government has had difficulty in finding the means to meet its day-to-day obligations.

Surely, the spokesmen of the government administration that brought the country’s financial, and monetary situation to such a sorry pass either have short memories or believe in the military strategy that offense is the best defense.

It should be admitted, however, that the Liberal administration, having brought the fiscal crises upon the Government and the country, tried to adopt improvements in the tax system, fiscal policies, and budget procedures to save itself. But not only were these measures ineffective and insufficient, but they were-also too little and too late. They were in fact adopted only because the prodding by the Bell Mission report began to hurt, and because efforts at such improvements were made a prerequisite for the continuance of United States aid. It was a humbled and shamed Liberal administration that roused itself at long last to do that which it should have done years before of its own will and volition. This was the way the Liberal administration managed the nation’s affairs and preserved and safeguarded the independence and sovereignty of our people and nation.

And now, I want to call your attention to that supposed astronomical public debt for which again no figures were offered. When, on December 31, 1953, the Liberal administration was ended by an aroused electorate, the existing total public debt had reached what I believe can be truly described as astronomical, ₱1,065,975,000. Of this huge sum, no less than ₱696,938,000 had been spent for operational purposes, and only ₱369,037,000 for economic development efforts. Budgetary loans, represented at 65.4 per cent, whereas development loans only, 34.6 per cent.

I believe I am justified in saying with pride that during the Nacionalista administration and, in spite of all its heritage of bungled and juggled finances, no additional budgetary loan whatsoever has yet been incurred. On the contrary, it has been able to pay off ₱157,915,000 of the budgetary loans recklessly incurred by the Liberal administration and restore to the fiduciary and trust, special funds, and sinking funds, all but ₱8,000,000 of the ₱152,339,715.32 which the Liberals had illegally misappropriated. In addition, the Nacionalista administration redeemed ₱26,400,000 of the Manila Railroad bonds, held by British bondholders, on which the Liberal administration was not able to pay interest, much less redeem. The aggregate total of these sums, which the Nacionalista administration has had of necessity to divert from both essential government services and economic development activities in order to correct and cover up the reckless borrowings and pilferages of the Liberal administration—₱328,674,715.32—certainly deserves to be called huge, if not astronomical.

Aware of the huge public debt incurred by them, Liberal spokesmen talk of astronomical public debts. Not only have we incurred less indebtedness than the previous administration, and only for economic development purposes, but our public debt position at the present time is neither astronomical nor unsound. Our total indebtedness as of today is only 15 per cent of our Gross National Product. In contrast to our indebtedness, Turkey’s is 24-percent of the Gross National Product; India’s and Ceylon’s, 35 percent; the United States, 65 per cent; and the United Kinkdom,; 150.2 percent.

Rotary was also told that “a rapidly-increasing money supply is flooding the country,” as if an expanding money supply were bad for the economy. The truth, of course, is that an expanding economy like our requires a corresponding expansion in the money supply. Provided the growth of the money supply is commensurate with the needs of the expanding economy, it is not a sign of an unhealthy economic condition. On the contrary, it is an indication of wholesome and healthy economic growth.

To support the intended ring of alarm in the charge that an increasing money supply is flooding the country, Rotary was also told that prices were rising. The rising prices, so-called, are not unnatural, and neither are they the product solely of the increasing money supply. The restrictions on the importation of non-essential goods, the increasing tariff duties collected on foreign goods, the systematic expansion of credit to stimulate production, and many other factors contribute to the inflationary tendencies. Nevertheless, no undue price fluctuations beyond what is tolerable for an expanding economy have been experienced since 1954. For instance, the consumer’s price index for Manila, as of the first quarter of 1957 is only 103.1 as compared to the corresponding index in 1952, which was 104.4. The reason for this most reasonable price trend is that the expanding monetary sector of our economy can absorb larger increases in money supply than what Liberal spokesmen think feasible.

Lastly, Rotary was told that the country’s unemployment of only 1,200,000 in 1953 was 2,500,000 at the end of 1956. These are two of the only four figures cited to support a plethora of generalities, and I hope I shall not be charged with lack of charity if I have to point out that they are completely wrong. The latest and most reliable statistics on our unemployment was published by the National Economic Council as a result of a Philippine Statistical Survey of Household conducted in May, 1956. The total unemployment as of that date was estimated at only. 1,182,000. If Liberal administration authorities admit, as they seem to do, that they left the Nationalists administration a heritage of 1,200,000 unemployed in 1953, then it can be said that the Nacionalista administration has frozen the Liberal unemployment at a stationary position.

I do not mean by this that the present administration should not take care of all the unemployed. As a matter of fact, we are putting the greatest emphasis on those aspects of our economic development that can absorb maximum employment. And this reminds me that the Liberal spokesmen also gave “another set of figures—the second by only two pairs—which again turns out to be all wrong. It was claimed that “out of the some 700 new and necessary industries which we have today, no less, than 600 were already under way, many of them in the production state, before the close of 1953.” This is not quite true. The records show that between 1946 and 1953, a period of eight years, only 297 concerns were granted tax exemption on the ground of being new and essential industries. From the beginning of 1954 to the end of 1956, a period of only three years under the present administration, 422 new concerns engaged in new and essential industrial activities were granted tax exemption. As the stimulation of such industries is one of the principal means of creating employment opportunities for our people, I have pointed out the discrepancy so that you may judge for yourselves how we are accelerating the opening of new jobs.

My friends, we have nothing to gain but everything to lose in misrepresenting our economic situation by erring either on the side of exaggeration or understatement. But the facts and figures are clear and are of public record. The present administration, by which I mean mainly that of President Magsaysay, has revised, updated, and expanded whatever economic plans and policies the outgoing Liberal administration had left, most of it in a state of confusion and chaos, and consolidated them into a new five-year economic plan. We abolished, for instance, the Import Control Office which had become the center of public corruption and scandal. We swerved the direction of imports to minimize non-essentials and emphasize capital goods needed to equip our industries, not only to increase productivity but also expand employment opportunities. We stabilized our financial position by settling much of the indebtedness, legal and illegal, incurred by the previous administration, and by keeping our dollar reserves at a safe and sound level. We have improved budgetary policies and procedures to the extent of consistently balancing the budget and annually showing surpluses. We have kept the public debt well within the borrowing capacity of the country and have resorted to borrowing, not to support extravagant operational expenses, but to use as investment capital in the various areas of our comprehensive and coordinated economic development program. As for the charge of “rank mismanagement in the fiscal, financial; and trade fields,” I believe I can say with the fullest justification that our administration not only has redeemed and redressed almost all the damage and harm caused and committed by Liberal managerial ineptitude and inefficiency but we have also been able to advance our economic development program to a stage where the momentum we have built up constitutes a sufficient earnest of total and final success and triumph. The Liberal charge is not only unfounded and unproved, it is also gratuitous and rediculous. It is, as I have said, a desperate attempt to convert defense into offense, a last-ditch try to make the red herring trick work. I am very sorry that you were imposed upon, but I am certain that you were not deceived by the verbiage and you certainly must have deplored, as I do, the lack of figures and facts to support the glittering generalities.

This, then, is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth about the national economy. I have presented the situation to you, completely documented in depth. Every figure I have cited can be verified at source. I have in effect opened the books of the government for your careful scrutiny.

This administration has fully justified the decision of the electorate in 1953 when it ousted the Liberal administration and gave its mandate to the Nacionalista administration. The Liberal administration was a government of controls to conserve dollars only and thus aggravated the orgy of importation; the Nacionalista administration has continued controls, not only to stabilize our foreign exchange position but also to utilize as much of our dollar resources as possible to promote economic development, production, and employment. The Liberal government incurred astronomical public debts and, with this, also recklessly and illegally misappropriated the government’s fiduciary and trust funds, special funds, and sinking funds; the Nacionalista administration not only has replaced the Liberal administration’s misappropriations, except ₱8,000,000, but has incurred indebtedness within safe and logical limits, and all for economic development. The Liberal administration was inept and ineffectual, entirely lacking in managerial energy and competence, and pushed and prodded into action and decision like a lazy carabao by an American mission; the Nacionalista administration has managed the economic, fiscal, and monetary affairs of the nation under comprehensive and coordinated plans, with competence, energy, and imagination.

The return of the Liberal administration would be a return to chaos and confusion; the continuation of the Nacionalista party at the head of our government is an assurance of increasing and uninterrupted economic development and fiscal stability, national progress, mass contentment, and prosperity.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library