Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the University of San Agustin

[Delivered in Iloilo City, March 25, 1961]

MOST REV. RECTOR, DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING CLASSES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THE high academic honor you confer upon me today is one that any man would be proud to receive, and in all humility I accept it with gratitude and full appreciation of its significance. One of the immediate benefits of receiving this doctorate of laws, is that I become automatically an honorary alumnus of the University of San Agustin. It shall be my constant endeavor in all my thoughts and action to hold up high the honor and prestige of this famous institution of learning until the end of my days.

I am happy indeed to become a San Agustin alumnus— Class of 1961—and to be associated with this university whose name evokes a pageant of history, recalling the very roots of Christianity in the Philippines, calling to mind the origins of that which is now an integral part of our Filipino heritage.

You will recall that the very first missionaries to land in our shores and preach the gospel of Christ in the Philippines belonged to the Order of St. Augustine. It was they who broke the ground, so to speak, and it was this same Order which sowed the seeds of Christian faith which today gives our nation a distinctive character, and a unique identity in this part of the world.

The first parochial schools ever set up on Philippine soil were established by those courageous Augustinian missionaries. And it is a historical fact that the first educational center to offer secondary education in the Philippines was founded by the Augustinian Fathers as early as 1572.

History also records the notable achievements of the Augustinian Order in this country, and relates of the contributions made here in the fields of science, linguistics, literature, and history as well as religion, by learned and distinguished members of the Order.

The University of San Agustin, therefore, has a tradition that goes back to the beginnings of Christianity in the Philippines, and to the first meeting of our native Malayan culture with the culture of the West represented by Spain. The Filipino of today is largely the product of those two distinct cultures which subsequently merged into one, and which was further enriched by our contact with the culture of the New World at the turn of this century.

In the Philippines, therefore, there is a trinity of outstanding elements in our culture, and these are our native

Asian-Malayan, the Latino-Christian culture we inherited from Spain, and the Anglo-American democratic ideology.

This amalgam of three great cultures of the world is what we now claim as our own Philippine culture. It is our duty not only to preserve this cultural heritage but to enrich and develop it to higher horizons and vaster frontiers and make it worthy of the 21st century and the Eternity thereafter.

Oftentimes, there are super nationalists who are embarrassed that a great part of what we call Philippine culture “has merely been transplanted” to our soil from other lands. These puritans call only Philippine culture that which is indigenous to our land. This point of view has become anachronistic and no longer valid. In the great stream of our culture or any culture for that matter, there have flowed in confluence many tributaries from varied springs and sources of many times and climes. The Spanish culture, the American culture, and the Anglo-Saxon culture are similarly constituted.

So we need not blush for the fact that Filipino culture springs from many non-indigenous sources, any more than Europeans are ashamed of their debt to ancient Egypt, Greece and Rome; or that American culture and ideology are a blend of practically all cultures of the world, ancient and modern. The great all-pervading essence that transmuted all these cultural forces into a real Filipino cultural creation is the breath of the Filipino soul, the essence of Filipinism.

Gentlemen, it. took us one decade, the first decade of our Republic, to rebuild our beloved country devastated by World War II. After the completion of our national reconstruction, we plunged into the economic development program to which we are committing all our financial, industrial, and intellectual resources. We have accomplished in so short a time a tremendous job. A new, free, prosperous, and great democracy is rising in the Orient that promises to become the Paradise of Oceania. It has achieved spectacular material progress greater than that attained by any one of our contemporary independent republics.

But the important question suggests itself: has our cultural progress been brought into balance with our material well-being? Have we paralleled our material upswing with corresponding spiritual and moral uplift? This industrial mobilization and economic development saga to which we are totally committed, have we built them to a capacity as to nourish and sustain a rich cultural life?

Jesus Christ in his transcendental Sermon at the Mount revealed the cosmic priority of things. He said: “Do not be anxious about what to eat, or drink, or wear on. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His justice, and all these things shall be given you besides.” If we were asked as a nation whether we have attended to this priority of things in life, can we truthfully answer yes? Can we honestly say that we are showing equal concern to the nation’s moral well-being as to its material possessions? Can we truthfully say that we have more concern for what we are that is life, than for what we have that is worldly possessions?

I am afraid, ladies and gentlemen, that our affirmative answer to these questions will be embarrassed by the realities in our national set-up. Right now we are preoccupied by the steadily and defiantly rising tide of criminality among teenagers. Our movies most popular shows are those which depict lurid and cold-blooded murders and gangsterism. Our press favorite headlines are society scandals, sordid stories of the social flotsam and jetsam. It buries in the obscure pages the stories of heroism, of motherly sacrifices, and acts of charity, love , and kindness, the epic efforts of young artists, and geniuses to survive in a world dead to all sense of beauty. We have evidences all around us that, despite our outstanding achievements in material progress, our cultural attainments for the uplift of the soul, for the moral enrichment of our individual and national life, have lagged behind.

This then is the challenge to the University of San Agustin and all other institutions of learning in our country. This venerable institution radiating with the Christian missionary zeal of its founders and maintainers and enthroned in the grateful hearts of the people it serves, assume cultural leadership in this beautiful part of our country.

It is my considered view that this materialistic impetus we are witnessing must be matched by moral and spiritual revival. Hence, the necessity and the essentiality that the cult of the arts be placed centrally in the education of our youth. The cultural efforts of the nation derives its vitality from the schools and colleges which are charged with the education of the youth. The awakening of the noblest emotions of the heart, the germination of the highest aspirations of man, the deepening of the aesthetic sense of our youth, the stimulation of the higher purposes of life, the cultivation of the three great virtues of the heart—faith, hope and love—these are great goals of our cultural efforts; these are the potent tools with which to fight criminality, poverty, disease, ignorance, and social perversity.

In this connection, let me reiterate what I said in my last message to Congress on the state of the nation, viz: “I urge legislative consideration of the idea to grant qualified educational institutions a margin of curricular freedom to allow educational diversity in educational unity.” This university dedicated to perpetuate the memory of one of the greatest saint-philosophers of the Church is an ideal setting for launching the cultural drive to attain these goals. As such private institution established for the cult of Christian virtues, and proud of its impressive record of service to the nation, it has the curricular flexibility to give central emphasis to art and culture.

In conclusion, may I felicitate fervently, one and all, the new graduates of the University of San Agustin for having achieved on this day the educational goal they have set for themselves. The nation is proud of you. You will constitute part of the upper echelon of the Philippine manpower who will help build up the nation and make it worthy of our heroic past and our glorious future. On behalf, therefore, of the Philippine Republic, I wish you all the fullest measure of success in your chosen profession or vocation. Remember always that he who lives for the greater glory of God and for the happiness of his fellowmen forever dwells in Eternity’s sunrise.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech at the Commencement Exercises of the University of San Agustin, Iloilo City, Saturday afternoon, March 25, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(14) , 2477-2480.