PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE NATIONAL JAYCEES CONVENTION AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SAN AGUSTIN, ILOILO CITY, FRIDAY, APRIL 26, 1957

MY FRIENDS:

I AM happy to be with you today and counsel with you on problems that affect our nation. All around I notice evidence of the buoyant optimism, the quiet confidence, and the easy camaraderie which in these troublous times are a welcome reminder that all is not wrong with the world. My heart lifts up too when I see the alert, bright faces of our young business executives and professionals on whom we can rely for further help in the difficult and complex job of governance, and on whose capable shoulders in the near future even greater responsibilities will surely be devolved.

You have given me by this opportunity a sense of well-being. But it is more than that, I assure you. I am likewise deeply grateful for this get-together because I know that your group has been very close to my distinguished predecessor, the late lamented leader, Ramon Magsaysay, whose policies—I have announced before and I solemnly repeat now—I intend with all the vigor and ability at my command to pursue.

That you should have been close to him, that he should have welcomed your advice, it is easy to understand. Your unquenchable spirits your disciplined and able minds, and your sense of community service, all qualify you for the sometimes thankless but indispensable role of presidential consultant. May I hope that the same eagerness with which you responded to his call, and the same enthusiasm with which you discharged the delicate tasks that our late beloved leader entrusted to you, will not be denied to his successor.

Your answer I can read in the eyes that light up with the mention of service to country that such a call entails. I know I shall not be disappointed. I hope that you will not be disappointed either. Together with the invaluable aid that your group collectively, and individually can furnish me we can serve our country. For that spirit, for that dedication, I commend you.

If you expect from your guest speaker some new and hitherto unrevealed truth about that most perplexing and difficult of all the arts—the art of government, you are in for a disappointment. But I know that you have no such expectation. I know that what you have in mind is some plain unvarnished statement of the course of action your President intends to pursue. I shall do my best to enlighten your understandable curiosity.

It is no secret that, from the moment of the grim tragedy that has befallen the country and of my assumption of the presidential office, I have announced in no uncertain terms my determination to pursue the policies of the late President Magsaysay.

God has given me the good fortune of being one of his co-workers during the all too brief tenure that he held the reins of presidential leadership. He had discussed with those of us who were in his official family the various aspect of his policies. We have been able to explore with him all their implications. We have seen them tested and we have seen them work.

All of us know how successful his policy has been in promoting the welfare of our people. Even more important, we realize how much it has meant in recapturing and holding the affection of, our people for their government, without which authority would become meaningless and allegiance a mere empty word. With the ardour for democracy so enthusiastically manifested in his personality and policies, we avoided the grave threat of the country falling like a ripe plum to the eager outstretched hands of the enemies of the free way of life.

The basic premise of the government resting on the consent of the governed demands as the first fundamental the identification of the people with it. Only on such a firm foundation of unyielding loyalty can a democratic institution maintain its existence. The policy in the social and economic field which the late President pursued with resolute determination has been tested and has come out with flying colors. Never has there been a firmer bond between the government and the governed as there is now. This is all to the good.

All of us know why. The strength of a constitutional democracy does not rest solely in the contentment of the rich, the well-born, and the able. It is even more indispensable that the humblest and the poorest among the people are satisfied. That happy state can only be realized when they know in their hearts that they are not neglected, they are not forgotten; when they have no doubt that their government sees to it that their primary needs are attended to and satisfied.

This is not mere empty futile theorizing. This is not a novelty in political theory. And yet only with the Magsaysay administration has it been acted upon with boldness and energy.

My administration—which is just the continuation of the Magsaysay administration—intends to carry on. The great work started will not be abandoned. I can assure you there will be no retreat. That is my solemn pledge.

What is more, my administration will accelerate the pace and hasten the progress. It was a great American President, the late Theodore Roosevelt, who said “a great democracy must be progressive or it will soon cease to be great or a democracy.” That is also our creed. Not only eternal vigilance but equally so eternal progress is the price of liberty.

That kind of progress has been achieved under a vigorous leadership with a sense of intimacy and closeness to the citizenry. It has been so in the United States. It is even more so in the Philippines, where its latest and most notable example, is our late President, whom we fondly remember not as an abstract being dwelling on the heights but as a friend of everyone, whatever be his station in life.

I repeat that the sense of mission, the sense of urgency which his administration felt in connection with the upliftment of the masses will characterize my administration. The militancy and zeal in the promotion of social justice will not abate one whit. Nor is our concern solely for the undoubted benefits that such an active endeavor will entail for our economically distressed brethren. There is, insofar as the more fortunate of us are concerned, the inner satisfaction at the thought that thereby we give expression to the natural passion for righteousness and the innate sense of justice that animate each and every one of us. There is the very real effect that the well-being of the masses enhances even further the happy situation of the favored few.

You have given the late President as I have noted earlier and for which I have commended you, your enthusiastic cooperation. You have thereby lightened his task. You did so freely and willingly because, like so many other Filipinos, you were close to him.

There is more to it, however. Your feeling must have transcended the purely personal. Of all groups, you are in the vanguard of enlightened capitalism. You realize that the problem of the 20th century is the betterment of the economic and social conditions without which further progress is impossible.

The free way of life to which we are dedicated is now under test. Its battle for the allegiance of men’s mind and men’s hearts, while progressing satisfactorily, has not been fully won. This is not to underestimate the heroic proportion of the successes attained here in the Philippines by my distinguished predecessor. Communism is on the run, but the problem of poverty has not been fully solved. The opportunity for striking mightier blows is therefore ours. I know you will not let it go.

With clearness of vision, with unfaltering faith, and with resolute determination we can fight together. The victory that is within arm’s reach will soon be ours. We shall not be worthy of it unless that passionate sense for social justice which we profess and our uncompromising belief in the dignity of every one of us be translated into reality. It is not enough that we proclaim it in stentorian tones. We must act with vigor. We must act with energy. We must act now.

With every resource at our command thus fully and effectively utilized, we can hope within our lifetime, within the very near future, as a matter of fact, to obtain for all of us here in this country we love so much, the full blessings of a constitutional system, the full flowering of a regime of liberty, justice, and democracy.

The opportunity for further service to the country is yours. I ask and challenge you now to grasp it.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library