PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT OF AN ICA DREDGE FROM THE UNITED STATES, TUESDAY AFTERNOON, AUGUST 5, 1958

MR. AMBASSADOR, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

ON BEHALF of the Republic of the Philippines, it is my pleasure to accept this hydraulic pipeline dredge from the government of the United States. While this will not be the first dredging equipment which we shall receive from the United States yet this will be the first from their foreign aid program which is specifically intended for harbor improvement.

The remarks this afternoon have vividly brought to our awareness the magnitude of our dredging problems. It is for this reason that I have always looked with growing concern for solutions that would offset adverse effects which this unsatisfactory condition of our harbors might have already done to our shipping trade and commerce, one of our main sources of national income, to our national effort toward boosting tourism, and to the reputation of the country as a whole.

The timely delivery of this worthy piece of machinery comes therefore at a crucial time when corrective measures to solve the critical deficiencies of our major harbors have become one of extreme national concern. It is to be regretted, however, that our effort towards this end has to be inextricably linked with our current dollar reserve conservation policy which compounds the problem with the difficulty in raising the much needed foreign exchange with which to procure essential capital goods of the type of this hydraulic pipeline dredge. Because of this financial “shots in the arm” the immediate significance of the ceremony this afternoon is our material gain. But far transcending this perhaps is that this benevolent gesture is one of the many manifestations of the friendly relations that now exist and should exist between our two governments and peoples. I am probably voicing the sentiment of our people in saying that through this practical demonstration of valuable aid of one nation to one of its loyal allies, we feel a greater attachment to the bond that has united our peoples’ hopes and aspirations. This relationship that has been forged in the crucible of the last war, makes for our happy co-existence in this trying time of peace.

I want to assure you, Mr. Ambassador, that this equipment, as we have treated other such equipment in the past, shall be put only to such uses that will prove beneficial to the country as a whole. We are not stopping here, however, for in spite of the limited resources we have at hand, we have, as a matter of fact, been able to negotiate successfully recently the acquisition of a bracket ladder dredge.

During my recent trip to your country, we made representations with your government for the acquisition of an additional sea-going hopper dredge and three hydraulic cutter type dredges, not as a direct dole but on a straight business loan proposition whereby as a consequence of the loan, we will oblige our government to pledge its paying capacity to provide the debt service requirement for them. Besides this amortization payment, I am quite aware of the effect of the expansion of our dredging fleet upon the annual budget owing to the resulting needs for their increased operation and maintenance. I know how inadequate our present peso resources for this purpose are, but cognizant of the manifold indirect benefits that will inevitably accrue in the form of unhampered shipping operations, increased national income, elimination of shipping losses, to mention only a few, I would recommend the examination of the effects of this fleet expansion upon the budget with the view to determining proper appropriations I could recommend in order to insure that this equipment is utilized to the optimum.

A formal application has been filed for this project. It is our ardent hope that this application will bear the patronage of your government, too.

In speaking for my government and my people, therefore, I wish to express to your government and the American people through you, Mr. Ambassador, our sincere appreciation for this concrete evidence of a type of a useful material aid of one friendly nation to the economic well-being of another. I would however be remiss in my obligations to my own colleagues in the executive branch of my government, were I to neglect to commend publicly the Office of the Foreign Aid Coordination of the National Economic Council and the Bureau of Public Works of .the Department of Public Works and Communications for having successfully negotiated the acquisition of this dredge with the able assistance of your local ICA Mission.

Oh behalf of the Republic of the Philippines and as its President, I now accept and, subject to other formalities, order the commission of this dredge under the Philippine National Flag.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library