LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

WE ARE met today on hallowed grounds. The earth under our feet once bore the footsteps of heroes and martyrs. The walls around us once resounded to the marching of conquering armies, the painful whish of the whiplash, the shouting of tyrants, and the groaning of their helpless victims. These walls once shielded the might of foreign masters—Spaniards, British, Americans, and Japanese—from the attacks of their enemies. They have crumbled down on various occasions owing to the fury of the elements or the destructive onslaught of war, but they have always been restored, mostly for military purposes.

Now Fort Santiago is once more in ruins. Once again it is being rebuilt. But this time it is we, the legitimate owners who are rebuilding it. And this time this historic Fort is being restored not for military purposes. The technological advances in military science have made it obsolete as military stronghold. But we are rebuilding it to stand forever as a reminder to our people that our independence has not been fed to us on a silver spoon from a silver platter. That, instead, we have won it at the cost of so much blood spilled by martyr-heroes and, of so much tears shed by countless widows and orphans. In this way, we may strengthen oar resolve to treasure our freedom and to keep the ramparts which support them, always physically, morally, and spiritually strong.

Fort Santiago has had a long and checkered history. At the coming of the first Spaniards to Maynilad in 1570, it had been fortified by Rajah Soliman and his grandsires for about a century. The old fortification was made merely of logs alone and earthen embankment, it is true, but it was a proof, nevertheless, that our forefathers had a sense of strategic military values and that the defense of the homeland has always had a high priority status among our people.

When the Spaniards came under Martin de Goiti in 1570, the bronze cannons which guarded the Fort and the valor of our forebears were not sufficient to stop the invaders. Maynilad, and after that, the rest of Luzon and of the country became a Spanish possession.

I shall not tax your patience with the details of the construction of the stone Fort at this site through centuries of Spanish occupation. Let me just say in brief that it was conceived and started by Legaspi soon after his arrival at Maynilad in 1571; strengthened by his successor, Guido de Lavezares; improved by Antonio Sedeno, a priest-engineer; further strengthened and given its present name by Gov. Gomez Perez Dasmariñas around 1592, and rebuilt in 1729 by Gov. Fernando Valdez y Tamon. I might also add that Fort Santiago has been so named because “Santiago” was the battlecry of the invading forces of Martin de Goiti during their successful assault against the wooden fortification of Maynilad in 1570, and Dasmariñas perhaps wanted it to be a reminder to the Filipinos of the might of Spain and the futility of resisting it. Furthermore, Santiago happened to be the patron saint of Spain and of Governor Dasmariñas; so the choice was more or less a matter of course.

This historical background may be important to the historians, and to us as a people. But far more important are the historical associations of this Fort to the important chapters in our struggle for liberty and independence. For this historic Fort has performed the dual role of defense bastion and torture chamber.

As a torture chamber it made no distinction between Spaniards and Filipinos. Even Spanish Governors like Geronimo de Silva, Hurtado de Corcuera, Fernando Bustamante, and Jose Raon, to name only a few, were confined here. So was Bishop Francisco de la Cuesta. But far more numerous were the Filipinos imprisoned here and far greater was the physical suffering inflicted upon them by their wardens.

Nameless forever are the anonymous martyrs who died here of suffocation, hunger, and physical torture. But there stand out a few famous Filipino prisoners who typify the rest. There are, for instance, the three martyr priests of 1872—Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora. Then there were the Lims, the Quirinos, the Elizaldez, and the Santoses of the Japanese occupation. But foremost among them is Jose Rizal, our national hero, the greatest Malayan that ever trod this earth.

Rizal’s imprisonment here in July, 1892, prior to his banishment to Dapitan, was relatively uneventful, but it is significant in that it is a clue to the kind of administration of justice obtaining in the Philippines at the time. Rizal’s confinement and subsequent banishment were not preceded by any form of due process of law. His second confinement, from November 3 up to December 30, 1896, is of paramount significance to us, for it was during this period that he carried out his unsuccessful fight for his life. It was in one of the rooms here that he wrote his immortal poem, the Last Farewell, than which no loftier, nobler lines have ever been written by man in any century and any clime! It was in an improvised chapel yonder, still awaiting reconstruction, that he was reported to have been reconciled to the religion of his childhood, as a part of his preparation for his untimely return to his Maker. It was there that he wrote his last lines to Blumentritt, to Paciano Rizal, and to his father and mother. It was also there that he allegedly married the dulce exirangera of his last farewell, thereby changing her status to that of “my dear and unhappy wife,” partly as a reward for the love she gave him during his lonely days of exile in Dapitan, and partly as a part of his reparation for the moral lapses he had committed, in preparation for his immolation at the altar of justice, racial equality, freedom, and human dignity. Finally, it was there that he started his last walk to Bagumbayan; it was there that he started his last .meditation on Christ bearing the Cross, ending at Bagumbayan with his meditation on Christ Crucified.

My friends, there are a few countrymen of ours who would rather see Fort Santiago completely demolished so that henceforth there shall no longer be in this portion of Manila any reminder of the tyranny to which our people have been subjected by the invaders. Every stone, they say, is a mute testimony to the agony that so many hopeless victims suffered here. But, as I said in the beginning, it is necessary to have here a perpetual reminder to our people that we have paid very, very dearly for the freedom we have won. Just as a man raised in ease is quite capable of throwing away the wealth he has inherited from rich parents, and one who has sweated for his possession is likely to conserve it, so our people will be more deeply concerned with the preservation of our liberties if they are aware of the terrible price we had to pay to win them.

But it is not merely as a reminder of the past that we are undertaking restoration work in this historic place. We want it as a repository of our precious historic relics and as a shrine to which cur people may repair in times bf national stress, to draw the inspiration and moral strength needed in solving the serious problems of the nation. Who knows if some day we may transfer to this place, to be given the reverent care that they deserve, the bones of Marcelo H. del Pilar, Jose Panganiban, and other heroes, which are now kept in small niches inside the dilapidated tomb of the Filipino Veterans at the Cementerio del Norte! Who knows if some day we may collect from the jungles, where they are now scattered, the remains of Jose Abad Santos, Vicente Lim, Wenceslao Vinzons, and other heroes that they may forever repose in permanent tombs tended by the loving hands of their grateful countrymen!

Also, we want this place restored so that our friends from across the seas, coming to visit our country, especially during the Rizal Centennial Year, which we have also designated as a year for attracting tourists to see the Orient, particularly the Philippines, may be able to see that we have had a history that entitles us to the respect of our brothers and sisters in other lands. For these mute stones shall always be eloquent witnesses that while there has been tyranny in this country, we as a people have never bended our knees before the tyrants. Be the tyrants white or yellow we have always believed with Rizal that there can never be tyrants where the people are not willing to be slaves. And we have always fought the tyrants with bolos or even with our bare hands, never hesitating to spill our blood, never faltering before the call of duty, in the face of weeping wives and children who are about to become widows and orphans as we leave our homes for the battlefields.

Then we may hope that our foreign friends, having learned how much our freedom means to us because of the price we had to pay for it, will learn to respect our independence just as we respect theirs. Then we may hope that in this spirit of mutual respect we may be able to help build a just and enduring world peace not only in Southeast Asia but also in every other section of the world.

Cognizant of the paramount significance of this project, the Congress of the Philippines has made an initial appropriation of ₱150,000 for the building to house the Rizal relics. As soon as estimates of additional appropriations needed can be determined, I shall not hesitate to recommend Congressional approval of the supplementary appropriation. Once sufficient funds become available, the reconstruction work shall be carried out with the utmost speed, for this job merits the highest priority in our public works program.

Our program shall not be limited within the confines of this historic Fort. In due time, as resources become available, it will be extended to include the entire wall of Intramuros. Fort Santiago and Intramuros are integral parts of a single historic site. Each will be incomplete without the other.

I should like to stress, before closing, that the reconstruction work we are embarking upon in this historic place is only an initial step in a huge and more vital reconstruction job which we shall undertake as a nation. If we are to attain the maximum level of greatness for which our people aspire, we must reconstruct our scale of values, placing the material and the moral and spiritual where they properly belong.

The Philippines has been called a show window of democracy in Asia. We have reason to be proud of it. But we must strive to deserve the honor. A show window can serve its purpose only when it contains, tastefully and properly arranged, the products it is intended to display. A show window of democracy would not only be useless, nay, it would defeat the very purpose for which it has been made, if it were either empty or filled with an unsightly display.

As you very well know, our display of the beauty and the virtues of democracy has been spoiled lately by so many forms of dishonesty and malfeasance in office. The PCAC during the administration of our late lamented President Magsaysay, and the more vigorous and vigilant PCAPE under the present administration, have been performing a herculean task in ferretting out the malefactors and prosecuting them before the courts of justice. Much has been done but much still remains to be done in this connection. I have often pledged, and in all sincerity I pledge again before the spirits of the honored dead who have hallowed this shrine, that I shall never stop in this thankless task as long as I am President of this country.

Herein, as I see it, is the real value of the reconstruction work which we are launching today. May our people grasp its full meaning and rise to the challenge which it poses! I hereby deliver this check to this patriotic group as my modest contribution for the accomplishment of this task.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the formal launching of Fort Santiago and Intramuros Restoration Project. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(17) , 3101-3105.