Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the United Nations dinner

[Delivered at Winter Garden, Manila Hotel, October 24, 1959]

THE thickening shadows of continued mistrust among nation’s and the grave implications of recent incursions into outer space as part of the huge armament among nations, brood over the world today as it celebrates the fourteenth anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations Organization. First conceived in hope by the Great Powers in order that peoples may know and enjoy an enduring peace, the Organization has grown slowly through years of dissension and recurrent clashes that brought the world perilously close to war. That it has so far succeeded in averting an open conflict gives rise to the renewed hope that the United Nations with its essential role as a force for mediation might yet dispel the shadows and help the world emerge into the brighter light of peace.

If one were to examine the balance sheet of the achievements of the United Nations, one is heartened by the important gains it has made in all fields of human endeavor in spite of the serious setbacks the Organization has met on political levels. More significantly it has given meaning and validity to the true concept of universal harmony: a shared kinship among the human race irrespective of barriers erected by men. This kinship arises from a common and spontaneous desire for peace, for the right to live, free from the oppressive circumstances of economic pressures, and for the preservation of human dignity.

We in the Philippines, like the rest of the small nations, have a special stake in the United Nations. Incapable of defending ourselves adequately in the event of a nuclear war, we look to the Organization to check the evil forces that threaten our way of life. Economically insufficient, we have recourse to its expanded technical assistance programmes.

Not very long ago, deteriorating political situation in Laos gave our people reason for deep concern. The explosion of what seemed at first an internal problem would have had tragic repercussions not only in the Far East but throughout the entire world as well. Without fanfare, but almost with dramatic promptness, the United Nations sent a team of investigators to the tiny kingdom and thereby halted what might have been a disastrous conflagration, as it did in the dispute between Lebanon and Jordan a few years back. Also relatively recent was the systematic despoliation of fundamental human rights in Tibet and which moved the governments of Ireland and Malaya to sponsor a resolution condemning Communist China’s violation of fundamental human right of the Tibetan people. In 1956, a United Nations Expeditionary Force was dispatched to the Suez Canal to forestall what could have precipitated an open conflict among the great powers. Perhaps less positively effective in the sad case of Hungary, the United Nations, nevertheless, brought to the attention of a shocked world the inhumanity and brazen character of Communist suppression of a people aspiring for the right to conduct their own way of existence. And by 1955, ten years after its founding, the United Nations had chalked up to its credit measures which it had taken throughout the Far East and the Middle east to ease situations that constituted a threat to international peace. It was instrumental in the solution of the dispute between the Netherlands and Indonesia. It had halted a full-scale war in Korea through the timely creation of a United Command under the United States and subsequently maintained peace in this area through the establishment of the Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of an independent Korea in the South. In the protracted negotiations between the Governments of India and Pakistan regarding the accession of Jammu and Kashmir, the United Nations succeeded in bringing about a temporary cessation of hostilities between the two countries. Its moral influence has, time and again, been a moderating force in heated disputes involving at one time or another, Formosa, Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Palestine, Cyprus, and the Republic of China. In Europe and Africa, it had encouraged the sober discussions of numerous delicate and sensitive issues, including the question of race conflict in South Africa as a result of the Apartheid, the Tunisian and Morocco questions, and the Algerian agitation for independence.

The dynamic quality of the United Nations in developing and adopting procedures for the solution of conflicts arising in various sectors of the world has therefore counteracted the discouraging fact that so many problems still await solution.

On the economic and social levels, the Organization has been an even more potent instrument of world peace. Deeply cognizant of the importance of economic welfare in the establishment of enduring peace, the United Nations and its specialized agencies have continuously studied prevailing international commercial policies. Since 1952, the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council have given considerable attention to international trade questions and particularly to the possibility of expanding world trade. The United Nations has, consequently, drawn attention to the farsighted wisdom of removing existing trade obstacles and the development of inter-regional commercial cooperation.

The Philippines, for one, has benefited yearly from the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations since its founding. This year, Philippine requests for such assistance in the continuance, in existing or modified forms, of U. N. and Specialized Agencies Projects amounted to $407,000. Aside from existing fellowship grants in varied fields of study, the Philippines derives invaluable advice from U. N. technical experts among whom are those on statistical work, economic surveys, industrial development and productivity, house and town planning from the United Nations Technical Assistance Administration; experts on plant production and protection, animal production and disease control, rural welfare, agricultural economics, forestry development, land use management from the Food and Agricultural Organization; science teaching and scientific documentation from the UNESCO, civil aviation from the International Civil Aviation Organization, schistosomiasis pilot control, hygiene and public health from the World Health Organization.

As you are well aware of, the United Nations expanded program is geared towards helping under-developed countries “to strengthen their national economies through the development of their industries and agriculture, with a view to promoting their economic and political independence in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and to insure the attainment of higher levels of economic and social welfare for their entire populations.” Contributions to the expanded program are voluntary. Since July 1950, eighty-five governments have paid or pledged approximately 200 million dollars. For its part, the United Nations gives, partly under a program financed from its budget and partly under the Expanded Program, expert technical advice in the fields of economic development, public administration, social welfare, and the broad field of human rights to countries which ask for it. Fellowships pilot projects, regional training, and demonstration centres and seminars are offered to train nationals of the requesting countries in these fields. Most specialized agencies also carry out additional technical assistance projects using part of their own regular annual budget to finance the projects. More than 10,000 experts of whom 6500 were provided under the Expanded Program, have been sent to 125 countries and territories on a broad variety of schemes.

United Nations Day, however, is not so much an occasion for recapitulating the achievements as it is for the reaffirmation of faith in the principles and objectives for which the Organization stands. In spite of dreary and profitless wranglings which have impeded its steady progress in providing a framework for negotiations of disputes, the United Nations has opened new vistas of international cooperation. Its growth from fifty-one to eighty-two members is not without significance. Nations have come to place greater value on United Nations membership and now actively contribute to the stream of experience, thought and culture from which the Organization draws its collective inspiration and strength.

We in the Philippines are cognizant of the overriding necessity for an effective foreign policy geared towards security and economic self-sufficiency in consonance with the principles enunciated in the Charter of the United Nations. We are equally aware that as a member of the brotherhood of nations, our best guarantees for ultimate peace lie in the harmonious blending of our ways of life with those of others, in the spirit of tolerance and comprehensive humanity. In this manner, we shall be helping in a practical manner to give clarity and meaning to the universal concept of unity that the United Nations stands for.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the United Nations dinner, Winter Garden, Manila Hotel, at 8:30 p.m. October 24, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(43) , 9023-9027.