PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE 1957 ANTI-TB FUND DRIVE, AT MALACAÑANG SOCIAL HALL, ON AUGUST 14, 1957

BEHIND me, hanging on the wall, you see the banner of the red double-barred cross, symbol of the united world efforts against a disease that has oppressed mankind since time immemorial—tuberculosis.

Far back in history this mighty foe of man existed, called by many names: phtisis, scrofula, consumption, the White Plague. Even before history was recorded, it plagued the world, leaving its telltale marks in the skeletons of Neolithic man and Egyptian mummies. Today in our country, it continues to defy the efforts of our Government and people to control it, still maiming and killing 23,000 of our countrymen every year, draining our manpower and constituting a stumbling block towards our economic and social progress. We are making great strides in our fight, but the disease remains a stubborn enemy.

We have, indeed, made great progress through the joint efforts of our government, the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, and our people after half a century of struggle. We cannot and we must not falter in our determination to emancipate our countrymen from the misery and suffering that Tuberculosis wrought in our land.

As we usher in the 1957 Anti-TB National Fund and Educational Campaign with today’s ceremonies, it is only fitting that we give proper recognition to the able work being done by the Philippine Tuberculosis Society in promoting its worthy objectives.

The officials and members of this organization have year in and year out, dedicated themselves to the fight against tuberculosis so that the toll of this dreaded disease among our people shall be reduced. They have evolved a system of services that effectively helps in keeping tuberculosis under control in this land. To them goes my heartfelt congratulations for their dedicated pursuit of their mission.

An encouraging fact to remember is that TB, although highly communicable, is easily cured if detected in its early stages. If the people can be widely informed of this characteristic of the disease and urged to undergo a regular medical checkup, the incidence of TB can be greatly reduced. The Philippine Tuberculosis Society will do well in further intensifying its activities towards this direction.

It is now my privilege and honor to declare open the 1957 Anti-TB National Fund and Educational Campaign. I now call upon every citizen and resident of the Philippines to rally to this double-barred cross banner and intensify their united crusade against the White Plague, giving the enemy no quarters until every man, woman, and child need not shudder with dread from the spectre of tuberculosis; until every home need not be engulfed with the fearful gloom which this vicious disease casts over the land.

I take pleasure in presenting my modest contribution to the General Chairman of this drive, my good friend, Don Manolo Elizalde, who generously gives of his time and energy for this worthy cause.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library