Ladies and gentlemen, my friends:

LIKE many other things in this modern world of ours, radio started out as an item of luxury but has become in the course of time, an item of extreme necessity. Its sister-medium, television, is in our country still a matter of luxury as it is in most of the countries of the world, except those that are so technically advanced and prosperous. But television’s phenomenal growth in the Philippines the last few years speak well of the sagacity of the industry as well as of our people’s reception for it. Indeed, there is no need for prophetic vision to predict that in the forseeable future, television in this country will be in the status that radio is in how—that of a necessity comparable to a free press.

I hope that this comparison with the press will not annoy those among you who fought still harbor some of the ill-feeling generated by the long war between press and radio over the effectiveness of each as a mass media of communication. That war has long since been settled and it was lost by neither side. Press and radio have found that they complement and supplement each other both in the area of news dissemination and in purveying entertainment. The entrance of television into the field of mass communication has also done damage to neither side. If there is anybody who is worried today over the fast growth of television, it is not press, nor radio, but possibly only the Hollywood film industry.

Here in our own country the complementary characteristic of press and radio has developed into a healthy trend noticeable the last few years. This trend has to do with the putting up by the big newspaper chains of their own radio-TV networks for faster dissemination of on-the-spot news. Of course, the rabid partisans for radio may claim that this is a clear victory for radio, since we have yet to hear of a big radio network putting up its own newspaper chain.

But that is neither here nor there. The fact is all the media of mass communication in this country had grown at a fast and steady clip especially during the last decade. Readership for the newspapers has increased and so has listenership for radio and viewership for television.

The role that the media of mass communication play in the country has become, over the past years increasingly more vital as we strove to meet the challenge of post-war development. That role has been doubly important because, hand in hand with our struggle for material progress, we have had to wage relentless battle against forces of an ideology that threatened the freedoms and liberties that constitute our democratic tradition. There is no doubt today that the mass communication media have been of incalculable importance in securing harmony among our people, a greater awareness of the problems that confront us, and an understanding of the alternatives that are open for their solution.

Especially true is this during this election year when media men are called upon to disseminate among our people the conflicting views on national problems that are being foisted upon them by rival politicians vying for public office.

To air impartially conflicting views, instead of lopsidedly presenting only one side; to; criticize with a view to reform, instead of senselessly attaching just to destroy; to calm the passions of political partisans by dispassionate discussions, instead of fanning them into flames of hatred by heated emotionalism-these are to them the greatest gauge and the truest test of media men’s service to the nation. I am happy to state here that our mass: media people have passed this test with flying colors.

At this point, I want briefly to summarize the reasons why I am seeking a second term.

I stand foursquare on the achievement of the Nacionalista administration. They are solid, concrete, and incontrovertible.

The next logical step in bur struggle as a people is the attainment of economic emancipation. Filipino First, which is the slogan of this economic policy, aims at placing in the hands of Filipino citizens the control of economic power in this country. This is the only way we can make every single Filipino benefit and share the bounty of the land. Filipino dominance in industry and business will be the direct result of Filipino First. A fully balanced agro-industrial economy will be the end result bringing about a self-sustaining and self-sufficient society.

The country’s fight against communism has been effective and will continue to be pursued relentlessly and with vigor, I signed into law the bill outlawing the Communist Party in our country. Under the; Nacionalista administration the subversive force of the communists in this country has been reduced to a minimum with the capture of most of their outstanding leaders. The few remaining at large are being hunted without quarter. These facts should take, care once and for all of the silly oppositionist charge that I am coddling communists in our midsts. In the fight against graft and corruption, I challenge anyone to show me any other administration that has done even only half as much as this one.

Grafters, there are in the government, as which government in whatever clime and during whatever time has none. But more than any other, my administration has gone hammer and tongs at crooks and has fired and jailed a substantial number of them. No other administration has done as much.

The next solid achievement of the Nationalista administration is dignity in foreign relation. No longer are we called puppets and no longer are we treated as such. Keeping faith with the strong traditional ties that bind us to our allies and yet developing closer relations with our Asian brothers and neighbors, we have achieved a position of prestige and respectability which no other administration in the past has attained.

The management of government and internal affairs under my administration has | shown a steady improvement of fiscal matters. Our national budget has been balanced and the last three fiscal years have shown consistent surpluses, to wit: ₱53 million in 1958; ₱70 million in 1959; and ₱59 million in 1960.

But it is in the field of public welfare and rural improvement that my administration has outdistanced by leaps and bounds every other administration in the past Today, the Filipino people enjoy health facilities comparable to the best in the world. This, notwithstanding the recent cholera scare that threatened us from our neighboring countries. My administration has encouraged local autonomy right at the barrio level. Local government have been granted a greater share in revenue collections. Per capita income has increased 21 per cent that of 1953, the last year of the Liberal Party. Rural health units, puericulture centers, an expanded barrio school system, irrigation and artesian wells units, land for the landless programmes, and numerous other community development projects, had improved the lot of our people in the1 rural areas where the majority of our population live. Today the countrysides vibrates with the pulse of progress.

Lastly, the Nationalist administration has restored to our people faith in free elections as the final arbiter in the choice of government officials: Civil liberties, many of you must still recall, were at a premium during the dark days of the Liberal Party regime when to be an oppositionist was to court bodily harm and might even cost one’s life. Today there are cases of election violence to be sure; for we Filipinos tend to take politics too seriously. But these cases are of local nature and: are being adequately handled by our national police agencies; unlike during those infamous days of the Liberal Party when organized terrorism was the weapon of a ruthless administration to bludgeon the opposition into submission.

This respect for liberty and love of freedom has distinguished the long and historic service to the nation of the Nacionalista Party, the party that won for us political independence, the party that will win for us this time economic emancipation.

It is this liberty and this freedom to which you as members of the Association of Philippine Broadcasters are committed. God grant you the power to preserve this liberty and this freedom which has cost us so much to achieve and to safeguard.

Your association will be called upon again to help your country during the coming elections. The quick and accurate reporting of the conduct of the elections all over the Philippines must be your chief concern. The element of speedy reporting during elections time is priceless. In past elections, you have helped report the news and the election returns to a waiting populace. By so doing you have performed great service to our people and minimized the commission of fraud. I trust that all the 130 radio and five television stations in the country will help disseminate the poll returns to Manila as speedily and as accurately as possible. Then the whole world will know that Philippine elections under the Nacionalista Party are the freest ever held here. Then we shall have preserved our people’s faith in free elections as the expression of their mandate. Then we shall have lived up to the verdict of the world that the Philippine Republic is the most successful democracy in Asia.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia before the Association of Philippine Broadcasters. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(45) , 8121-8124.