Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the annual B.W.A.P. awards dinner

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel March 3, 1959]

I AM indeed honored to be with you today, and happy to be able to share, with you some of my views on the country’s current problems and what my administration’s determined to do to meet these problems in the near future. Our paramount problem is economic in nature, and I wish to say something about the new problem for economic stabilization which has been prepared and is now awaiting congressional action.

The field of economics is not unfamiliar ground to you. As a matter of fact, the names of some of your members figure prominently in the world of business and economic debate. I can therefore speak to you with the freedom and confidence of one who knows that his words and ideas will be received with objectivity, intelligence, and sincerity of purpose.

Above the heat and dust of controversy, one inescapable fact stands clear—we have reached a critical crossroad in our long march to full development. If we do not meet the challenge with courage, and skill, we may find ourselves in danger of floundering along the way. We must not let this happen. There is too much to lose. We must rise to the occasion, shake off all vestiges of indecision that may grip us, and take up our new course with fresh determination and vigor.

The warning signals are definite enough. Rising prices unmistakably indicate the declining value and possible weakness of the peso. An inflationary situation is with us, spawned by developmental and other overspending in most sectors of the economy over many years. The international reserves has been increasingly called upon to finance the needs of our growing industries and to siphon off excessive consumer demands, so that it has now been reduced to a level which may undermine the integrity of our currency. The situation calls for comprehensive and decisive action. Such is embodied, I believe, in our proposed stabilization program.

We must bear in mind that domestic inflation and the law level of the reserve are only the external symptoms of the problem. No number of regulations and directives, and no amount of legislation can succeed in effectively checking these symptoms if they do not strike at the root causes.

The root causes are as I have already mentioned, two-fold: First, the heavy outlays needed by the public sector for economic development; and second, the substantial disbursements by the private sector for both investment and consumption. Public sector disbursements had primarily fiscal effects; private sector expenditures, monetary effects; both had eventual foreign exchange effects. Any program of stabilization, to be effective, must therefore exert a coordinated and simultaneous effect on the credit, fiscal, and foreign trade sectors.

The present situation evolved out of the heavy expenditure of our resources on economic development. Economic development and economic crisis may appear to be opposing terms and contradictory concepts. Yet, it was precisely the Heavy public and private investments in the industrialization program which brought about the bulk of the balance of payments and fiscal deficits, and which have resulted in the inflationary pressures and shortage of foreign exchange now threatening monetary stability and the continued progress of economic development.

A remarkable acceleration of economic growth occurred between 1954 and 1957, with the gross national product expanding by nearly ₱1.7 billion in that period, compared with less than ₱700 million rise registered during the previous four-year period. Agriculture expanded by 17 per cent, mining by 35 per cent, and manufacturing by a robust 41 per cent.

This growth in production was made possible by huge infusions of credit into the economic system. Capital expenditures of the public sector were financed largely through credit-supported borrowings, while those of the private sector were induced by liberal credit policies, the expansion of bank credit, the affording of tax exemptions together with a foreign exchange policy heavily biased towards industrial importation.

Inadequate revenue earnings from taxes compelled .the government to finance its operations and the development program through the use of public borrowings. A large portion of that debt was incurred in the form of bonds which were bought by, banks, since private savings and private entities could not or would not absorb them. The banks then sold these bonds to the Central Bank, thereby monetizing them and widening the credit base of the banking system, which development resulted in an over-expansion of credit channelled to the private sector.

This excess credit in turn generated an abnormal and effective demand for importation which created the chronic balance of payments deficit .that has whittled down our international, reserve. However, price inflation did not evidence itself until a little more than a year ago, owing to the fact that until then, the unsatisfied demand in, excess of domestic production could largely be met by imports financed from, the international reserve. Of course, such a process could not be continued indefinitely, and accordingly, when the reserve dropped to a marginal level at the end of 1957, the controls had to be tightened on credit and foreign exchange expenditures. The effects of these measures became immediately apparent on price levels, particularly of imported items. Price levels during 1958 thus were higher than in 1955, with consumer prices having .advanced by 8 per cent, general wholesale prices by 11.2 per cent, and retail prices by 12.4 per cent.

A solution which would strike effectively at the root causes of our difficulties must simultaneously accomplish several things. It must mop up the excess demand for imports and reduce the basic demand for foreign exchange, in the short run; and provide for some incentives to export to secure an increase in foreign exchange earnings, in the long run. Thus, the gap in our balance of payments would be narrowed and eventually closed. On the domestic side, it must eliminate or at least minimize government borrowings by the raising of revenues from non-inflationary sources, such as taxation, the kind that is based on capacity to pay, together with a judicious apportionment of expenditures, which would not only provide the revenue for the essential needs of a growing population but also make available a non-inflationary source of financing to make it possible for the country to proceed with development under conditions of greater stability and freedom. After stability would have been achieved in the first year, a scheme of gradual decontrol couldthen be properly, worked out.

The stabilization program which I have already presented to Congress, through the budget message which the business writers must be analyzing now, would enable us to accomplish what I have mentioned.

I ask for your comment. I invite criticism of the constructive kind. If you honestly believe the offered solution is wrong, I would appreciate it if you show me the right one. After all, it is the concern of the entire Filipino people. It is no less than the national economy that is at stake.

The stabilization of the peso is the goal. What are our chances of success? I would say they are good. But it requires determination of the entire nation. We have to have faith and vision. We have to work hard. I said that our chances of success in the stabilization of the peso are good after considering certain economic indexes definitely foreshadowing our successful emergence.

Here are some of them:

1. In industrial production, the manufacturing index of the first half of 1958 hit a new high of 168 points as compared to 149 points for the same period of 1957, taking the 1953 as basis with 100 points. The mining index shows an increase of 2 per cent in the same period.

2. Agricultural production in 1958 rose 1 per cent in volume and 5 per cent in value over 1957, In 1959 we have bumper crops of rice and corn.

3. The foreign trade in 1958 made a significant progress by cutting down the adverse balance of trade from 190 .million dollars in 1957 to only 48 million dollars in 1958. The adverse balance of payments is now only 17 million dollars were it was 94 million dollars in 1957. If we can keep this rate, we shall have favorable balance of payment by the end of this year. Our exports increased by 52 million dollars and imports decreased by 90 million dollars. The United States Philippine trade in 1958 was for the first time in postwar years brought close to fifty-fifty balance.

4. Our dollar reserves in 1958 showed an increase of 6.5 million dollars from 140 million dollars in 1957 to 146.5 million dollars in 1958. The first quarter of 1959 is showing encouraging trend.

There are a number of other indexes that portend well for a successful issue for us in our fight for the stabilization of the peso. But I shall leave that for some other time. What I would like to bring out at the conclusion of this talk is that all developments and indications show that we are in, the right direction towards economic stability; that we have found the correct proportion between the rate of speed of the development and the means therefor, and that, given the opportunity and the responsibility, the Filipinos, with the sympathy and understanding of our friends abroad can build up here a solid national economic structure that can withstand the stresses and tests of time.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the annual B.W.A.P. awards dinner. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(11) , 1903-1906.