Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the opening of the 8 th Annual Meeting of the Supreme Court Council of the Scottish Rite Masons

[ Delivered at the Plaridel Masonic Temple, February 13, 1958 ]

I SHALL remember this occasion as a happy moment of my life, for tonight you have given me the opportunity to be with you and to talk to you on a subject that is cherished and treasured in every human heart. It is with this pleasant feeling that I take the privilege to talk to you at this, your Scottish Rite reunion.

I cannot help but take cognizance of the great and noble work which your grand fraternity has done and is still doing for freedom of thought and conscience, for democracy, and for equality. In our own country and in the United States, members of your brotherhood led in the fight for the sacrosanct cause of liberty, equality, and fraternity.

In his infinite wisdom and abiding love for mankind, God created men equal and free. Our people have kept faith with their freedom which they have cherished since time immemorial, living and fighting for it and dying for it whenever necessary. Love for liberty has been manifested in numerous events that fill the pages of Philippine history. When their freedom and peace were curtailed and their rights and dignity as human beings were threatened, the Filipino people rose in belligerent protest. In Bohol Dagohoy fought with might and main against the Spaniards; in the Ilocos, Diego Silang; in Pampanga, Maniego.

Let us not forget the Philippine Revolution of 1896, nor the Philippine-American War that followed. All these wars were fought in the name of freedom and the human right to live and let live. Nor should we forget our part in World Wars I and II, where we fought side by side with the American and other democracy-loving peoples of the free world.

It makes me very happy to know that this venerable and ancient fraternity of yours is founded on precepts of brotherly love, belief, and truth .On these precepts is broadly premised the promise of peace. World-brotherhood is a most worthy and noble aim. And I think that it can be achieved. Good begets good. In the heart of man there glows the spark of love for his own kind. If men’s minds and hearts can be directed toward that happy goal— brotherhood of mandkind—our hope for peace will be accomplished. If we can make man see the truth and make him believe the gospel of love, make him look to his neighbor as his friend and brother, and make him forget his envies his jealousies, arid selfishness, we can attain true universal brotherhood.

Regarding this noble objective to which all Masons are faithfully dedicated, let me quote Rizal’s inspiring words:

“And what does our duty consist? It consists in working for the redemption of humanity, because once man is dignified there will be less unfortunates and more happy people, to the extent to which this is possible considering our condition. “Humanity will not be redeemed so long as there are men who are exploited, so long as there are oppressed races, so long as intellects are castrated and eyes blinded in order that others may live like sultans and alone enjoy the contemplation of beauty. Humanity will not be redeemed and reason will not be free while faith is imposed upon man, while whims are laws, while there are subject nations. Humanity, in order to reach the high destiny toward which God is guiding it, must be free from dissension and from plagues devastating it, and there must be no complaints or maledictions heard in its onward: march.”

Andres Bonifacio, the great Plebean, in his writings for the people that he loved too much and too well, left these words:

“Always bear in mind that the true love of God is the love of thy country, and that this love is also the true love for thy fellowmen.

“Engrave in thy heart that the height of honor and happiness is to die in order to save one’s country.”

In Mabini’s True Decalogue, that Sublime Paralytic who selflessly forgot his own physical weakness and material poverty, in dedicating his life and labors for the Filipino cause, said the following:

“Love thy country next to thy God, and thy honor more than thyself, for it is the only patrimony of the race, the only inheritance from thy ancestors, and the only legacy for thy descendants; because of it thou hast life, love, interests, happiness, honor, and God.”

These tenets for which the greatest among us lived and worked, and even died, are the same principles for which this fraternity is committed. Let me congratulate you, my friends, for being members of this fraternity dedicated to such high and noble ideals. Yours is truly an enviable membership, for your organization touches the four corners of the earth and binds it together with the loving hands of friendship for all. Yours is the true freedom, for it is governed by the self-imposed responsibility to bring tolerance, forbearance, and relief to every man and woman and child. Yours, too, is the real democracy, because Masonry has brought about equality for all men of all creed and color, It has removed distinction of the races; it has formed a big universal brotherhood. Yours is the brotherhood that works and builds and even sacrifices for freedom, democracy, and peace.

For one last parting word. Freedom of thought, freedom of experience, and freedom of conscience constitute the greatest heritage of democratic civilization for which so many of your greatest heroic brothers have fought and died in all climes and times. These great freedoms of men have led us to the miraculous advances of science, to this age of atomic and nuclear energy, television, and supersonic planes, and to the era of the sputnik that opens to us the threshold of inter-planetary navigation. Your fraternity has won a place in the vanguard of marching civilization. May it remain there until time is no more.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library