Doña Julia Vargas, widow of Don Ortigas, ladies and gentlemen:

IN RECENT months, we have witnessed substantial efforts to speed the country towards progress. Both the Government and the private sector, equipped with new perspectives, have been engaged in various endeavors designed to raise the standard of living, banish traditional ills in our economy, and all in all create conditions of prosperity and happiness for our people. Most of you present here have lent a helping hand in advancing these efforts and achieving our social and economic aims.

I am certain that this ferment for change will continue unabated.

Progress, however, calls for total efforts, and we may well pause to ask ourselves if there are tasks that we should be accomplishing with closer care or performing with greater dispatch. We may need to remind ourselves, for instance, that economic aims call not merely for investments in trade, commerce, and industry but in society itself.

The public health program is one of these investments.

A partial evaluation of the importance of this investment is an opportunity to which we are invited as we meet on this auspicious occasion. For the fight against tuberculosis, now on its 49th year, is a major aspect of the public health program. There had been many times when tuberculosis was the principal disease in our country, taking higher yearly tolls in human lives than any other. When the first organized effort against tuberculosis was launched in 1910, some 40,000 out of every 100,000 persons were dying of this dread disease.

We have since made great strides in combating the disease. In 1935, the death rate had dropped to 214.32 per 100,000, and still further down to 107.39 in 1956. Science, education, and a dogged will to cooperate have constituted an active force against the yearly onslaught of this terrible menace to our nation’s well-being.

Reports from health authorities, however, have shown us that the disease has not entirely ceased to be a grave problem. As of last year, there were still approximately 800,000 patients in the country. At the Quezon Institute alone, 50 to 100 patients were still applying daily for admission. The yearly death toll was estimated at 23,000. And even more graphic description of the continuing menace was made in a report that tuberculosis, in 1958, was still responsible for one death every 15 minutes.

It is therefore obvious that maximum effort in combating tuberculosis is the minimum condition to a successful health program.

For indeed, even merely as a corollary to our economic objectives, the fight against tuberculosis is of utmost importance. Each year it handicaps our manpower potential. Death and disability caused by tuberculosis have accounted for a heavy drag on our capacity for productive effort. This fact is of special concern for us today, when much of our national effort is devoted to productive enterprises in farm, office, and factory.

In our continuing campaign against this disease, we are fortunate to have the voluntary and whole-hearted assistance of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society. This patriotic organization maintains those ever growing bulwarks against the White Plague—the Quezon Institute, a number of provincial tuberculosis pavilions, provincial chest clinics and dispensaries, and an active fleet of mobile X-Ray units to carry the public health campaign to our schools, firms, and distant barrios.

The Philippine Tuberculosis Society has, thus, been a remarkably efficient and dedicated public servant, living up faithfully and with vigor to the expectations of the people who have, year in and year out, contributed financially so that this fight against tuberculosis may continue. These contributions betoken the huge, warm spirit of trust and confidence that is today the indispensable ally of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society—indeed, of the whole anti-tuberculosis campaign. I have great personal admiration for that public trust and confidence, and I am convinced that the scientific knowledge as well as the human toil and sacrifice of the men and women engaged in eradicating the tuberculosis menace will be both impossible and meaningless without that public trust.

We are gathered now to renew expressions of such trust in the humanitarian work of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society. I join Mrs. Ortigas who, as president of this organization, exemplifies its boundless sense of public service, and with her I appeal for renewed support of the anti-tuberculosis fund campaign. I ask this support specifically in behalf of the 800,000 men, women, and children who are now afflicted with tuberculosis. But in a larger sense, I appeal to your generosity in behalf of us all, about whom it ought never to be said that those fundamental values of human compassion and sacrifice were without meaning and place.

In this spirit, and with this hope, I now declare the 1959 Anti-TB Fund and Educational Drive officially open. At the same time, I take pleasure in presenting my personal contribution to Dr. Andres V. Castillo, general chairman of the campaign.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech delivered at the opening ceremonies marking the launching of the 1959 Anti-TB Fund Drive at Malacañang Tuesday afternoon, August 18, 1959 . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (34) , 6994-6996.