PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE CONVOCATION COMMEMORATING THE 27TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE FAR EASTERN UNIVERSITY, FEU QUADRANGLE, MONDAY AFTERNOON, JANUARY 30, 1961

Ladies and gentlemen:

TWENTY-SEVEN years ago the nation underwent a political transition, the Commonwealth period, and we, the people, were faced with the collective challenge to build a nation sturdy and firm, and to govern ourselves. The late Dr. Nicanor Reyes respondent to the challenge by founding the Far Eastern University.

Dr. Reyes, scientist and educator, envisioned the imperative need for private non-political, non-sectarian Filipino institutions of higher learning to train the country’s youth who may later assume the monumental task of nation-building. The numerous men and women your University has trained to man the wheels of nation-building and development attest to the clarity of his vision.

Underscoring further the vision of your founder, private education has assumed—in great part—the duty of the state for the education of our people. Figures bear this out: 60 per cent of our secondary and 90 per cent of our collegiate and graduate students attend private schools.

My friends, the need for able and far-sighted men and women is a continuing one. Our political independence is won, our nation is built, but we still must recapture our economic independence. With this in mind, I gladly accepted your alumni president’s invitation to visit with you and share my thoughts on “the Filipino youth and nationalism.” You, today’s youth, are after all our country’s leaders tomorrow.

Nationalism is not an original commodity of the Asian or the African. But nationalism thunders loudest in Asia and Africa today. History tells us that it was in 17th century England where nationalism first manifested itself and the Geneva-born French philosopher, Jean Jacques Rousseau, was the first to expound on it. In his “Social Contract,” Rousseau, who greatly inspired Filipino nationalists like Dr. Jose Rizal and M. H. del Pilar, created an ideal community, a “true” political community with mutual devotion and love of the fatherland as the moral foundation of his state. His citizens, the people, were the center of his nation.

Ardent love of the Fatherland then is nationalism. It is deep attachment to one’s native soil, unselfish loyalty of the individual to his country; it is community-consciousness. It is, of course, a state of mind. But it manages to develop loyalty without the whip or a coercing hand. It is devotion to country.

What energizes it is national discipline. With this discipline, nationalism is a vital, potent, and active force. Without it, it becomes an empty catchword. No amount of legislation can help a people assert itself and rendezvous with destiny, for the “will” is not in the people.

Across the world today—in Asia, in Africa, and in the Americas—peoples and states pulsate with nationalism. For the first time in the history of mankind, it is the driving socio-political force in virtually all countries and all civilizations. As the journalists have written, it sweeps the country.

This, despite the forces of reaction. These forces, which would perpetuate a Filipino nation groveling in the misery of a putrid status quo ante, have sought to discredit the nationalism I have espoused by deliberate distortion of our Filipino policy, maliciously depicting it as an anti-foreign and exclusivistic policy.

Filipino First Policy does not shut our doors to our outside friends. In fact, we continue to invite capital from friends to invest in our country. I have recommended to Congress the enactment of a foreign investment bill designed to attract foreign capital and help develop further our economy.

It is the policy of my administration that Filipinos receive greater participation in their own country’s economic activities. The invitation for foreign capital to invest in our country and give the economy a push is not inconsistent nor incompatible with the Filipino First policy. The foreign investment law being proposed will provide a favorable climate to attract foreign capital and would include incentives; such as, a more liberal rate of repatriation of capital. I dare say that the most ideal arrangement would call for a partnership with aliens preferably providing for the technical skill.

When present-day nationalism—a feeble voice at the start—erupted, it exploded like a booming thunderclap that drowned the deriding voices. The people gave our Filipino First policy a resounding popular endorsement in 1959, and the skeptics of Filipino First policy had to switch tactics. They were, they said, for “positive nationalism” and for “cultural nationalism.”

My young friends, there can only be one kind of nationalism. Devoid and stripped of delineations, colorations, or shadings, nationalism simply means love of country and the determination to do good by our fellow countrymen. Whether manifested in the political, the cultural, or the economic fields, it forms part of the whole.

And so, who is the nationalist? The nationalist, I submit, is:

The sari-sari store owner who sells at reasonable prices and does not try to make a fortune overnight.

The industrialist who invests his money and help in his country’s development.

The farmer who tills the field and helps feed his countrymen.

The student who studies hard to prepare and adequately equip himself for the day when he will serve his country and his fellowmen.

These are nationalists.

Youth of the Philippines, our country calls upon you. We have won political independence, but the fight for eco-carry out in attaining this objective to national fulfillment.

Your generation has a special and distinctive mission to our people have been aroused to break the alien domina but the drive and determination must be supplied by you not enough. You must help energize these legislations emancipation continues. We are in the great turn. The government can only create a legal climate for you, The enactment into law of Filipinization measures alone is point of our history. For the first time in 400 years of our economy.

Upon your collective shoulders, then, is placed the task of carrying on the struggle for realization of this national aspiration. It is my fondest hope you will respond. Help generate this national philosophy. When it shall be fulfilled, it will be the greatest source of our national pride.

The fight for economic emancipation is, of course, not as romantic as a political revolution. You cannot die for it. We, Filipinos, have demonstrated repeatedly that we have the courage and the willingness to undergo sacrifices and to die for our native land if it need be.

But the summons to you, the Filipino youth, is in a field of endeavor which is just as vital in our national life. You, young university men and women, have, by your higher education, a greater responsibility indeed. Train well, prepare well. Our developing and ever expanding industries, our growing financial and business houses, our government and our schools, await the young men and the young women who are skilled and who are equipped to occupy the pivotal jobs in the nation. To fall short of this high expectation will be to fall short of the requirements of national discipline in the nationalism we embrace.

It is also you, the youth, who can best help the Administration eliminate graft and corruption from the public service. Despite the “total war” we have waged against this cancer, and although we have scored some 9.547 convictions on our scoreboard, the malady has proved itself so deep-rooted that it will take no less than a supreme total national effort to weed it out completely.

How can it be that with some 21,992 cases filed, 13,600 cases decided, and with 9,547 convictions obtained, our government is still gnawed by his social cancer? Perhaps the solution may be found in the theory that the bribe-taker is not as guilty as the bribe-giver. I dare say the bribe giver should be meted out sterner punishment.

History shows graft and corruption existed in our country as early as Spain’s rule. The martyr-patriot, Dr. Rizal, wrote of it with anguish as part of his time’s “social cancer” in his “Noli Me Tangere.” Contemporary history records it as a sore in the government when the Nacionalista Party wrested the government from the Liberals in 1953. In the name of nationalism, I appeal to you, the enlightened youth, to give me your all-out support in this war on graft and corruption.

In concluding, my young friends, I wish to dwell briefly on the juvenile delinquency problem, the continuing fight against communism, and the conservation and maximum use of our natural wealth.

We are particularly distressed by the rising incidence of juvenile delinquency which besets most countries of the world, even in totalitarian states like Soviet Russia. Juvenile delinquency, of course, stands indicted in the hearts and minds of men. But mere indictment is insufficient. I dare say the government alone cannot meet this problem, although it is doing its utmost to eliminate it. I subscribe also to the belief that parents cannot face this alone; neither can this university go it alone. But the government, the parents, and this great university, in a joint effort, could stamp out this social evil.

We are deeply disturbed, too, by the communists’ insidious efforts to infiltrate the ranks of our youth. The communists, I must warn you, are subtle in their ways. In fact, it is because they are subtle that they are effective. It is always the youth, together with the workers and young professionals, who are the initial and prime targets of communist infiltration. And the student body of this university is no exception.

I would like to see our youth organized for civic service. It is a novel way to harness the skilled and educated youth for development of the country. With such an organization, the country will have ready manpower to man key posts in the government as well as to provide the brains and sinews to our industry and business.

As I said in my state-of-the-nation speech before the joint session of Congress:

“The Filipino youth, fired with ardent patriotism and raring to do something for their beloved fatherland, should be rallied and organized for civic service. They can be of immense help in solving the worsening youth delinquency problem. They are a definite asset in lighting communism. They can be of massive assistance, as once in the past, in keeping elections free, honest, and orderly. They can contribute effectively in our efforts for reforestation and against deforestation and also in the conservation of other natural resources. They can wield a tremendous influence for good in moral regeneration and in many other undertakings requiring mass action.”

But I firmly oppose the organization of a national youth agency such as that proposed by certain political aspirants. I am against control of the youth by the state which such an agency would do. This proposal by the Opposition would seek to regiment the youth. It smacks of fascism. And it may well be the forerunner of Brown Shirts and Black Shirts.

Educational institutions should unquestionably be the proper instruments for the development and sharpening of the minds of our young people and definitely not national youth agencies. This university as well as other institutions of learning have the tremendous responsibility of safeguarding the basic freedoms of the individual. Any educational policy that is described as “cultural” but intended primarily to destroy the integrity and liberty of the individual, does violence to the university and is destructive of society itself.

A true Filipino nationalist fights for a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy as ordained in our Constitution. He believes that sovereignty resides in the people and that all governmental power emanates from them. He is therefore willing to fight and, if need be, surrender his life to uphold and maintain free, honest, and orderly elections.

I therefore invite the alumni and the student body of the university and the youth throughout our land to be on the alert against any attempt at violation and commission of frauds in the forthcoming national elections. I will not tolerate and, much less, allow election frauds. I call upon you to maintain your vigilance in order that our democratic institutions and traditions will be preserved for posterity.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library