PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT OPENING CEREMONIES OF THE FIRST REGIONAL CONFERENCE ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AT THE HALL OF FLAGS, DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, JUNE 7, 1957

OUR generation has seen a great and historic movement in many of the nations of Asia and the Far East. In this part of the world, at least 11 new states have emerged since the end of the war: Korea was the first in 1945; followed by the Philippines in 1946; Pakistan and Ceylon in 1947; Burma, Vietnam, and Cambodia in 1948; India, Laos, and Indonesia in 1949, and Malaya in 1957.

As newly sovereign nations, we acquired for ourselves the governmental authority which we considered to be a primary and cardinal requirement for the fulfillment of the economic and social aspirations of our people.

I should also remark upon an equally dramatic political development in our midst. I refer to the serious efforts of Asians to reorient the goals and methods of their government so as to make it truly an instrument for promoting the general welfare.

In the words of an early Filipino patriot, Emilio Jacinto, “the welfare of the people is the sole purpose of all governments on earth.” We now have the independence essential to the realization of this exalted objective.

After giving due and full credit to those directly responsible for the betterment of our school system, public health service, industrial activities, agricultural production, commodity credit and distribution system, labor relations, road-building program, pier construction, police, protection, and many other substantive fields of productive endeavor, we must ask ourselves: how well has this effort been planned and organized? How well staffed and trained are the personnel of these agencies? How effective are their operation? How well are these functions been coordinated? And, lastly, do we have the machinery to constantly appraise and evaluate the result of these efforts? Have we provided adequate checks and balances? Have we preserved sufficient flexibility to adopt and revise our methods to constantly changing conditions?

The answers to these questions are the continuing responsibility of management—and management in government is known as public administration.

That the welfare of the people is the purpose of government is fully recognized by the government represented here, I am sure. Today, we are concerned, especially with the social and economic welfare of our people. We want to raise their living standards, to provide employment opportunities, and otherwise to help them provide the necessities of an improved livelihood. But to do so we must increase our productive capacity. We must increase our agricultural and industrial production to provide food and clothing for all. We must develop industries essential to a balanced economy; and we must develop exportable products to maintain a balance of trade with other peoples of the world.

Government may or may not be directly involved in the production, transportation, and distribution of economic goods. But it is necessarily engaged in providing services and facilities that will make increased production and effective distribution possible. There must be roads for transportation; there must be schools to prepare our citizens for better living; there must be health services to guard against the debilitating effects of disease; and above all, there must be protection of life and property against violence and other criminal activities which tend to destroy both the incentive and the capacity to engage in long range planning for economic and social gain. In addition, modern government is called upon to assist in the promotion of productive enterprises through research activities, training and demonstration services, and the adoption of economic policies designed to encourage private planning for and investment in productive enterprises.

The goals are clear and the programs, though complex, can tie planned and promulgated with relative ease. The real difficulties arise in implementation of these programs. It is in the performance of the detailed services despite limited financial resources that our developing governments encounter their greatest difficulties. Modern governmental operations, like large scale business and industrial enterprises, require systematic planning, well coordinated organization, and efficient and effective performance of individual tasks in order to accomplish the objectives essential to balanced and progressive economic development. Above all the governments of developing nations need effective leadership at the operating levels—agency administrators and supervisors who know how to get work done by instilling in others the collective will and capacity to do it.

This is the function of public administration: to plan the detailed programs and activities necessary to carry, out major government policies; to organize the personnel of government into effective operating units; to stimulate and facilitate the performance of individual and group tasks; to appraise and evaluate the efficiency of operations; and to take such remedial action, or recommend such changes from time to time, as may be deemed necessary to improve the performance of governmental services.

If we agree with men like our national heroes Rizal and Jacinto, and with other far sighted patriots of your country and mine, that the function of government is to promote the welfare of the people, we must also agree that the success of a government in fulfilling its mission depends upon the quality of its public administration. An efficient administration system, guided by sound policies, will hasten the industrial and agricultural advancement of an entire nation; an inept and inefficient administration will be a drain on the nation’s financial resources and will obstruct rather than facilitate economic productivity.

It is incumbent upon every nation, therefore, and especially upon the governments of developing nations that seeks in a few years to raise the living standards of their people several fold, that the system of public administration be studied critically, and that every effort be exerted to increase the performance output of government workers, to insure the positive contribution of each individual and group task to the achievement of major objectives, and to install in every employee and official the professional spirit of service to the public.

Within the next two weeks you will focus your attention upon many vexing administrative problems that obstruct the economic development of our respective countries. Likewise you will exchange ideas and experience on the encouraging results of administrative programs and reforms that you have carried out for the economic and social uplift of our peoples.

Because of these reasons—the importance and value of the work that you and those you represent typify—and also because of the community of interests of our respective countries in the solution of the grave social and economic problems confronting us, I cordially welcome you to the Philippines. This welcome is accompanied by the fervent wish that out of your deliberations will come some constructive suggestions that will assist our newly developing nations to advance more rapidly towards our mutual objective of achieving an improved and more balanced social and economic condition for our people.

I wish to repeat what I have said in my signed message to you on this significant occassion: It is my fervent hope that your deliberations will lead to the formulation of programs of foreseeable benefit to the nations that you represent. I also wish that this conference will provide the groundwork, as contemplated in your agenda, for the organization of a regional body of public administrations whose leadership may well secure for the peoples of our region the most efficient and competent public administration.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library