PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH DELIVERED SUNDAY MORNING AUGUST 31, 1958 AT THE HALL OF FLAGS, DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, WELCOMING THE REMAINS OF JOSE MA. PANGANIBAN

IN THE NAME of our government and people, I welcome back to the Philippines the remains of Jose Ma. Panganiban.

In committing him to the bosom of the soil whence he sprang, he is at last at home with his own people whose cause he served with the great Filipino propagandists at Barcelona, Spain, seventy years ago.

It is a beautiful custom and an obligation to history to bring home the remains of great Filipinos wherever in the world they have died in order that our children and their posterity can comune with their ideas and works at a closer range and feel the breath of their immortality in the warmth of our own soil under our benign skies.

It is indeed a happy coincidence that the official reception of the remains of this compatriot occurs on this day, August 31, which is the birthday anniversary of my great predecessor, President Magsaysay, who, if he were here today, should have been the one to receive these remains in my stead.

When in his twenties Panganiban went to Spain to further his medical studies and identify himself with the Great Propaganda Movement, which was already graced by the famous names of Jose Rizal, Lopez Jaena, Marcelo del Pilar, and Mariano Ponce, this young Bicolano showed a maturity and sense of responsibility beyond his year—an indication indeed of the measure of his future stature if he had lived out his full life.

From his biography we must abstract out an important fact that he began writing seriously at the age of 15 and through his 27th year when he died. Throughout his writings that had come down to us we note a precocity definitely oriented, toward love of country. This was very unusual because “love of country at that time was dangerous heresy, and young men of lesser breed would rather toy with, safer ideas.

It should be re-emphasized in these brief remarks that the Great Propaganda Movement from 1882 to 1892—ten crucial years that exposed naked an exploitive empire— was a period of our colonial history when Filipino nationalism had its first and strong manifestations, and it was of such dimension that it gripped the whole nation and loosened the strangle-hold of an alien power. Thus the nation shook from north to south and from east to west— all because of that Great Propaganda Movement spearheaded by the youth of the land and carried on by them under heavy odds, with all the force and recklessness characteristic of young men touched with divine fire.

That it was truly national in scope is easy to demonstrate. Thus we had Juan and Antonio Luna and Isabelo de los Reyes from the Ilocos; Jose Alejandrino, Teodoro Sandiko, Mariano Ponce, and Marcelo del Pilar from Central Luzon; Jose Rizal, Baldomero Roxas and others from Southern Luzon; Tomas Arejola and Jose Ma. Panganiban from the Bicol region; Graciano Lopez Jaena and Enrique Magalona from the Visayas.

Now, what is the relevance of Jose Ma. Panganiban to the context of our time? What is the message of his young brief life?

His relevance to the Great Propaganda Movement is already indicated.

His relevance to our time is in his exemplification as a brilliant university student which the present generation of young men and women can draw inspiration from. We must stress his seriousness of purpose and his sense of responsibility at so early an age.

Why did Panganiban not merely pursue his medical studies and isolate himself from the patriotic activities of his countrymen? That would have been a safer position to take—he could have finished his medical studies, come home, and made money out of his private medical practice.

The fact that he chose the part of greatest resistance and courted danger under conditions so uncertain and in a struggle so unequal, reveals the timber of his character and the obsessive drive of his patriotism.

The young men and women of the Philippines today should note here the example of an unusual patriot with whom history has reckoned and whose ideals are worthy of emulation.

Welcome home, young intrepid spirit, and touch the kindred spirits amongst your people, and infuse into them the internal incorruptibility of character which is the crying need of our public service and free enterprise!

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library