Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the observance of the 14th Anniversary of the Independence Day

[July 4, 1960]

MY COUNTRYMEN AND OUR FRIENDS WHO HAVE JOINED US IN THIS CELEBRATION TODAY:

THE vast throng which we Filipinos comprise in this park is but the nucleus of an entire nation 27 million strong in joyous observance throughout the country of the Great Day of Independence.

Fourteen years ago today, from the holocaust of war our freedom rose like the Phoenix from the ashes—and with it sovereign statehood. This Republic of the Philippines is the capstone achievement of four centuries of libertarian heroic struggle.

The renowned contemporary British statesman Sir Winston Churchill described the ordeal of the freedom fighting peoples in the recent world war as a trek through a valley of “blood, sweat, and tears.” His words fit well our own travails as one of such nations. And it was also this statesman and wartime leader who paid tribute to the Filipino soldier as among the best in the world in the fight for freedom and human dignity.

The Philippines today is engaged in the task of dignifying its independence and of developing its strength—socially, culturally, economically, and politically—so that the dream come true may always be a good, beautiful, and living reality, the source of the best in life for our people.

For the task at hand, there must be dedication on our part. From the glories of the past, let us draw new inspiration. And like the artist, we must discipline ourselves in the practice of the art of nation building, which calls for the genius of our race to stay at the fore.

I say to you, my dear countrymen, that if this our nation is to live perpetually in freedom, if we propose to live up to the legacy of the past, if we are to achieve in full the bounties that God has earmarked for our people not only of this generation but of the generations of the future, we must be zealous in our exercise of responsibilities as well as of rights in a democracy; we must be worthy of Rizal and the heroic past. We must deserve our glorious future; we must be true to God and to our fellowmen; we must be true to ourselves by disciplining self; we must be inspired by dedication; we must WORK. And, if necessary, we must FIGHT AGAIN.

Whether we shall have to fight once more, only the event will teach us in its hour. But we must work now in the spirit of Peace whose lot it is to work ever for the greatest good. We must do something more in the way of increasing our gains toward economic progress and the general welfare. At the same time, we must watch our ramparts and strengthen the bastions of our defense against aggression and infiltration.

In regard to the latter, the keynote of this year’s Independence Day observance is struck, Discipline for National Greatness. This is not the discipline of fascist or totalitarian communism. It is not a regimentation of human robots. Ours is democratic discipline, the discipline of free men. We do not merely work, obey, and fight. We also think. And the crystallized constructive thought of our people as a nation is the basis of this discipline, the self-discipline to be exercised by each individual citizen and public servant redounding to the best interest of the nation as a whole.

Let me put it this way: From the millions there must be concern for the national welfare and from the nation as a whole will emanate the individual welfare. Each of us is part of the whole and no one can make any lasting gain unless the nation is healthy, strong, and secure. Each of us, therefore, must contribute to this end.

Nor is it enough that we speak of these things. We must do them. I address you in all candor that, for all that has been accomplished, much more remains to be done. Your government is trying to do its utmost within its power under the Constitution and the law and it is doubly resolved on this historic anniversary to keep faith with you and with all that you, the Filipino people, stand for.

With regard to the national security in these uncertain times, we have evolved a foreign and domestic policy calculated to make this country safe for democracy and a contributor to the Great Cause of making the whole world a haven of peace with freedom and justice.

Peace with freedom and justice. A few weeks ago we had for visitor in our midst the President of the United States who came in the course of a worldwide odyssey in quest of the Golden Peace. The phrase which I repeated is his. I quote again from President Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Let us never forget for a moment this world fact: the hulk of the earth’s people are joined with us in the eternal pursuit of freedom and dignity and justice for every individual.”

And permit me to recall humbly how I observed on the occasion of President Eisenhower’s visit that the United States and the Philippines are two of the freest nations of the World and that in the enterprise of helping seek the boons of freedom for alt, as well as in preserving their own, our two nations are inextricably linked. On this stand— the policy of corporation with America in the spirit of amity and alliance and on the basis of sovereign equality— the Filipino people, demonstrated far beyond question your adherence and support, with the tremendous welcome and ovation for the President of the United States during his stay in our country.

President Eisenhower’s many public statements here culminated in the Joint Communique issued before his departure which included the synthesis of Fil-American collaboration, specifically with a view to “maximum effectiveness in the formulation and execution of U.S. military assistance in the light of modern requirements.” President Eisenhower also re-emphasized in his joint communique the concept that in the event of attack there would be “instant (U.S.) retaliation,” thus reaffirming the Joint Communique of 1958 issued during my visit of state in Washington.

In the difficult task of nation building, disciplined restraint applies with equal cogency to our conduct of foreign relations. While we are determined that the winds of freedom should blow freely about, we are also cognizant of the requirements of international cooperation in the spirit of the United Nations.

In our pursuit of progress we have refashioned our policies within the context of a rapidly shifting international scene. Thus, in the awareness of our geographical and racial affinity with the Asian nations, a greater stress has been laid upon forging closer ties with them. We hold that if Asia is to have its rightful place in the community of nations, it must achieve unity of objectives and of action. In stressing friendship with our Asian neighbors, we seek to reinvigorate traditional ties and to solve common problems that in here in profound political, economic and cultural changes.

During the recent meeting of the SEATO council of ministers in Washington, the Philippines underscored the need for the members of that regional organization to undertake unflinchingly the task of extracting Southeast Asia from the state of underdevelopment. The defense of freedom rests heavily on the existence of societies where the individuals possess a standard of living to which they would passionately hold on.

Of course, we do not agree with the proposition that freedom is exclusively a matter of material values, but if man does not live by bread alone, he must have the bread that will sustain the vigor with which he has to fight for things of the spirit. If the time comes to defend freedom, let it not be said that the spirit is willing but the flis weak.

In the enterprise to help make Asia become strong, we with our kins, the people of Malaya, will propose the creation of a Southeast Asia Association of States devoted to the up building of Asian prosperity. My projected visit to Malaya this year is part of a plan of that country and ours to give life to an integrated pattern of cooperation encompassing all our immediate neighbor nations. I am sure that they will join us in this project calculated to benefit all. The basis of this Asian plan is a free exchange of experience, the greatest teacher of all. While this country is ours, she proposes to be truly of the world, not only in amity and ideals but also in trade and commerce. We have to further our economic ties with the United States, but beyond that we must go and therefore we are exploring and opening new outlets for Philippine exports in Asia and Europe.

The new economic blueprint rests on the Filipino First policy, so much criticized by those who do not understand it. Actually it is a vehicle for the nation’s growth into a worthy and substantial contributor to the welfare of the world family of nations. A Philippines internally strong will be of value to the world and the international community. In terms of economic contribution alone, such a Philippines is to be desired not only by her own people but also by her friends.

The Philippines proposes to be a strong and healthy nation for the sake of her own people, for the sake of that part of the world to which she belongs, for the sake of the world at large which will be a better place to live in if the littlest state and the humblest people count with the blessings of life.

We have found our friends in the free world responding with understanding and sympathy. And from America—our special ally—has also come not only understanding but even encouragement through President Eisenhower. During his visit here, he endorsed the nationalism of our people and of their government. President Eisenhower’s stay with us demonstrated conclusively that there is no diminution in the quality of Fil-American friendship.

In point of fact, the visit climaxed the current process of settlement of Fil-American problems. These include the payment of our gold devaluation claim for $23 million; the revision of the Military Bases Agreement to the effect of reducing the lease period from 99 to 25 years; the relinquishment of considerable areas of land heretofore under American control and the determination of the metes and bounds of remaining areas to be retained; the release of the Olongapo community to our government; and the clarification by President Eisenhower himself that the U.S. treaty obligation in the Mutual Defense Pact to repel aggression against the Philippines will be done immediately and instantly.

Some problems remain to be solved; such as, the administration of military bases and the criminal jurisdiction over triable offenses. Enactment of a law appropriating payment for additional damage claims is pending in the U.S. Congress with good prospect of approval. Our sugar quota is being improved by American Congress. Adjustment of our obligations under the Romulo-Snyder agreement and our claims for expenses of the Recovered Personnel Division are being ultimated. With ampler American assistance our Armed Forces will be modernized. On the economic phase, the oft-quoted joint communiques give us reasonable hope for more substantial aid to make the Philippines an effective factor for democracy in Asia.

I speak of all this because of its relation to our efforts to stay on our own feet. We shall never be on our knees. Our relations with the United States as well as with the rest of the nations of the world are on the basis of equal sovereignty, as President Eisenhower pointed out during his visit with us and as the whole world recognizes under the Charter of the United Nations.

We have made our political alliances courageously and we have forged our system of national defense in conjunction with the defense of the free world. Our national economy is an internal affair which still challenges the best in our people to solve the problems that beset it.

Today we begin our fifteenth year of independence. July 4, 1946, indeed was a day to become unforgotten ever. Here at the Luneta hundreds of thousands of us watched with throbbing hearts the ceremony marking the birth of the Republic. This edifice of stone from, which I speak was not here then; nor the imposing skyline of modern buildings that we now see around us. But at the time of the proclamation of independence, it did not matter that the ceremonial grandstand was a makeshift affair, that all around were the debris of war, that the whole country was prostrate and bleeding.

Our people only saw the future and felt the moment quote: “This was a moment of eternity. Time seemed to have paused to watch the apotheosis of Democracy in the Far East. This was the culmination of the Dream of Bizal who watched us still from his marble pedestal. . . . This was the final note of that many-centuried melody of yearning . . . that arose one dark morning on the beaches of Mactan, gathered force and tragic sweetness in the precipitous defile of Tirad Pass, on a lonely hill in Balintawak, on a sunny patch of ground at Bagumbayan, and rolled in global thunder through . . . Bataan.”

Our eyes were moved to tears and our souls were stirred. Then reality had to be faced again. The task of reconstruction and rehabilitation had to be begun. Time could not erase the face of war; only our hands could. We had to clear the debris; then we had to build anew.

Government buildings were in shambles. Schools, hospitals, homes were in ruins. Agriculture was erased from the ground. There were no ships for vital inter-island communication and transport. Our work animals were also casualties of war. The land was barren and the waters to irrigate them were still. There was no money. Government revenue from taxes could not fully met public expenditures. Fortunately, the situation was retrieved to some extent by extraordinary receipts from abroad, which were largely balances carried over from pre-war years.

The period of reconstruction and. rehabilitation was fully accomplished in ten years.

Thereafter, we took off for the grand adventure into the future. We dared into accelerated development. The government spurred production on all fronts, lessened dependence on imports, encouraged capital formation, provided expanding employment opportunities, together with higher income and a rising standard of living for the people. The forces and resources of the national economy were marshaled and mobilized to support the development program. We embarked on development of our vast natural resources in proportions never before attempted. In the larger interest of the nation, there was a call for economic discipline under a system of controls, particularly on foreign currency exchange and on imports.

Over the tremendous objections of many who did not understand, we passed legislations and other measures to stabilize the government fiscal position and consequently the people’s economy. Happily the outcome was the stabilization of our finances, the strengthening of the peso, the rise of the credit and confidence of the world in our Republic, the attainment of favorable balance of trade for the first time in post-war years, the rise of the dollar reserves now nearing $200 million, and the doubling of our gross national income from six to almost 12 billion pesos.

A rising trend of government expenditures is inevitable. Population increases, the maintenance of armed forces, the cost of government operations, and the servicing of public debt—all involve huge sums of money. Furthermore, capital and social overhead projects demand financial resources far above revenue from taxes.

However, if the government revenue trend from 1946 to 1959 can be used as a measure of this country’s progress, the picture it depicts is quite heartening. A random comparison of 1946, 1950, 1955, and 1959 income figures shows a steadily rising revenue from all funds in the amounts of ₱69 million, ₱360 million, ₱710 million, and ₱960 million, respectively.

On the expenditure side for the same years, using all resources available, total government outlays were ₱234 million in 1946, ₱562 million in 1950, ₱839 million in 1955 and ₱1.102 million in 1959. The difference between total expenditures and total ordinary revenues were financed from extraordinary receipts, loans, and domestic borrowing. We should note that economic and social expenditures absorbed increasingly larger proportions out of the totals, more than 60 per cent each year.

Tangible result of all these are schools, hospitals, bridges, power and steel plants, housing and resettlement projects, irrigation and hydro-electric projects, besides the intangibles, especially increased productivity induced in the private sector.

Parallel to the fiscal stabilization success, other measures were adopted to induce and encourage investments from the private sectors in production. The past ten years are an eloquent testimony to the great strides achieved in economic progress which is now already gearing toward a never expanding scale of industrialization.

Within the last ten years, our Gross National Product has expanded more than 80 per cent, rising from ₱6.136 billion in 1949 to ₱11.032 billion in 1959. No other country in our part of the world can match this record.

The magnitude of our strides forward may be gleaned from the gains in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing. In the past ten years agricultural production doubled. It stands today four times that of production before the war, when the economy was almost entirely agricultural. In the past ten years mining has trebled its output. Manufacturing is also producing today three times more than the pre-war record.

This is the picture:

Our population has increased 23 per cent during the past ten years.

But our agricultural production has expanded 96 per cent during the same period. Mining output has increased by 179 per cent. And manufacturing by a phenomenal 211 per cent. All in ten years.

The wealth of our natural resources and the existence in our own midst of all the basic raw materials are but for us to utilize in the operation of modern industry. We must carry on with training our people in technological, industrial, management, and administrative skill necessary for the purpose.

We must study more, learn more, and work more.

Already, we are virtually self-sufficient in the necessities of life; that is, in food, clothing, and shelter. Our production of rice and corn was in surplus the last two years. Our agricultural export products should be bountiful this year again. In addition, more than 1,000 food-processing plants are now operating in the country. Eight integrated textile mills and 20 knitting mills are capable of supplying three-fourths of our clothing needs, saving us as well $70 million in foreign exchange annually. A Philippine cotton growing industry will raise the supply of raw materials to meet our requirement 100 per cent.

Our forest resources valued at billions of pesos should certainly be able to fill our construction needs with a supply for export to spare. We have cement factories, glass factories, metal sheet plants, and varied industries turning our construction materials. We have the physical assets. Let us utilize them with our hands, our heads, and our hearts to produce prosperity.

We also have the financial institutions necessary to help— commercial banks, rural banks, insurance-institutions, the social security machinery, mutual funds enterprises, home financing organizations—governmental and private—all servicing progress.

The growing stature of our economy is palpable not only in the domestic activity alone. Our international position has also improved considerably. Last year we had a favorable balance of trade in the sum of ₱40 million. Foreign trade increased by 25 per cent; imports decreased by 13 per cent, and exports increased by no less than 115 per cent. We thus paid our short term foreign obligations and at the same time added more than $17 million to our first six months of 1960, the dollar reserve went up by another $32 million. It stands now at $195 million, the highest since 1957.

The year under review has been one of the most fruitful years in the life of the Philippine Republic. It was during this year that we had won for the first time during our four centuries of Christianity the appointment of a Filipino as Cardinal in the person of Rufino Cardinal Santos. It was during this year that we won the lightweight junior championship of the world in the youthful Young Flash-Elorde. It was during this year that we have seen the inauguration of the world’s biggest dome auditorium, the Araneta Coliseum. It was also for the first time that the biggest industry for the manufacture of agricultural implements, machineries, and spare parts out of locally-produced materials contributed by 124 Filipino cottage industries was established by the International Harvester of the Philippines. This is a significant stride in the industrialization program of making use of locally-made raw materials. And of course, in the line of arts, we have also for the first time in the year under review won universal recognition for our Philippine folklores art which has been broadcast all over the world through the initiative and enterprise of the Bayanihan Art Center.

With the encouraging state of the economy, we are implementing now steps toward final, complete, and absolute decontrol. We have already decontrolled partially by freeing a sizable portion of the foreign exchange reserve. The gradual decontrol program has been laid out for a period not to exceed four years. Now, I feel confident that we will be able to decontrol finally, completely, and absolutely in three years. Then, free enterprise shall return and, with it, a normal economic environment.

This is my special message to you on this the 14th year of our independence. Please let me remind you once more of the responsibilities of freedom, not only of the freedom of economic enterprise but also of freedom in every phase of our national life. Freedom is the opportunity to do the right thing.

Today our future appears bright. Our countryside is peaceful. Our economy is being put in order. Our national security is being enhanced. Our individual rights are respected. The machinery of justice is in working order. Opportunities will increase.

The need now is Discipline for National Greatness. To this end may I remind of the first message I sent to Congress after my election as President on the imperative of building the House of the Nation on rock. “And the rain fell, and floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, but it did not fall because it was founded on rock.”

Thank you and God bless the nation.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library