PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE WORLD AFFAIRS COUNCIL, LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA, AT 7:30 P.M. THURSDAY, JUNE 26, CALIFORNIA TIME (11:30 A.M. FRIDAY, JUNE 27, MANILA TIME)

THIS GENEROUS welcome that you have accorded me this afternoon, more than an expression of hospitality, is really a token of our mutual pride over Philippine-American relationship covering half a century of a momentous era in world affairs.

May I point out, at the outset, three highlights of that relationship:

First: For the first time in history, a great power fixed a definite date for independence. It was an unparalleled and revolutionary idea at the time. It was all the more significant because such an unprecedented policy was laid down by a country which was not declining in power but was on the ascendant and which, in fact, would soon be regarded as the most powerful in the world. History will appraise more accurately than we can the long-range effects of America’s enlightened policy towards the Philippines. Nothing, however, can alter the fact that my country was the first of the former colonies in Asia and the Far East to attain independence through peaceful negotiation. The creative process of liberation which in the past ten years has brought a dozen nations with some 7,000 million peoples into the community of free states had its beginning in Manila when the Republic of the Philippines was inaugurated on the fourth of July, 1946.

Second: No less significant were the mean’s employed to achieve this end. From the outset, America renounced any intention of governing the Philippines for its own benefit. At a time when exploitation of colonies and dependencies was the rule, America inaugurated a revolutionary concept of government epitomized in the sentence, “The Philippines for the Filipinos.” Faithful to its own libertarian traditions, the United States respected the Filipino people’s ceaseless aspiration for freedom. The administration of the Philippines was considered a trust, and generous assistance was given to the Filipinos in the arduous task of preparing a nation for the responsibilities of sovereignty. The pattern of relationship thus established was the forerunner of two of the most constructive developments in today’s world: the trusteeship system now administered by the United Nations and the programs of economic and technical assistance to economically under-developed countries.

Third: Moved by a common devotion to freedom, America and the Philippines quickly established firm bonds of friendship that have proved indestructible in peace and in war. During the ordeal of two world wars, the Philippines stood by the side of America, and never more steadfastly than in times of defeat and disaster during the Pacific war. And for its part, America has never hesitated to extend to the Philippines the protection of its immense strength as well as share with us the blessings of its abundance. Our two countries, we can with justifiable pride say, have given our divided world an example showing that when nations, no matter how geographically distant, or culturally and racially different, are willing to defend freedom together and to establish democratic institutions to safeguard their people’s liberty, there is formed between them indissoluble ties of amity on the strength of which they can draw in moments of grave crisis.

These are the inspiring lessons of half a century of Philippine-American relationship. No less inspiring were some of the related episodes of the epoch which gave life and substance to such results. I recall the great debates that resounded in your halls of Congress when the issue of Philippine independence was examined in the full light of free inquiry and in good time was settled—as all such fateful issues between nations should be settled—-peacefully on the basis of principle, of law and justice. I remember the decades of contractive work prior to independence, when some of your outstanding men as well as hundreds of good, average Americans spent the best years of their lives among our people, sharing with us the high adventure of nation-building. I recall the war years when Filipinos and Americans fought side by side in Bataan and Corregidor, in Lingayen and Leyte, unconquered by defeat, chastened by victory. I was a witness to that shining hour in the morning of July 4, 1946, when the Stars and Stripes, which had first been raised in conquest over Manila some forty years before, was lowered in glory by a voluntary act of the American people, to give way to the Sun and Stars of an independent Philippines.

Mutual cooperation in that task of nation-building, comradeship in war, partnership in peace—thus can Philippine-American relationship be best summarized.

It has not been lost to us Asians that in your constant re-evaluation of the manifold problems you face incident to your leadership in world affairs, Asia now looms large in your calculations. As the head of state which had been and will continue to be your friend and ally, I ask you to reassess your responsibilities in Asia in the light of the great lessons which Philippine-American relationship had yielded to the mutual benefit of our two peoples.

The area of South and Southeast Asia is in ferment; powerful currents of change are in motion and it is not always clear what direction they will take and what goals are sought by them. There was a time when it was confidently believed that the one and only goal of all was freedom and democracy. It is true the new Asian states were, and still are, largely inspired by democratic ideals; by choice, they established republican or parliamentary systems of government, and they evolved economic and social programs designed to elevate the living standards of their peoples.

It must be stressed, however, that three factors have tended to change the picture. The first is the inherent difficulty of providing their peoples with a better life and give them freedom from want. Without exception, the new Asian states have had to face almost overwhelming problems of poverty, lack of capital and trained personnel, inadequate technical know-how, undeveloped and malformed economics, over-population in relation to available resources, and the inertia and lack of initiative induced by centuries of foreign rule. The second factor is the relentless, unscrupulous, and increasing effective Communist penetration of the area. The third is the decline of western influence and the failure so far to establish with Free Asia a relationship fully responsive to its needs and aspirations.

These three danger signals must be heeded because they post a great potential danger to the cause of freedom. The Communist political, economic, and cultural offensive is being intensified in Free Asia precisely at time when many of the Asian states are experiencing a deep sense of frustration and, unfortunately, a growing estrangement from the West.

Already we have seen some disquieting portents. To South and Southeast Asia belongs the dubious distinction of having given communism for the first time in its history something it had sought in vain elsewhere: the respectability and power conferred by substantial victories in free elections. At this moment a great and populous Southeast Asian country is convulsed by an internal conflict arising in part from the issue of communist participation in the national government. Elsewhere, there are signs of a potentially disastrous drift towards extremism as achievements fall short of minimum goals and democratic institutions and methods appear less than adequate to the task of bringing to fruition the great goals of the Asian revolution.

What is to be done in the face of this challenging situation? Asia is too large a segment of the earth and too important in numbers, geographical position, and resources to be written off as a bad risk or a lost cause. The free world cannot lose Asia and still hope to survive, let alone prevail. There is no alternative to meeting the challenge in Asia.

The only question is, how can it best be done? The first step required, it seems to me, is to recognize the fact that present policies have only partially achieved their objective. Taken separately, those policies have undoubtedly been soundly conceived, and there is no questioning the sincerity and earnestness with which they have been implemented.

The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, popularly known as the Manila Pact, and the Pacific Charter, have been particularly useful and should be all means be maintained. Within its self-imposed limits, it has helped to deter open aggression in South and Southeast Asia and is doing valuable work assisting member governments to identify, expose, and counter communist subversion, at present the major threat to the security of the area. Bilateral arrangements for mutual defense and for economic and technical aid also fulfill a most useful function. The Colombo Plan, now in its seventh year, has given the countries in the area substantial assistance in increasing production of basic commodities, augmenting available capital and training technical personnel. Within their means, the United Nations and its specialized agencies are likewise doing a commendable job.

These are worthwhile programs and no fair-minded critic can find fault with them. But in the totality of their effect, they have somehow fallen short of their mark. There is need, therefore, for re-appraisal in order to strengthen present policies and programs where they have proved to be inadequate, and perhaps to chart and move boldly into new courses of action where fresh initiative is needed.

I would commend to your consideration three such courses of action:

First, as far back as 1950, in the Southeast Asia Conference held in Baguio, the Asian nations made it clear that their security should not be made secondary to that of any other area. It is a significant commentary on the so-called “Summit” talks that, eight years after that Southeast Asia Conference, hardly any mention of Asian security has been made on the western side. Yet the free Asian states are among the most exposed in the world, not only to the danger of open aggression from the vast and steadily growing Communist forces in the North but also to a greater extent than anywhere else—to Communist infiltration and subversion in all its forms. Surely, without minimizing the importance of political settlements primarily affecting Europe and other parts of the West, it should also be possible to show equal concern for the fate of free Asia. The fact that there are no easy solutions to this problem is beside point. The important thing is for the initiative as well as the serious and sustained search for such solutions to come from the great powers of the free world rather than from the opposing side. The Asian nations should never be given cause to feel (as some of them did during the war) that their destiny is of no more than secondary interest to the great powers of the West. Psychologically, it is of the utmost importance that free Asia should not appear to be disregarded or ignored in any serious attempt to reach high-level agreements leading to disarmament or peace. The temptation to deal with the problem of security within the narrow framework of armed strength, economic potential, and balance of power should be consciously resisted. Psychological and moral factors should be taken fully into account. Too often, it is forgotten that a free Asia’s deepest hunger is not for rice and fish but for equality and status and a position of dignity in the community of nations.

Secondly, either within the framework of the United Nations or by agreement between the nations concerned, that a policy be adopted regarding the remaining colonies and dependencies in Asia and elsewhere based on a program for the orderly and reasonably rapid progress of those territories toward self-government as well as for providing them with such economic and technical assistance as they may need when they shall have become independent.

While it is true that nearly all of the former colonies in Asia have attained independence, the issue of colonialism continues to concern them deeply, and they feel affected when conflicts about self-determination arise in the remaining colonial territories. Moreover, the free world, engaged as it is in a struggle for survival, can ill afford the cost in money, precious lives, hostility, bitterness, and disunity in its ranks exacted by the periodic and increasing dangerous crises in the colonial territories. It should be one of the major objectives of free world policy to set at rest all doubts about the future of the remaining colonies, to persuade the peoples in those territories that their best hopes for self-determination and a better life lies in constructive cooperation with the powers concerned, and thus remove an issue that has, time and time again, grievously divided and weakened the free world. Our Philippine-American experience is an excellent example. Because the question of Philippine independence was settled at least in principle, at the beginning of our relationship, our two countries were able to develop goodwill and friendship, and our confidence in America was enhanced gradually and it developed into the trust that has won our loyalty.

The third suggestion is the formulation of a comprehensive long-term economic policy that would enable not only the United States but all other industrialized countries of the free world which are in a position to do so, to undertake with the under-developed countries a joint program of mutually profitable economic development. It may seem over-ambitious to propose a program on this scale at this particular time. But careful study will show that it is well within the capability of the free world, given the conviction that it is a good thing to do and that it has the will to undertake it. The program should be adequate to the needs of the under-developed countries, both as to capital and technical assistance; it should be divorced from political or security condition; and should be aimed solely at the attainment of the widest measure of prosperity and rising standards of living in the participating countries, respecting at all time the sovereignty of the nations concerned.

A program of this magnitude would kindle the enthusiasm of the free Asian and other under-developed countries. It would engage their creative energies and at the same time stimulate production and employment in the industrialized countries. As the untapped resources of the underdeveloped countries become available for consumption and commerce, two-way trade would expand and generate new levels of prosperity. But infinitely more valuable than the material benefits that would accrue from the program would be the sense of partnership and kinship that it is bound to engender. It would serve as a powerful catalyst, uniting East and West with a strong sense of common purpose. It would provide a broad and durable foundation for the establishment of a constructive and mutually satisfying relationship between the industrialized and under-developed countries. From such a relationship will develop community of interests, pride of achievement, and the united strength essential for survival.

It is of crucial importance, I believe, for the great democracies of the West to be aware of Asia’s problems and needs and to make the Asian peoples feel they are linked by a common purpose and a solidarity of ideals, so linked that they are consulted on matters of common concern, to agree to a policy of extension of freedom to the remaining colonies, and to work and plan for the raising of living standards of the under-developed areas. The best means to achieve this end is joint involvement in the great enterprise of providing a better life for the vast majority of mankind. The struggle for survival will not be won by the West alone or by Asia alone; it will require the best they can do together with the rest of the free world, drawing fully on their human and material resources.

I have spoken of a sense of common purpose. Even more essential, I think, is a sense of mission, a sense of dedication. Great sacrifices, heroic effort, deep and sustained devotion to freedom and human betterment—all these will be demanded in generous measure. I am confident they will be willingly and gladly offered, for free men have never yet failed to rise to the challenge whenever their way of life has been threatened as it is menaced seriously today. The Philippines is a small country, but in this epic struggle we have made it clear we refuse to be on the sidelines. Our history, our tradition, and our very instinct as free men make it impossible for us to be neutral in a contest in which the highest spiritual values are involved and the very life of the free world is at stake. We have made our choice. There is no twilight zone for free men. It is freedom or slavery. Proudly we stand with you and with the host of free peoples irrevocably for freedom.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library