PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE LEAGUE OF GOVERNMENT PROSECUTORS AT THE MANILA HOTEL, SATURDAY EVENING, AUGUST 9, 1958

I ACCEPTED your invitation fortnight with more than my usual enthusiasm because the occasion affords me an opportunity to speak on a subject which is of vital interest to everyone and before officials who are directly concerned with it. I refer to the administration of justice in this country, with particular emphasis on the part assigned to government prosecutors.

The organization of the League of Government Prosecutors, I think, was a step towards the right direction. It enables you to get together and exchange views, discuss your common problems, and perhaps find solutions for them.

Your office as government prosecutors is a necessary part of the machinery for the administration of justice. You are directly charged with the prosecution of all criminal cases. You also, conduct preliminary investigations, a function which until a few years back was exclusively that of judges of courts of first instance, justices of the peace, the city fiscal of Manila, and, under certain circumstances, municipal mayors. Because of the powers that go with your office, which make an inept, incompetent, unscrupulous, or unprincipled prosecutor dangerous, a good prosecutor, I think, must possess three indispensable qualifications. The first, of course, is adequate professional background, training, and experience; the second is industry and sense of dedication; and the last but not the least is high moral character and broad human understanding.

The first qualification should be obvious to anyone and requires no elucidation. No government prosecutor can properly and efficiently discharge the duties of his office without adequate preparation for the position. The lack of it weakens public confidence in the government and in the administration of justice because it is often the cause of miscarriage of justice. The law fixes the experience and qualification of a fiscal, but this is not always a guaranty of professional competence because much depends on the individual office holder. The trouble is—if I may speak in a light vein—while men are created equal their inequalities commence from the moment they are created.

As to the second qualification, no lawyer should aspire to be a fiscal unless he is willing to work and is prepared to assume the responsibilities of the office. As we all know, and I am speaking as from a lawyer to lawyers, the profession of law is very demanding and no lawyer, however brilliant he may be, can afford to neglect it. It requires continuous study and application. So do not be self-satisfied and stop growing professionally, because if you do you are sure to stagnate and be left behind. Remember, there is a keen competition in the profession. Keep yourselves posted with the law and the new decisions; If you cannot afford the expense, require the city or the province where you are assigned to subscribe to the Official Gazette, to the advance decisions of our appellate courts, and, to broaden your knowledge, outlook, and understanding, to law journals here and abroad. Thus may you properly and adequately prepare yourselves for better opportunities, bigger responsibilities, and larger usefulness.

The tendency to follow the line of least resistance is a universal failing. Fiscals are not free from it. Some find it easier to leave the handling of even the most serious or important cases to their assistants, forgetting that, as the chief prosecutors, the investigation of crimes and the prosecution of criminal cases is their direct responsibility. I hope that no one of you is a victim of the habit.

In these days of clogged court dockets, when detention prisoners languish in jail for months and even for years without the benefit of a trial, the speedy disposition of criminal cases should be your particular concern. Because such speedy disposition is your joint responsibility with the trial courts, you are expected to exert every affort towards clearing the clogged dockets. In your enthusiasm and your impatience, however, you should take careful precaution against the commission of injustice. My attention has been called to a recent case against an accused who was convicted solely on the qualified admissions of her counsel. Apart from her plea of not guilty upon arraignment, the accused said nothing during the entire summary proceeding. She was not even asked to confirm or deny her counsel’s qualified admissions and no witness, either for the prosecution or for the defense, was required to give testimony. The Fiscal cannot evade his share of the responsibility for the irregular proceeding which deprived the accused of her day in court. His impatience and that of the trial judge did not result in speedy justice but in hurried injustice, I trust that in the performance of your duties farcical proceedings such as the one I have just described may not be repeated. What I am driving at is that while it is your duty as government prosecutors to go .after criminals, you should not be indifferent to the rights of persons accused of crimes. Moreover, because courts decide cases only upon the evidence presented to them, much of the power to acquit or convict rests in your hands. Use that power judiciously and be sure that no person regardless of the evidence goes to jail for a crime he did not commit. After all, the administration of justice is the goal of every criminal prosecution.

I am reminded at this juncture of Judge Bernard Botein’s very interesting book, THE PROSECUTOR, based largely upon the author’s observations as an investigator and a prosecutor before his appointment to the New York State Supreme Court. His principal character is a brilliant and ambitious but utterly unscrupulous public prosecutor who, to win headlines and fame, would make use of fabricated evidence he himself helps secure to insure conviction. I commend the book to you, not only because it is an interesting, reading but also because it points out the mistakes you must avoid as government prosecutors.

The municipal and the justice of the peace courts constitute perhaps the most important part of our judicial system, because to them the masses usually go for redress. Any injustice however minor committed in these courts gives the poor and often ignorant litigant a deep sense of frustration. In actual practice, however, criminal cases in justice of the peace courts are prosecuted by the local chief of police. The practice has its weak points because the ordinary policeman is usually unfamiliar with law and court procedure. The prosecution of criminal cases is your direct responsibility and I wish that you would pay personal attention to criminal cases in these courts.

And now for the third and last qualification. Every prosecutor must have a high standard of morality to serve as his guidepost in the performance of his duties. A fiscal with solid moral background is a safe guaranty against misfeasance in office. On the other hand, because of the powers that go with his office, a weak, unprincipled or dishonest government prosecutor is both dangerous and unfit to hold office. Imagine, for instance, a fiscal prosecuting a person for a crime when at one time or another that fiscal has been guilty of a similar offense.

I can not close these short remarks without letting you know that I am not unaware of your problems. In the discharge of your duties you are often subjected to temptation or strong pressure which is sometimes hard to resist. My advice is that you stand your ground. Your strong moral background serves you to good advantage in such situation. If you do what is right, as you must, you can count on my support and that of our Secretary of Justice whose sense of fairness and dedication are matters of public knowledge.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library