Friends:

I DECLINED your last two previous invitations to address this body because I felt, and still feel, I am not qualified to talk on a very technical subject like the complexities of sugar technology and the possible utilization of sugar by-products. But the persistence of this group has finally convinced me, a layman, to appear before this assembly of technologists. It is precisely because of this dogged tenacity that the sugar industry has made the giant strides from the animal-drawn muscovado mills at the turn of the century to the most modern steam and electric factories of today. Why, even in the field of politics this bulldog of tenacity of the sugar people has won general respect and admiration.

Today, I shall limit my comments on broad generalities affecting the industry as a whole as I see it and restate the Administration’s policy of assistance.

More than ever, unity among all segments of the industry is of the essence. Never has the industry faced a greater challenge. Production cost is mounting and the world competition is getting more intense with each passing year. Planters and millers, supervisors and workers, the government and the industry must therefore join hands if the industry is to meet the challenge successfully.

I am disturbed by reports that, eventually, American refineries would demand the shipment of our sugar exports in bulk owing to a faster turn-over of ships, ease in unloading, and economy in labor handling. I believe the only alternative left us is to pool our resources and map out a national blueprint for the eventual mechanization of sugar bulk handling.

In this respect, the Administration pledges assistance in the way of dredging the shallow harbors, especially those in Negros Occidental, to allow access to ocean-going bulk carriers.

May I suggest that the time has come” for captains of the sugar industry to sit down on a conference table and discuss ways and means of shipping sugar in bulk. Some centrals that are far away from loading points can produce domestic sugar and switch their export production with centrals near bulk handling terminals. If this plan can be carried out, we can initially limit the construction of bulk terminals in Negros island and in Luzon. In preliminary studies it was found that two terminals for Negros and one for Luzon will suffice. But these are preliminary studies which I hope you will examine more critically and thoroughly during your convention.

But the subject that interests me most today is the challenge posed by sucro-chemistry. This is also the most pertinent subject for sugar technologists.

The development and eventual mass production of detergent is one. I have been informed that high quality detergent can be manufactured from refined sugar and ester of coconut oil using potassium as a catalyst. If this is true, sucro-chemistry opens an entirely new horizon not only for our sugar but also for our coconut industry. This new industrial frontier envisages tremendous possibilities which should claim in the most conscientious research by sugar chemists.

The abundant cheap labor and even cheaper materials of yesteryears which contributed immensely to the rapid growth of our sugar industry are now gone. Condition today is exactly the reverse. Cost of labor is rising not to mention cost of materials. And coupled with these dif­ficulties, is the fierce competition now prevailing in the world sugar market.

A wise scientific utilization of sugar cane by-products might help not only in bringing down overall production costs, but also develop new industries now only envisioned by science.

Our present factories leave very little to be desired. Our sugar extraction compare favorably with the world’s best. There is very little room for advancement in present factories which have all but attained their maximum deficiencies.

While in the field of agriculture we have hot made as spectacular a progressive, our farmers, with better oil management, wiser use of fertilizers, and creation of new cane varieties are beginning to achieve records of production that are beginning to reach the world’s peak.

With the annual researches of your associations, and those of the Philippine Sugar Institute, we can still improve our production records in the fields. And I predict the day is not far off when that goal is reached. Definitely, we are on the right track and all we need is time and, of course, market. The present world sugar market seems to be saturated, and only the development of industries utilizing sugar by-products will create expanded market demands.

Today, we are producing paper from bagasse pulp. Another bagasse pulp and paper mill will soon be established along the Bago River. Wallboards and accoustical boards from bagasse are now being manufactured.

Excess molasses is now being absorbed by the livestock feed manufactures. Yeast is also being produced from distillery slops and excess molasses. And this source of rich livestock feeds has not yet been fully tapped. But here again, the day is not far off when molasses and its uses will be finally harnessed.

It has therefore become imperative that sucro-chemistry be given top priority, for it promises new horizons and hew wealth for all. This is the great challenge to our scientists in general and to the sugar technologists in particular.

There are reports that films and other photographic materials may be manufactured from raw materials using molasses as base. The future of this development will mean better arid cheaper diagnosis of illnesses arid will bring the X-ray picture within the reach of the common man.

I forsee the day when sucro-chemistry will take its place right alongside petro-chemistry which today sustains the world’s major industries.

I therefore call on all our sugar technologists and scientists, planters and capitalists, the men and the captains of the industry, to unite and usher in the new era of prosperity mainly based on the exploitation of sugar manufacturing by-products.

On your shoulders rests the salvation of the industry. On your shoulder, will, and determination hinges to a great extent the economic destiny of the State.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech before the Sugar Technologist Convention held Wednesday morning, August 26, 1959, at the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (35) , 7326-7328.