MY FRIENDS:

IT IS a privilege to take part in these ceremonies honoring a courageous, unflinching leader of our people’s courageous, unflinching struggle for national dignity and independence. I am grateful to the members of the Kalaw family, the provincial officials of Batangas and the city officials of Lipa for the opportunity given me to participate in this dedicatory.

There is a sense of historical fitness in the fact that these rites honoring Teodoro M. Kalaw take place while the Filipino people are engaged in what may be called the process of re-discovering their glorious and heroic past. Our men of letters and thought, our scholars, historians, and researchers of today are slowly but steadily lifting the curtain of falsehood and distortion, misinformation and prejudice which for decades has hung like a blight over our historical past. Our struggle for freedom—uninterrupted since the first invader waded ashore onto Philippine soil—has suffered particularly from such distortion. The story of that struggle has been written largely by non-Filipinos, owing allegiance less to the truth and to the facts than to the alien interests they were pledged to serve.

Since independence, however, we have delved deep into our archives and records to re-write our history in accordance with the facts, and from the point of view and perspective of our own people. We are now, as I have said, in the middle of this soul-satisfying task, and it is fitting and proper that at this point we should pause to remember and do honor to Teodoro M. Kalaw. For Kalaw, long before our independence, had devoted much of his life, labors, and genius to this enterprise of gathering and compiling between book covers the imperishable thoughts and works of our illustrious heroes, and of producing his own original histories and treatises on our revolutionary struggle and on our social and political development under Spain and later the United States.

We owe to Kalaw the Epistolario Rizalino, that epochal six-volume work which offers direct access to the most intimate thoughts and views of our national hero on a vast panorama of subjects, ranging from love and women to philosophy and statecraft. We owe to Kalaw El Ideario Politico de Mabini, La Constitucion de Malolos, Las Ideas Politicas de la Revolucion Filipina, La Revolucion Filipina, Las Cartas Politicas de Mabini, and a wealth of other works on the glorious revolutionary period of our history, and on the genius who directed and guided its politics, Apolinario Mabini. It was Kalaw who gave us the only biography of the most romantic, most appealing figure of the Revolution, the fearless Gregorio del Pilar. And, attesting to the wide range and diversity of the talents of this scholar-researcher-historian, Kalaw authored a series of tracts on political science and constitutional law which were found useful and invaluable by many who later participated in the formulation of our constitution in 1934.

Our contemporary historians and scholars will thus find in the works of Teodoro M. Kalaw a precious store-house of wisdom and information on our people’s revolutionary struggle and their socio-political development under the Spaniards and the Americans. But Kalaw is more than a mere source of material, more than a competent bibliographer and historian. He is a source of inspiration, a source of emulation to our present-day historians and scholars. All his writings are invested with a proud, fierce nationalism and patriotism, an unshakeable faith in the worthiness and capacity for self-development of the Filipino which today should provide inspiration to his fellow-historians and scholars—nay,—to all his people. We cannot progress one inch toward our national goals unless we are fired with the same patriotic fervor. We must be imbued with the same indestructible faith in our capability to build up our country largely and mainly—and, if need be, solely—through our own efforts and resources. And faith and fervor must inform the work, as with the Evangelists, of those who have taken unto themselves the vital task of wiping away the ugly stains of falsehoods and distortions from our history books in order to reveal underneath the story of our struggles in all their shining glory:

If for this alone—for the utilitarian and inspirational value of his many works—Teodoro M. Kalaw’s place in our history would be secure. But this son of Lipa was a favored child of the gods, a generously-gifted, versatile man, and all his talents he laid unselfishly at the door of his country’s needs. He was an outspoken, courageous, passionately nationalistic journalist, who held the editorial reins of the El Renacimiento, organ of the Filipino campaign for self-government, when it published the celebrated editorial, Aves de Rapiña, which denounced in no uncertain terms unnamed but clearly identifiable imperialistic activities of a certain official in the top echelon of the American administration. Kalaw was only in his twenties then, and the target of his trenchant satire was one of the most powerful men in the country. But the uneven odds hardly deterred this young David of Philippine journalism from hurling his sling-shot at the alien Goliath. This editorial outburst eventually led to the closure of the El Renacimiento, but this setback was more than offset by the enduring moral and spiritual triumph felt by all Filipinos who saw in Aves de Rapiña an act of courage and defiance worthy of the Cry of Balintawak. Small wonder that Philippine journalism looks back on this incident as the high water mark of its history.

Teodoro M. Kalaw was a parliamentarian, a member of the Philippine Assembly from 1910 to 1913 representing the third district of Batangas, of which Lipa was—and still is—a part. He served with high distinction in the legislature, becoming one of the closest collaborators of the number one Filipino in the government at that time, then Speaker Sergio Osmeña. After his term, Kalaw remained in the Assembly as its secretary, up to 1916 when he was appointed director of the Philippine Library and Museum. He held this office briefly for one year, but he returned to it in 1929 and spent the remaining 10 years of his life in the company of the books and the historical memorabilia that he loved so much. It was during his stewardship of the Philippine Library that Kalaw enjoyed the most productive and prolific years of his literary life, turning out his books and pamphlets, watching solicitously over the nation’s historical treasures and cultural relics, and building up the library into the center of research and learning that it was meant to be.

Teodoro M. Kalaw was furthermore an imaginative and efficient administrator, who left the indelible imprint of his talents in this field in the reorganization of the executive branch of the government. The basic structure and main outlines of the network he helped to erect have been preserved to this day. Former President Osmefia is our authority for the assertion that Kalaw “was especially notable in the preparation of two important measures”—one of which was the reorganization of the Executive Departments during the regime of then Governor-General Francis Burton Harrison. Under the Departmental Reorganization Law which he helped to formulate, Kalaw himself served as the first under-secretary of interior and subsequently as secretary. Never forgetting the ultimate objective of all Filipino efforts during those colonial days, he also lent his administrative talents to the organization and operation of the Philippine Commission on Independence, of which he was executive secretary and chief adviser. This body was the nerve center, the general headquarters of the ceaseless Filipino campaign to achieve immediate, absolute, and complete independence.

And finally, this man of versatile excellence, so used since early school days to perfection, who wore the mantle of success and leadership so easily and naturally, of course had to bring home as his bride none less than the prettiest girl in the country, the queen of the first carnival, Purita Villanueva. In the field of romance, in the affair of the heart, he strove, as in all his other endeavors, for nothing less than perfection. His bride had to be a queen, no less, and young Kalaw’s happiness must have been complete when it was a queen indeed who pledged to share his dreams and disappointments, his hopes and reverses, his joys and his sorrows, at the church of Molo, Iloilo, in 1910.

This, then, is the measure and stature of the man whom we are gathered here today to honor and remember, on the 75th anniversary of his birth. His family, his relatives, and this town of his birth and boyhood have every reason in the world to be proud of him. But this sense of pride they can no longer confine to themselves. They must share it with the rest of the country, the rest of the Filipino people, for Teodoro M. Kalaw now belongs to the nation. He takes his place among those revered Filipino patriots whose life and works will forevermore serve as an ideal and inspiration for all the people, to goad and guide them along the difficult road to national progress and greatness, to reassure them at every turn and before every barrier that the Filipino is the equal of any man, and that there are no limits to the glory and achievements to which he may confidently aspire.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia on the occasion of the unveiling of a historical marker in honor of the late Teodoro M. Kalaw. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(15) , 2618-2621.