Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Association of Philippine Broadcasters at a dinner held in his honor

[Delivered at the Guevara Compound, Parañaque, Rizal, May 5, 1959]

MR. PRESIDENT, MEMBERS OF THE BOARD MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION OF PHILIPPINE BROADCASTERS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

TO PARAPHRASE a familiar statement that we sometimes hear on the radio, I would like to start by saying that, “The views you are about to hear are purely the opinions of the speaker himself,” but I am sure they also reflect the opinions of the radio and television representatives present here tonight. I am sure we all have this in common. I am as interested in the radio and TV industry as you are:

In fact, I would like to take this occasion to thank the radio and TV stations which have so graciously covered my speeches in the interest of public service. I appreciate this very much, not only from a personal point of view, but also because it is a fine demonstration of civic spirit and a keen consciousness of the need to keep the public informed. This civic spirit and awareness of the public is a fine and admirable thing, and it is to the lasting credit of the Association of Philippine Broadcasters that its members are well known for these rare qualities.

As your President, Mr. Eugenio Lopez, Jr., has said, the APB can be a very potent force in the civic and cultural life of our country. I agree with him completely. The APB is a powerful factor in for community simply because radio and television in themselves are powerful factors and forces in our lives.

Those of you who went out of your way last Friday to visit with me for a while in Malacañang will recall what I said at that time, that radio and television broadcasting is one of the mightiest factors in the moulding of public opinion and in the development of correct, constructive, and creative thinking among our people. Because of this tremendous power of broadcasting, those who wield this power in turn have a grave responsibility. They have the responsibility to wield this power for the good of the people. Because they have the power to mould public opinion, they also have the corresponding responsibility to direct that public opinion to channels that are constructive and creative. Because radio and television reach the homes in such a direct and intimate manner, the men of radio and television likewise have the responsibility of helping, to guide the minds of the youth of the land, guiding them, towards practical idealism, towards genuine nationalism, towards: their ultimate destiny as the future generation that must carry on the work we ourselves are now undertaking and which is part of our national heritage The government; and I, personally, are very conscious of this vital role that the broadcasting industry plays in our national life. I feel that it is a role as important as that played by the press. Certainly, broadcasting is an indispensable and integral part of freedom of speech, without which, freedom itself as a basic and all-embracing term would not have any significance at all.

In fact, if I may digress for a while to express my own personal impressions, I feel that if radio is just as valuable and important as the press, there is no reason why radio should not be accorded the same regard as the press enjoys. In all official activities, coverages, and even in the little things, like, for example, making it possible, for the APB to have it’s own clubhouse or center here in Manila, in much the same way as we have the National Press Club and similar organizations, in all such matters, I feel that radio and therefore it’s own organization—your Association of Philippine Broadcasters-—must enjoy the full support of the people and the Administration.

I have said earlier that, to me, radio and TV have a special significance. I feel a special attachment to this organization that you have formed and established. In a way, I think I was indirectly and partially responsible in bringing about the birth of the APB, for it was at my instance two years ago that a call was issued to all responsible broadcasters to get together and set up standards of broadcasting which would be designed to elevate their own industry. At the time, the main objective was to keep their airlanes clean, for that was the hottest stage of the political campaign of 1957. Radio then was very much in the electoral battle, and we were all concerned with making sure that what was broadcast would be true, decent, and constructive.

And so, that was the only purpose of an organization at that time. But you who now compose the APB must have sensed at that time the opportunity to derive something bigger and more permanent; from that one individual project. As your own president has said, “this called for vision and courage.” And if I may echo his words, the men of the APB have certainly proved themselves men of vision and courage.

It only remains now for you to transmit that vision and courage to the whole of your industry. It is your responsibility to keep intact your own idealism, to keep sacred your code of ethics, to maintain and constantly keep elevating the standards of broadcasting and telecasting in the Philippines so that it may rank as among the most outstanding, among the most admirable, among the best in the world.

It has been my personal privilege to have been able to participate in your pioneering in this organization. I have constantly observed its progress during your national conventions in Cebu and in Cagayan de Oro. And tonight, it seems almost as if by destiny, I am again a participant in this third year of your organization. I consider this a distinct privilege. And I shall hope to be able to continue to observe and perhaps take part in your future progress, whether I remain in the public life or not, and I shall watch that progress with keen interest and eagerness, knowing that your organization cannot help but succeed and that, because of the bold leadership and imaginative thinking of all who compose this Association, I am confident that the whole nation will finally recognize and acclaim the great contribution to the country by the Association of Philippine Broadcasters.

Lastly, may I repeat that it is my fervent hope that this Association will lead in the formation of alert, intelligent, creative, and positive thinking among our people.

The nation dreams of making the Philippines a model democracy in this part of the globe with the establishment of prosperity and economic stability enjoyed in freedom and in honor. The nation dreams of building a national economic structure where every citizen of this country partakes in terms of abundant life. The nation dreams to contribute it’s best and utmost to the cause of world peace. Let the Association of Philippine Broadcasters get behind these legitimate aspirations of the nation and let each broadcasting center be a giant dynamo to spark progress, growth, achievement, and success.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia before the Association of Philippine Broadcasters at dinner held in his honor at the Guevara Compound in Paranaque, Rizal, Sunday evening, May 24, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (22) , 4078-4020.