PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH UPON RECEIVING THE SCROLL OF HONOR AND THE GOLD MEDALLION OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK FROM MAYOR WAGNER AT 12:30 P.M., MONDAY, JUNE 23, NEW YORK TIME (1:30 A.M. TUESDAY, JUNE 24, MANILA TIME)

MAY I thank you Mr. Mayor and through you the people and government of the City of New York for your hospitality and for the honor which you have bestowed upon me today. In the busy schedule of any official visitor to this country, there is one item to which he looks forward with a feeling of joyous anticipation and special pride—this is the visit to the City of New York without which he would feel that his itinerary in America would not be complete.

The physical magnificence of New York has struck all visitors with an overwhelming sense of wonderment and awe. The streets crowded with traffic, the sidewalks full of people, the shops and factories teeming with activity, and the towering skyscrappers, truly make New York the greatest, busiest, and most restless metropolis in the world.

But New York is not just an outsized city that is larger, richer, and more active than the next one. The real glory of New York is that it is the city of man. Here is a city built upon a scale more godlike than human as if one day man had planted his foot on the solid rock of Manhattan and here decided to build a city more splendid than any ever conjured by the Genie of Aladdin’s lamp or by the magic wand of Merlin. The wonder of New York is that for all its awesome grandeur, it was raised and reared stone by stone by the hands, brain, and imagination of man.

But New York is unique. In yet another way, other great cities are usually the epitome of the genius and enterprise of one race. One nation, one people, New York alone stands as a massive and challenging monument to the genius and enterprise of all the peoples of the world who have come here in search of freedom and opportunity in the spirit of the beckoning lamp of the statue of liberty.

The real greatness of New York lies not in its buildings, bridges, and docks of stone and steel but in its people. It is to be found in the daily miracle of 10 million people living and working together under unbelievable pressure of time and space, and yet avoiding each momentary menace of explosion and chaos. This is possible only because New York is aware that it is an amalgam of all the races, nations, and religions of the world and because New York knows also that it has a duty to render unto each the equal dignity and respect to which it is entitled. To you, Mr. Mayor, is due-most of the credit for the daily miracle that is New York. I congratulate you most warmly and, through you, the thousands of men and women who help you run the government of the city of New York with marvelous devotion and skill. It used to be said of New York that it is an American city that looks to Europe in the same way that San Francisco looks to Asia and the Far East. But we of Asia do not minimize the importance of San Francisco nor love and admire it the less when we feel we must say of New York that it is the American city that looks to all the world because it partakes of all the world and works for all the world. Truly may it be said that all mankind has a stake in the greatness, present and future, of New York.

In this spirit I accept with deep pleasure and gratitude this scroll of honor and Gold Medallion of the City of New York and will treasure them always as priceless mementoes of my visit here and of your kindness to me.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library