Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the 60th anniversary of the National University

[Delivered at the Wack Wack Golf and Country Club, February 18, 1961]

FELLOW ALUMNI OF THE NATIONAL UNIVERSITY, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

IT IS not often that one finds an opportunity like this to come together with old friends and, in their familiar faces, look back to precious days in the past. For me, this is such an opportunity, and I hope you know that I am sincere when I tell you that I had long hoped to find it. No one ever departs from the past, nor surpasses his memories. Again and again we return to these in spirit, reliving joys and even tribulations, finding in tehm a new spur to the future. And today, we bring to this, happy occasion both spiritual and physical presence, old selves and new, in such a renunion and homecoming as we have individually wished for many times. By so doing, we add one more happy memory to the many that we have treasured as alumni of a great institution.

As it happens, not all of us have met before, in this school or outside it. But it is the virtue of this occasion that, not having met everyone else who is present at this gathering today, we are nevertheless old friends. For this institution is our common memory, the great bond that holds us and make us kin. Whatever separate experiences we may remember having had in the classrooms and on the corridors of this institution, the values that the National University had taught us to live by in our midst a lasting presence, an enduring bond.

Along with the country, and often in front of it, this great school has grown with every year. It is a source of common pride to us all that the alumni of this university have not merely contributed to the country’s advancement in many fields—a sufficient accomplishment by itself if there was nothing more—but they have also often led and, in the case of many who have represented us well, excelled in providing the spirit and the means for such advancement.

Let no one bewail the quiet way in which we have, from the portals of this institution, gone out into the affairs of this nation to perform large and small tasks to enhance human dignity and welfare in this part of the world. For they make a dismal error who wish to measure deeds by their lustre and their sound. One of the fundamental values that we took with us into the world, not so much a gift as a prerequisite of this university, was the loftiness of honest and sincere and quiet endeavor.

In the world we live in, there are not a few to whom this value has been lost. With hope and conviction, I can say that this university prepared us to resist the temptation of that hasty measure. I know that we learned our lessons well; it is this which has made it possible for many of us to tell in silence, even in anonymity, knowing that citations and applause and the hossannas of the crowds do not constitute the ends of labor.

It is also for this reason that today we have in the service of the government leaders of thought and action who have been willing to continue, with or without public acclaim, in their chosen careers. The field of education today is so much richer and nobler because of the quiet dignity and the dedication which one of our outstanding alumni has brought into it.

The National University has also contributed immensely if, happily, without flourish and invitations to acclaim, to the fields of education itself, the judiciary, the armed forces, private business, and journalism. It is a record we may well be proud of, and for which this occasion today is doubly happy and significant. The National University can claim a glorious past, and a more glorious future.

Nation-building, however, is a continuing labor. No matter what achievements are made, and no matter what heights are reached, there is always a fresh challenge for individual men and for the nation. Every day is a crisis; there will always be a problem of moving on, and of main­taining the successes we have made. The challenge will take many forms: a challenge to fortitude, to imagination, to the sense of justice and the sense of compassion. And each of these challenges is not a separate one, but part of a whole—the single, large challenge to the human spirit itself, and its resources of virtue and ideals.

This is the challenge to which the alumni of a university dedicated to the improvement of the human spirit and the advancement of man’s mind can address itself. It is a humbling challenge, and it is well that it is so. For no one may rightly claim that he is bigger than his task, and I think we, who were told to take that to heart many years ago in the classrooms of this university, are prepared to meet our tasks with humility and, if need be, with self-effacement.

One theme I have repeatedly stated in my speeches is the national goal of economic emancipation. This is a national objective that cannot be over-emphasized, a necessity for national survival that cannot be over-stressed. In my previous speeches, I have dwelt on this target as the logical successor of the one, already attained, by our people, of political independence, and as the only way to steer our nation towards a happy and prosperous existence.

Tonight, I will dwell on this theme again but from a different light, from the light that gives urgency to the attainment of the goal. I will dwell tonight on the subject of economic emancipation from the light of the communist menace.

In my report on the state of the nation to Congress and to our people last month, I said that recent developments and the perceivable trend of possibilities indicate that the problem which Communist China poses to the security of our area might assume a new proportion. Reports ema­nating from the countries adjacent to, as well as from, Red China itself confirm the launching of a massive economic offensive aimed at subverting the economies of the various countries in this region. The physical devise for this economic offensive is the dumping of cheap goods in the target countries. These goods are cheap because they are produced by slave labor, cheap because being political instruments of subversion they are sold at prices way below production costs, and cheap because they are exported without regard to shortages at home. Dumped in sufficient quantities in any country, these goods would be enough to disrupt and dislocate local economies. The physical threat of this dumping to local economies is real and imminent enough.

But more significant to the free world is the propaganda line inherent in the move. This propaganda line appears effective because it is apparently clothed in the guise of subtle example. This propaganda line has been repeated over and over again by the communists over the last five years and is aimed directly at the newly emergent and underdeveloped states of the world. In brief, they want to tell us that communism as an alternative to the democratic way of free enterprise is a faster and surer way towards economic advancement. This is the attractive hook that they are dangling before the Underdeveloped nations of the world from their arsenal of alternating threats and charms. At what cost in human dignity, family degradation, and curtailment of civil liberties these dubious claims have been accomplished, we can only surmise but perhaps will never know completely.

This is the challenge to the free world, the challenge to the newly emergent nations, the challenge to all men who love freedom—can a free society in a free state solve the problems of economic stablility and social justice for its people or must that free society surrender its freedom to an elite clique without scruples which will then, through repression and harassment force the people into the acceptance of nebulous economic theories of their own making?

We in the Philippines are committed to democracy as a way of life, to republicanism as a form of government, and to the basic freedom as the touchtone of existence. We must show the less fortunate among our people that within this framework we can achieve for them the promised economic benefits so temptingly held out to them by communism. “Man does not five by bread alone” but as a philosopher observed in a serio-flippant mood, “neither can he live without it.”

I have committed my administration to the lifting of the economic level in which the mass of our people live. I want to show our people and the whole world that ours is a free society where free man can lift themselves from economic underdevelopment into the plateau of progress and prosperity.

For this reason, very early in my administration I launched our program of agro-industrial development in order that the increased production of an industrialized society may benefit our people. My Filipino First policy was designed and is being pursued with vigor in order to wrest the strange-hold on our economy from aliens and their dummies. My campaign against graft in the government is likewise being carried out relentlessly in order that this cancer that is gnawing into our body politic may be cut off and checked completely.

We have made outstanding progress in recent years. We have become self-sufficient in rice—our staple food. Our industrial plants have gone beyond the packaging and assembly stage. Our textile production is almost enough to meet local consumption and we import less and less textile by the year. Electrification of the countryside is going on at a fast clip. Even our shipbuilding industry has gone beyond the rudimentary stage having constructed the first truly Philippine-made sea-going vessel. Our rural areas are brightening up with renewed vigor brought about by cottage industries and community development programs. These things alone are a lot more achievement that can be claimed by past administrations put together. But I am the last to claim that these achievements are enough. Rather, I say that these accomplishments of my administration are simply the initial steps in the right direction towards nation-building. Time and again in the past and dangerously in the present, too, our leaders of national importance have been sidetracked from pursuing the rightful destiny of our people by internecine fault-finding and partisans politics. I am proud to say that the record of the Nacionalista Party in the over fifty years of its existence, is an open book to all our people. The Nacionalista Party has adhered to a purpose single to the best interests of the Filipino nation. During the days when other political parties were contented and happy to settle forever in the gilded cage of benevolent colonialism, the Nacionalista Party, alone, and in the beginning a minority, fought for and succeeded in regaining Philippine independence. It was a great and big enough achievement—the winning of political freedom for a freedom-loving people. Political freedom having been won, the Nacionalista Party was to lapse into temporary eclipse by its own splinter which grew into a full fledged party—the Liberal Party. But the Liberal Party missed its chance for greatness by a failure to understand and appreciate the new challenges that faced the independent Republic. Intoxicated with newly won power, its members were side-tracked from the urgent demands of nation-building into the more enjoyable pastime of personal aggrandizement. Thus was made critical the communist problem in the country. A sizeable number of our people drew up arms against the government, not so much because of the attractions offered by communism, but more so because of the repulsion they felt towards the way their government was run.

Again it had to be the Nacionalista Party, this time again starting as a minority, that had to rescue our Ship of State from aimless and directionless wanderings that had to steady and firm the ship and once more set it on the right course towards its destiny under the sun. Today, the clarion call to economic emancipation has been sounded by the Nacionalista Party. It is today’s great figth that we must fight today’s great battle to which we must commit out forces.

The twentieth century may be divided for the Filipino people into two great epochs. The first half up to 1946 was the epoch of the struggle for independence from a benevolent colonialism; the second half starting with the late fifties is the epoch of grim struggle for economic emancipation. In between these two epochs was a period of wavering and irresolution, of teetering on the brink of progress and regress, a neuter period of non-identity, a sterile period of suspended animation. This was the period of the Liberal regime.

Today our course has been established. Our national identity is once more alive; our purposes have been made clear. I call on you to stand shoulder to shoulder with me to face the common challenge. The call to battle is insistent and may not be ignored. God willing, with your cooperation and the cooperation of all our people, we shall march on to victory.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President’s speech on the 60th anniversary of the National University held at the Wack Wack Golf and Country Club, Saturday evening, February 18, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(10) , 1752-1756.