COMMISSIONER VILLAMOR, GOVERNOR CUADERNO, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THIS fund campaign that we are launching today for the benefit of world refugees assumes added significance in the light of our own current struggles for economic progress.

I understand that for the upkeep, resettlement, and rehabilitation of roughly fifteen million refugees all over the world, the World Refugee Agency spends thirty-three and a half million dollars a year. In this light, the amount of one hundred thousand pesos, which the Philippines had pledged to contribute is a very small amount indeed. However, I want to say to the refugees who will be the recipients of our modest gift that this amount, small as it may seem by the enormity of their need, is given with the utmost compassion and sympathy for their plight and with the most sincere wish that they, like our own people, will see the way to better times.

It is in recognition of the plight of the refugees, that the Philippines, small as it is, having been laid prostrate by the last world war as it was, and being in the throes of a national economic struggle, is currently conducting this fund campaign to raise the modest amount of ₱100,000 to alleviate in a little way the poverty and the misery to which the refugees are heir and which the big bulk of our own people has known.

The end of the Second World War saw the rise of the world refugee problem. Originally, there were the millions upon millions of so-called displaced persons, most of whom came out of concentration camps. Others were the masses of war workers who were uprooted from their native countries to work in the war factories of the temporary victors in the early stages of the war, and who found themselves homeless, hungry, and without roots when the war ended. Others were simply fleeing from the rubble of their razed cities for a new place to call home. Still others were running away from the new despotism that was sweeping Eastern Europe even as the Free World was celebrating its victory over an old one. This last category, composed of political refugees, was to swell rather than diminish as the years went by. Its number was swelled by the political upheavals that swept the Near East, China, Vietnam, and Korea. It is estimated that in Hongkong alone, there are a million Chinese refugees from Communist China.

Help from the countries of the Free World to these refugees has come in various and multi-faceted forms but mostly in three general categories; namely, (1) by contributing financially to accredited agencies, (2) by taking refugees into the country, and (3) extending satisfactory legal status to refugees.

In the early years of our independence, our country helped in a small way by providing a temporary site in Guiuan, Samar, for several thousand European displaced persons under the care of the United Nations prior to their final resettlement in other countries.

Today our help will come in the form of goods that will be sent to the various refugee camps all over the world. For this purpose we are raising one hundred thousand pesos in a campaign that is being set off by this ceremony we are having here today.

We are giving help in kind and not in cash in order to deplete further our scant dollar reserves which we are using in the varied and competing needs of our own economic development. By giving in kind, therefore, we shall be helping others while at the same time not jeopardizing the welfare of our own people in the true Christian spirit that “Charity begins at home.”

I appeal to all our people—the masses, the business groups, the employees, the government officials—to support this drive to a successful conclusion. By doing so, we shall not only have lived up to a pledge given as a free nation, but we shall have helped others less fortunate than we are.

I now declare the World Refugee Fund Drive in the Philippines officially open, and I now wish to hand my own own personal contribution to your Chairman.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). President Garcia’s speech at the kick-off ceremony of the World Refugee Fund Campaign held at Malacañang, Thursday afternoon, March 10, 1960. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(11) , 2367-2368.