Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the re-union meeting of alumni of the “Big Ten”

[Delivered at the Winter Garden of the Manila Hotel, November 27, 1958]

IT IS a pleasure, indeed, for me to be with you at this annual meeting of the Alumni of the universities in mid-western United States which make up the football conference known as the Big Ten. I congratulate you on having conceived the excellent idea of getting together on this day of thanksgiving every year for the purpose of renewing old friendships and of enjoying the company of your fellow-alumni and friends. The hilarity and the fun which saturated the atmosphere of this room during the last hour or so is as eloquent proof that you know how to lay aside your worries on proper occasions and to be as jovial and carefree as you were in the halycon days of your youth. I agree with you that clean and harmless merrymaking such as this can be a healthful tonic that can relieve tensions and give zest to human living in this highly competitive age.

As I look about me and see the different groups gathered around these, festive boards, I realize at once that I am speaking before a select audience, among whom are the most valuable elements of our cosmopolitan community. Verily, we have here men and women who have found their places and made their mark in our social, cultural, scientific, or industrial life. Many of you are in the government service and, therefore, are doing your part of the government’s mission of ministering to the needs of our people. Inspired by the presence of such an array of notable personalities, I shall, with your kind indulgence, take advantage of this opportunity to say a few words on the role that the alumni of the Big Ten can play in the conduct of the affairs of this country.

It is well that now and then we put our heads together and consider how this country of ours is faring and what our university graduates, individually and collectively, can do to promote its welfare and progress. This is important in a democracy like ours. Under a totalitarian regime the practice of taking common counsel with the citizens would not be of much consequence, since the direction of the country’s affairs is placed in the hands of an individual or a small group of individuals. But we have expressed in clear and categorical terms our preference for democracy, both as a form of government and as a way of life. We expressed that preference in the Malolos Constitution, which stated in Article 1 that “the political association of all Filipinos constitutes a nation whose state is called the Philippine Republic.” And we reaffirmed our faith in democracy when in the preamble of our present Constitution we declared that it is our aim and desire to secure to ourselves and our posterity “the blessings of independence under a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy.” Now, as you very well know, under such a regime, “sovereignty resides in the people and all government authority emanates from them.” Therefore, the more we consult with the people, the more we take them into our confidence, and the more we allow them to share the responsibility of finding workable solutions to the manifold problems confronting the country, the more we broaden the base of democracy and the more we strengthen the foundations of our democratic institutions.

Yes, my friends, we need to address ourselves to the tremendous problems that beset our country today. Every country has its own problems, but ours have been aggravated by the fact that only a few years ago we went through a cruel and devastating war which shattered our economy, destroyed our cities, and laid waste our countrysides. Then, too, while our country was still lying prostrate and bleeding, our republic was born, creating new needs and new demands which had to be met if we were to restore peace and relative prosperity within our borders and maintain our national prestige abroad. Today we are still being faced with the problems that usually attend the birth of a new nation. Our problems are those of survival and these are by no means easy. Even the United States, the wealthiest country in the world, is feeling the pinch of an economic recession. Indeed, in the language of Thomas Paine, “these are the times that try men’s souls.” But our mettle has been tested time and again in the past and we have proven our ability to survive serious crisis which would have crushed a less courageous and less determined people. We are confident, therefore, that we shall live through these hardships, strong and vigorous as ever.

Now, just to cheer up those among us who appear to see nothing but the dark side of things, let me refer to the progress we have made during the last six decades. I need not tell you that we rose from our status as a subject people to that of an independent nation, the first to attain that status in Southeast Asia. Nor is this all, for young as she is, the Philippines has succeeded in making her voice heard in the councils of free nations, particularly in the United Nations Organization and its specialized agencies. Similar progress has been made in the health field, where such epidemics as smallpox and cholera, which used to decimate our population, have been entirely wiped out, thanks to the advance of medical science in this country and the better understanding of the rules of health and sanitation on the part of our people. And again, progress has been made in the field of education, as evidenced by the extension of educational opportunities to a greater portion of our population, the raising of our percentage of literacy, and the establishment of an increasing number of higher institutions of learning, where our young people may obtain the professional and technological training they need to prepare them for competence and leadership in their respective fields of endeavor.

And we shall continue to move forward, for progress does not operate in a closed system. The human spirit does not suffer itself to be shut up or circumscribed for long. It is in the nature of man ever to aim toward perfection or, to borrow the language of the poet, to “‘build more stately mansions” than the preceding ones. Every advance we make’ spurs us on to further advances. Now, to this desire for progress there are no visible limits. The farther we go, the wider the vistas we get and the stronger the urge to move on, to project ourselves into the future and to use our imagination in an effort to define .our problems, analyze them into their factors, and finally choose the courses of action that are calculated to yield the best results.

The progress of a nation has many facets and, in order for such progress to be balanced, it should cover every aspect of our national life—agriculture, industry, communication, commerce, education, culture, and all the other aspects of national existence that give it meaning and substance. In my inaugural address last December and in my message to Congress on the state of the nation early this year I made mention of some of these aspects which in my opinion require immediate attention. It would be superfluous for me to repeat them here. Suffice it to say that this administration is pledged to work for the welfare and happiness of our people. In line with this objective, steps have been taken to improve the condition of our people not only in the urban centers but also in the rural areas. The institution of land reforms, the organization of cooperatives, the extension of credits, the harnessing of our streams in order to provide our people with electricity for lighting and for power, the establishment of rural health units, the construction of irrigation systems and as well as that of highways and feeder roads, the sinking of artesian wells, and the extension of school facilities to the remotest barrios—all of these have been motivated by the sincere and earnest desire of the administration to raise the standard of living of our people.

Now, the successful implementation of this ambitious program of the administration requires the earnest and whole-hearted cooperation of all sectors and elements of our population. It goes without saying that no enterprise, however worthy, can prosper without the cooperation of all concerned. Therefore, government and private agencies must work together in a spirit of dedication in order to accomplish our purposes. The problems that lie ahead are many and they are difficult. But they are not incapable of solution. What we need are imagination and will power—imagination to conceive and plan methods of improvement and will power to see that those plans are carried out to successful completion.

Among those who are called upon to extend the needed cooperation are the alumni who are gathered here this evening. Because of the unusual advantage you have enjoyed as students and graduates of institutions of high standing in the United States, you are in the best position to lend a helping hand in the national endeavor to improve the lot of our people. It is the duty of all Filipinos, irrespective of party affiliation, to contribute their energies to this effort. This is no time for petty bickerings and recriminations. In times of stress, Filipinos from all walks of life must close ranks and contribute their strength, their learning, and their wisdom to the attainment of our common objective of ushering in a brighter day for our country.

Ladies and gentlemen, in the great and arduous task of nation building, the need is for unity of effort. We cannot afford to dissipate our energies and our strength by working at cross-purposes. I, therefore, call upon you to join us in the pursuit of our objective so that we may all pull together to the end that our republic which came into being after so many untold sacrifice, may live and endure until time shall be no more.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the re-union meeting of alumni of the “Big Ten”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(35) , 8046-8049.