PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE TURNOVER CEREMONIES OF FARM IMPLEMENTS DONATED TO FILIPINO FARMERS BY U.S. INDUSTRIES, INC., HELD ON AUGUST 23, 1958, AT PIER 9 IN THE PORT AREA

DISTINGUISHED GUESTS:

THE STATE VISIT I recently made to the United States on a mission of goodwill and friendship has struck a responsive chord from both governmental and private levels so spontaneous and-overflowing that could only bespeak of the heart-warming concern the Americans have for the people of my country.

One tangible proof of this concern is manifested today in the actual presentation of farm tools and heavy-duty engine lathe originally presented to me by two of America’s great industrial companies while I was in the United States.

On behalf of the Filipino people, who are indeed the ultimate beneficiaries of this magnanimous gesture, I thank these two industrial concerns—the U. S. Industries, Inc., and Koppel (Philippines) Inc.—for this invaluable gift. The material value of this donation, impressive as it is, pales beside the value count of the spirit with which it has been given. For these tools represent the goodwill and warmheartedness that the United States feels towards the Filipinos.

The intentions of the donors can not be equated with mere expressions of appreciation. The true worth of the gift is in its effective utilization, the fulfillment of its purposes. It is, therefore, our inescapable duty to see to it that this is so.

Allow me, therefore, my friends, to do a verbal unwrapping of the gift and the intentions which I propose for it. The Axelson heavy-duty engine lathe, valued at ₱ 80,00, will be installed at the Machine Shop of the NASSCO on Engineer Island, where it can be of greatest use in our industrial projects.

The agricultural implements, worth ₱ 120,000, consist of 1,500.0 plows, 1,000 wheelbarrows, 4,000 spades, 1,000 corn-grinders, and 1,000-handsaws. These are equipment which our farmers need most. It is my expressed desire that these tools shall go to them who should be benefited most— the small farmers throughout the country.

I have created a special committee which shall be responsible for the equitable distribution and utlization of these farm equipment, for I will not have these tools ill-used for personal aggrandizement or misused for political purposes.

This committee will be charged with one task—to see to it that only the small and deserving farmers get them and use them. This committee will be responsible to me, and I, in turn, will be personally accountable to the farmers of the Philippines for whom the U.S. Industries and the Koppel Philippines had intended this donation.

Our farmers need incentives for greater production. Needless to say, the Administration is committed to a program of ultimate self-sufficiency in food production. This donation of farm tools, properly utilized, can be of considerable help in the food production campaign.

We need more feeder roads in order to make the rural areas more accessible for commerce and communication. Self-help projects already undertaken by our rural communities will be given a big boost through the use of these equipment. More roads can be built in the barrios. More home gardens can be developed. Better rural home facilities can be constructed. There is, indeed, no end to the enumeration of worthy uses to which these tools can be applied in barrio life.

We have with us this afternoon the heads of various government entities and, agencies which have immediate concern with agriculture and industry. I will draw upon their services for the intelligent, useful and skillful management and utilization of the donation which the U.S. Industries and the Koppel Philippines have made to our people.

We also have with us this afternoon a representation of farmers, from all parts of the country, typical of those who will, benefit from this donation. Their presence here strikes a happy note for the occasion, for indeed they are here to see for themselves the donation which would ultimately be theirs and to bear witness to the pledge I have just made that all these equipment shall be put to good use.

Mr. Fittinghoff: On behalf of the people of the Philippines, I accept this donation, fully cognizant of the warm friendship and thoughtful concern behind it. With this acceptance goes my assurance that every effort shall be exerted to the fruitful utilization of each and every single equipment here at hand. I thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library