Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the National Seminar on Human Rights

[ Delivered at the Institute of Science Building, P. G. H. Compound on May 6, 1957 ]

MR. CHAIRMAN AND FRIENDS:

I THANK the Planning Committee of this seminar for this opportunity to speak at the opening session. You, the delegates are to be congratulated for this seminar. I know your deliberations will be productive of permanent results for the good of our citizenry. I know that you have come to learn from one another in a spirit of broad tolerance.

Your slogan, “Understanding of and Respect for Human Rights”, is sound and praise-worthy. It is not sufficient merely to understand our rights: we must in addition respect the rights of others. We can claim our individual rights only in proportion as we respect the rights of others. This is the life and essence of democracy.

I am pleased to note here that our distinguished Ambassador Felixberto Serrano has been chosen chairman of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights which recently held its conference in Geneva. This is a just recognition of his merits and at the same time it affords an opportunity for the Philippines to be of some service to the world in the significant task of fostering human rights. He has come to Manila to help organize the Regional Conference on Human Rights under the auspices of the United Nations, to be held in the Philippines sometime this year. The Philippine Government heartily welcomes the representatives of friendly nations who come here to agree upon plans for this regional seminar, and I am glad to offer every possible assistance looking toward the success of the coming conference.

Now I wish to comment briefly on the tasks of the five study groups of this national seminar.

I understand these groups are on Civic and Political Rights, on Women’s Rights, on Rights of Minorities, oh Freedom of Information, and on Social and Economic Rights.

First, as to the group on Civic and Political Rights. These rights which refer to the security of life, liberty, and property are fortunately not new in our country. In the Malolos Constitution our representatives consecrated individual rights arid liberties as they formulated that document, which founded the first democratic government in the Far East. We, as a people, are privileged to be the inheritors of the achievements of both Europe and America in the struggle for liberty. Through our happy and fruitful association with the American people for nearly half a century until our political independence in 1946, we have had a healthy and practical training in the exercise of individual rights and liberties as developed in the history of the United States. We are heirs to a rich heritage of freedom from our own forefathers even before the Philippine Revolution of 1896. The restless Malays in immemorial ages left their ancient abodes somewhere in Southeast Asia to seek freedom and a better way of life. And it is a historical fact that throughout the nearly four centuries of Spanish regime in the Philippines there has been a long series of local or regional uprisings against the Spanish rule. These revolts were in vindication of the rights of our forefathers.

This seminar will, I know, help in the greater enlightenment of our people concerning their civic and political rights. It is through the unceasing endeavors of each and every nation to cultivate an increasing understanding and respect for human rights that the cause of universal democracy will be saved. Let us do our own share in our country so that it may never be said that through our neglect or indifference that great cause of freedom has suffered.

Secondly, as to women’s rights. Fortunately for our country, the new Civil Code which became effective in July, 1950, has removed the civil disabilities of married women in the Philippines. This was a far-reaching advance in this sector of the globe where in most countries women are still fighting for their legal rights in the family as well as with regard to property and contracts. Moreover, the Filipino woman was among the first to have obtained the right of suffrage. I am glad to know that the Filipino woman has brought to bear a wholesome influence on our political affairs. I wish for the Filipino woman greater participation in public life and an increasing recognition of the value and significance of their cooperation in the solution of our national problems.

Thirdly, I am happy to note that there is a group that will study the rights of minorities. For example our brothers and countrymen, the Moslems in the South, should enjoy the amplest freedom in the exercise of their religion and should be encouraged in the development of their culture. As for the minority political parties, they may rest assured that I shall never lift a finger or utter a single word that may deprive them of an equal and untrammeled freedom in the discussion of the issues which they may present to our people. Nor will I ever counterance any act that may render it difficult for them to express their will through the polls. I am fully cognizant that one of the acid tests of Democracy is the clear awareness on the part of the majority party of its solemn responsibility to respect the rights of the minorities, and I am not unmindful of the lesson of experience that the majority party that rides roughshod over the minorities is on its way to taking the place of the latter.

Fourthly, on the group that will study freedom of information, I need not say that I am unconditionally and irrevocably for the freedom of the press. I am firmly persuaded that more effective than the restraint imposed by law is the restraint imposed by the press upon itself. Those who are devoting their lives to the press realize that true freedom is responsible freedom.

Lastly, with respect to the social and economic rights, inasmuch as these are new in formulation of human rights in the past, I shall quote some of the statements of the Universal Declaration which refer to social and economic rights:

“ARTICLE 23. (1) Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work, and to protection against unemployment.

(2) Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for equal work.

(3) Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary by other means of social protection.

(4) Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.

“ARTICLE 25. (1) Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing, and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age, or other lack of livelihood in circumstance beyond his control.”

In a sense, these articles are the distinct contribution of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to the formulation of principles for human amelioration. However, they had been preceded by over a decade by the conservation of social justice in our present Constitution. And when the Atlantic Charter added freedom from want as one of the four freedoms, it paved the way for more solemn and more detailed declaration of the social and economic rights of individuals in the United Nations document. Our late beloved President Magsaysay devoted himself wholeheartedly to the uplifting of the life of the orphans of Fortune who upon his death so touchingly demonstrated their gratitude. I have often declared, and I do now reiterate that it is my firm resolve to do my utmost to carry on in the pursuit of his objective. I have supported and will support the new Social Security Bill, and also the Apprenticeship Bill, both of which are pending before Congress. I shall apply myself particularly to the solution of the unemployment problem. I was glad to witness in the May First Labor demonstration the growing consciousness on the part of the laborers of their social responsibility. I reiterate my pledge to give full protection to the free labor movement in our country. But I earnestly hope that labor and management will come to visualize more and more the absolute necessity of their working together, for indeed it is only through their intelligent and patriotic cooperation that they may be of service to our country.

In closing, I wish this national seminar all manner of success. May it help bring about a growing understanding of and respect for human rights.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library