LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM happy to welcome you to this gathering of representatives of the countries of the ECAFE region to consider the problems of the utilization and development of water resources. Our people and government are indeed fortunate to act as the host country on this the third ECAFE conference on water resources: On behalf of myself and my government, I would like to ask all of you to feel at home and to partake of, the facilities and resources which we have offered for your convenience during your deliberations. I hope you will enjoy your stay in our country and that you will carry with you the most pleasant impressions of the Philippines.

All of us within the ECAFE region, particularly those that are in the process of development, have common problems in the use of water. Not unlike land people, water is one of the country’s basic resources. Its proper utilization, conservation, and development determine in no small measure the extent of development that any country may achieve. With many of the countries in the ECAFE region engaged in the implementation of a program or another for accelerating the process of social and economic growth, we are faced from the very beginning with the vital problems of resource utilization, of which water is a primary consideration.

One of the age-old traditions in many communities within the ECAFE region is the communal use of water, be it for irrigation or for drinking purposes. This is especially noteworthy in the irrigation of the rice terraces of Northern Luzon, and in the communal irrigation systems of Java, Taiwan, and other areas in Asia. But the traditional uses of water for irrigation and for the household are not enough. The countries of Asia and elsewhere who have regained their freedom and wish to provide their peoples with new opportunities for improving their economic status and their ways of living have embarked on various development schemes. In all these, new and varied and most effective uses of our water resources have assumed increasing importance. For instance, the generation of hydro-electric power to meet the power needs of industrialization has become for many of our countries the highest industrial priority. In some cases, the multi-purpose harnessing of lakes and rivers is a prime concern of overall planning and development. In others the traditional uses of water are being supplemented by modern structures for power production, irrigation, and drinking, taking advantage of the latest advances in science and technology.

It must be recognized from the outset that all the countries within this region have meager resources, for the needs of our peoples are far greater than any available resources would permit. If only for this reason, there is urgent need for the formulation of common principles that will guide each of our countries in the management and development of its water resources so as to yield the utmost benefit within any practicable period of its citizens. No limitations of funds nor the presence of apparently insurmountable difficulties should deter any people from the proper planning and development of its water resources without further delay. Much needless groping and unnecessary waste could however be avoided if there is common understanding and agreement on certain fundamental principles of an integrated approach to the problems of water utilization. Allow me to touch on these very briefly.

First of all, the development of any water use must meet a real need in the community which in turn must be able to operate the system on a self-sustaining basis. This requires careful planning of the particular water use and well-coordinated activities toward the proper estimating of cost-benefit relationships in the community or communities affected.

Secondly, the social and institutional framework of the community utilizing the water resources must be attuned to, or, if necessary, actually developed toward, the proper management and development of the short-run and long-run water uses. Apart from the financial obligations entailed in the construction and development of water uses or systems, the social and cultural factors in the community must be given full consideration. Unless these institutional factors or forces are properly evaluated and integrated with novel or projected uses of water, the heavy expendtures involved would bring little or no benefit to the community.

Thirdly, the main objectives of water utilization and development is to increase the productivity of the people in the community and make their living richer and fuller; hence, this utilization and development must be achieved as far as practicable at minimum economic and social costs to the people involved. Maintenance of benefits and conservation of the water resources are essential aspects of this principle.

The experience of this country in almost half a century, under a benevolent and far-sighted American administration, has been to continue harnessing our water resources within the limitations of available public funds, as part of our development effort. Testimony of this are the gravity irrigation systems, water reservoirs, artesian wells, and community water systems in different parts of the country. Under the Republic, we have strengthened this program and have added water-power development, first at Maria Cristina Falls and ether small lakes, and lately, at Ambuklao and Binga on the Agno River. We have also undertaken a consistent program of river dams and flood control systems. Under the American aid projects, our Government has given impetus for further construction of gravity irrigation dams and irrigation canals and the use of me­chanical pumps for irrigation.

However, we have not always succeeded in planning and constructing our water systems at such costs as would make the benefits commensurate with the payments made by the people served by these systems.

Perhaps the planning of our new structures, particularly the multi-purpose projects and the new hydros, would come close to desirable cost-benefit relationships. It is to be anticipated that the fuller participation of business and civic leaders, as well as the producers to be affected, would result in the maintenance and operation of our new water projects on a self-sustaining level. Conferences of this kind could contribute immensely to paving the way for intensive studies and research on this problem.

Not only this. The performance of our gravity irrigation systems indicates that the proper use of water has to be deeply rooted in the habits, customs, and traditions of the people if the benefits from such use are to contribute to the enrichment of their lives. Unlike our brothers in the uplands of Luzon who for centuries have practiced terraced agriculture and the most intricate and effective system of artificial irrigation, our peoples on the plains and valleys have not made water use an integral part of their community living. And unlike our neighbors and friends who have lived with communal water systems for ages, we have yet to develop the necessary social institutions by which water rights and water use are natural and efficient means of community living. For unless our people learn to respect individual water rights as part and parcel of community living in our towns and barrios, water utilization in this country will be quite expensive and the benefits therefrom would be derived by only a small segment of the entire population.

Thus we have another lesson to learn from our neighbors in conference on water development such as this one.

But there is a fundamental economic base in water resource management and development. This is the provision of water uses of various kinds at minimum cost to the community, if not to the entire economy. Granted that the social and institutional conditions are favorable to the further harnessing of a country’s water resources, the water uses must be made available in the most economical manner to both small and large producers, to agriculture and industry, and must benefit rich and poor alike, To do this, a country like ours must be able to plan its water uses carefully and program their development as part of the country-wide development scheme. And the planning phases must be a joint effort of both the technicians and economists on one side and the local leaders and policymaker on the other side. The planning and implementation of multiple water-resource utilization must also be sustained by long-range financing programmes, especially those with public fiscal support.

We have tried to do all these here in the Philippines. We are still making every effort to continue on a rising scale our water-development program, particularly hydroelectric power development, in some cases combined with uses for irrigation and flood control. But we are not satisfied in our past performance, and the present activities in water utilization projects leave much to be desired. It is needless perhaps to state that we have to improve upon our planning of our permanent structures and in spreading the cost and benefits of our irrigation and other water systems to as many people as possible. Obviously, we have yet to learn from the experience and the studies of other countries in improving the management of our water resources.

A development policy for water resources is indispensable to the country-wide economic program. But for this policy to be effective and beneficial in the long-run, it must be attuned to the changing needs of the people and their evolving attitudes toward greater and more varied uses of water for the general welfare. There is therefore a constant need for review, reappraisal, and evaluation of the present water-resource policy. Inasmuch as the conditions and needs are changing in a country, as these certainly are different from one country to another, the government activities with respect to water resource utilization and development should be re-examined periodically to see whether they are suited to prevailing conditions and whether they are consistent and workable. In this way, each country will have evolved a sound and practicable water resource policy.

My friends, we have a common interest in the effective harassing of available water resources, not only for the needs of agriculture but more particularly for industrial development. It is the recognition of Common problems in this field that impelled the ECAFE to sponsor this conference, and your corning together for the third time is an earnest of your efforts to pool talents and experience in solving some of these problems. The results of your meeting here in Manila will in no small measure enable us to move several steps forward in the proper management arid development of water, which, together with our human and natural resources, make up the complete structure of the country’s overall development.

I wish you then success in your endeavors, and may this third meeting on water resource development bring sooner to this country as well as to yours the much-awaited realization of better, happier, and more prosperous living for all our citizens.

With such a brilliant array of technogical talent as you represent, I have no doubt that this, or shall we say our conference will be both successful and fruitful. It is there­fore with great pleasure that I declare the third ECAFE Regional Technical Conference on Water Development officially opened.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech at the opening of the 3rd ECAFE Regional Technical Conference on the Water Resources Development, delivered at the Senate Session Hall, Wednesday morning, December 4 , 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(23) , 8523-8527.