Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the First Assembly of Philippine National Cooperative Bank

[Delivered at the YMCA Youth Center, Concepcion Street, at 10:00 a.m., January 16, 1959]

DELEGATES TO THE CONVENTION, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM glad a have been invited to address this convention which, I understand has, for its principal aim the consideration of necessary steps towards the establishment of a Philippine, National Cooperative Bank, as contemplated and authorized by Republic Act No. 2023. Perhaps I should add that, for a program of the magnitude envisage in the legislation which inspired this meeting, taking into account the present state of our finances, in relation to the essential needs and demanding requirements of our people, it takes the maximum of your courage, vision, and, dedication to bring this to a happy reality.

I need not be convinced that the purpose for which Republic Act No. 2023 was enacted, which is to strengthen the cooperative movement in the financial field, is of the considerable importance. I am keenly aware of the need of promoting cooperative organization and, financing of the economic enterprises of the, smallest units of our society, many of which are languishing, so as to ameliorate conditions m our rural areas and to build up even our far flung communities as vital factors in strengthening the national economy. It is hardly necessary for me, to remind you that the, story, of most of our cooperatives m the country is not ox success. We have yet to achieve more of that spirit of collectivism and perhaps a little less of individualism.

This should not deter you, however, from proceeding in accordance with your agenda, which is to consider the needed steps that would lead to, the eventual organization of such a bank, exclusively devoted 10 financing non-agricultural cooperative activities. After we have gone rather deeply into an agricultural cooperative program, investing heavily in farmers cooperatives throughout the islands, I agree that it is high time that we should begin balancing our efforts in this particular sector of our economic structure with similar efforts in the, non-agricultural sector, which is jus|, as important, if not indeed even more important, because it, embraces the large masses of our population that remain unorganised either in their common interest as consumers or as potential contributors to industrial productivity.

You have a tremendous responsibility in your hands, for the gospel of cooperation, whether in social and civic betterment or in the industrial and business field, has yet to be sold more effectively to our public. You have yet to win active and widespread support for it, especially in the open areas, outside of the sphere of established industries, where unorganized multitudes, helplessly exposed to the fierce play of unbridled economic forces, need them most. It has yet to be felt by our populate a an absolute necessity in the advancement of their common welfares, for until our masses are made deeply conscious of its value as pattern of conduct and a way of life, government help will not be of much avail.

You are, therefore, called upon to go into this tremendous pioneering work with greater zeal, to educate, inspire, and organize our people in-their own self-interest and for their mutual protection towards husbanding their resources, in however limited a mounts, for the greater service of the nation. The government will not fail you. It will come to your aid in every form it may be needed to strengthen your hands and to render permanent the benefits of your accomplishments. I assume the Development Bank of the Philippines will be ready to lend you a helping hand through its evolving” program” of financing small industries.

Perhaps, it is still your primary task at this time to keep on organizing cooperatives more extensively than so far undertaken, never failing to invigorate their growth. If because of meager facilities placed at your command, you have not gone far enough field, I should be glad to recommend or take such measures as will enable you to covet more territory and to bring more numerous groups into the cooperative movement. With your experience and example, you are in possession of all the useful information and vital data pointing to the indisputable benefits that accrue to members of cooperatives. You know how much better off those individuals and communities operating as or through cooperatives are today, compared with those acting singly or without the advantage that mutual protection and help can give.

You are all familiar with the case of the Fabrica Consumers Cooperative in Occidental Negros with average annual sales of over ₱1, 500,000; that of the Victorias Milling Credit Union, also of Negros, with more than ₱285,000 in members deposits; and that of the Philippine Iron Mines Credit Union, in Camarines Sur, with accumulated deposits of almost ₱300,000. While these are outstanding and exceptional successes, they are, nevertheless, clearly indicative of the magnitude of the resources of small people when pooled. You can well enlist the support of all the consumer’s cooperatives and credit unons now in existence to rally our people to this great cause.

This convention should therefore, be able to adduce more tangible and incontestable eviences that the immediate establishment of a Philippine National Cooperative Bank, as envisioned and provided in Republic Act No. 2023, is fully warranted and that, if the law is implemented now, it will very materially assist in carrying out the basic objectives of the present administration instead of merely burdening our strained finances without any positive assurance of early gains in terms of greater productivity and prosperity for the nation. If you can show that it would be a reliable means of drawing out savings lying idle in private coffers and an incentive to thrift and to profitable cooperative enterprises among the people who would otherwise be inactive or disposed to extravagate and the thoughtless dissipation of wealth, and if through this convention, you will succeed in working out a viable program of capital formation and investment for mustering and putting to good use every centavo that the masses of our people can spare, then, by all means, let us have the proposed Cooperative Bank at once, for it may yet finance our way out of our present difficulties.

I am, of course, encouraged by the information made available to me in your efforts to promote the organization of a Bank, that there has been pledged towards the required capital stock as much as ₱264,200 by some 208 consumers cooperatives and credit unions and by several cooperative-minded individuals and that you can count on still greater potential aid coming from all 425 non-agricultural cooperatives now operating in 18 cities and 12 towns in 43 provinces, with a total membership of 43,912 cooperators. It is equally encouraging to learn that, considering the comparatively little support so far extended by the government towards non-agricultural cooperative organization, you have already succeeded in pointing the way towards tapping largely unexploited sources of capital that can be channeled for use in our economic development.

In your complex undertaking in this convention, you should consider yourselves extremely fortunate to have the benefit of the mature mind, experience, and practical counsel of such a militant and purposeful leader in the cooperative movement and in business as Secretary Pedro C. Henaez, whose department has supervision of the Cooperatives Administration Office. You are equally fortunate that we already have in the statute books Republic Act No. 2023, which constitutes the government s commitment of full financial assistance, to the extent of a P5,000,000 contribution to the proposed Cooperative Bank s capital, of which ₱1,000,000 may be made available when and; if the Bank is actually organized.

These and all the assistance that can be given to, you by all agencies of the government, especially its policy and technical panels as well as its, financing institutions, are distinct-assets and advantages already in your favor and there is nothing that should hinder you from pursuing your very laudable aims. Insofar as I am concerned, it should be enough that you realize that my program calls for themaximum alleviation and improvement of the condition of the masses of our people. I see in the cooperative movement and, consequently, in a bank devoted to its support and expansion, the, means for promoting wider productivity throughout the land and for spreading abundance among, all levels of our population.

I see in them a resurgence of our native skills and their wider-employment in the total utilization of our vast, raw materials and immense qualities of by-products now largely going to waste, the profitable exploitation of our cottage industries, a revitalization of the economy of our rural areas, and a prosperity that will lift our country towards greater stability and our people towards greater security and contentment. That is our common goal and I bid you, to reach out for it with all your ingenuity, industry, and vigor.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia before the First Assembly of Philippine National Cooperative Bank. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(5) , 793-796.