TEXT OF THE PRESIDENTS’ SPEECH BEFORE THE FIRST NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE VETERANS FEDERATION OF THE PHILIPPINES DELIVERED SATURDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 15, 1958, AT THE MANILA HOTEL.

FELLOW VETERANS, MY FRIENDS:

I COME before you with a light heart, happy to be able to identify myself with you and to greet you as my fellow veterans. Indeed, you have given me the opportunity to bring back to mind cherished memories of the days when, together with many of you, I was in the hills fighting for freedom. These days are dear to me. You who shared those lean days with me, and who perhaps suffered more, naturally occupy a special place in my heart.

Yes, my friends, I am partial to the cause of the veterans—the deserving veterans. The records will show that in my thirty-two years of public service I have always been on the alert for opportunity to serve the veterans.

I am intimately familiar with your problems and equally familiar with the obstacles that must be overcome before these problems are finally solved.

I would venture to say that these obstacles can never be overcome if the various veterans organizations continue to exist serving their own individual ends and working, more often than not, at cross purposes. It is for this reason, my friends, that I congratulate you most sincerely on the success of your efforts to unite all veterans organizations into a federation.

The unity you had just achieved is indeed a tribute to the selflessness of your leaders and individual members. It bespeaks of a highly developed farsightedness. It augurs a better future for the veterans movement. After all, when everything is taken to account, we realize that personalities do not last. Only ideas, causes, and movements, if great enough, gain permanence and immortality.

It is most significant that in the preamble to your Constitution you underscored unity of action and purpose among veterans to promote their general welfare.

May I digress, for a moment, to bring into a sharper focus the kind of unity that you must achieve to make your federation an effective instrument for the common good of the deserving veterans. The unity I speak of, my friends, is the unity that great men all over the world have exhorted their respective peoples to achieve. There is for instance the unity that that immortal martyr of India, Mahatma Ghandi, had defined so succinctly. It was during one of the dark periods of their fight for independence that Indian leaders were riven by rivalries. Ghandi told them: “There are 400,000,000 of us and, if we had the sense to breathe at the same time and exhale in unison, we could blow the rest of the British Empire off the globe.” The moral of course was unity. From there on it was easily sailing for the Indian people.

When we go back farther into history, we read that one development which revolutionized theories on political government was the great American experiment in banding to form what now we know as the United States of America. It was such a great example of what a people can do and achieve when united.

This is the brand of unity that should be made your goal. This is the kind of unity necessary to give meaning and greatness to ideas and movements. Anything less will fail!

It is likewise most significant that in the preamble to your constitution you have made known your desire to preserve the sacred ideals for which many of our brothers have died.

I take this to mean the preservation of the dignity, freedom, and democratic ideals of our people. I heartily concur with you in this regard.

Toward this end, our government has consistently pursued the policy of preserving freedom in our land if only to do honor and glorify the blood that was so nobly shed in our battlefields in defense of home, country, and our ideals.

Our foreign policy for this matter, my friends, has been aimed at strengthening the defense of freedom beyond our frontiers in collaboration with the rest of the free world.

The recently concluded conference of the SEATO is an eloquent testimony of our determination to preserve these ideals for which so many of you have sacrificed.

The solution, therefore, to many of your problems does not lie on the veterans alone nor on the government alone. Rather, my friends, it must be a joint effort—a partnership between government and the veterans.

With this unification of all veterans organizations which you have formalized today, this partnership may now proceed to carry out the noble task of faring the problems of the veterans more dispassionately and realistically.

On my part, I pledge to you my ever increasing concern for the welfare of the veterans and for the early resolution of the various problems facing the veterans today. In doing so, I shall consult with you from time to time.

May I ask you in return, my friends, to do your share in the great task of making our Republic robust and strong. I am sure you realize too well that the problems of the veterans cannot be treated in isolation from the rest of the problems besetting our country.

The welfare and well-being of the veterans must perforce be the welfare and well-being of the entire nation. It is well, therefore, that in your unification,—in your oneness of purpose and in your unity of action, it should permeate the national life. Your organization can be a potent instrument for the common good, not for the veterans alone but for the entire nation.

I urge you to help your government carry out its program for a better life and a brighter tomorrow. In the same breath, I must ask you to guard against the misuse of your organization by anyone for selfish reason.

To fail in this, my friends, to my mind would be the greatest disservice your organization can commit to the veterans.

May I ask you particularly, my friends, to guard against those who now would attempt to turn our people into a nation of negative thinkers who view, matters through the jaundiced eyes of the pessimists. You can help by encouraging and stressing the need for a really constructive criticism.

This, I assure you, I would welcome and consider a great service to the country.

Finally, my friends, the patriotism that fired you to stick to your posts against overwhelming odds in war should be the self-same patriotism that should now spur you to work and contribute to the prosperity of all. The role may be less epic, but I assure you it will require as much if not greater fortitude and courage.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library