My countrymen, we are gathered here today to commemorate Loyalty Day. This is a day when we reaffirm our faith in our government, our country, and our people. It is a day when we pledge our continued loyalty to the principles of democracy and freedom for which our forefathers fought and died.

We are living in a time of great challenges. The forces of communism are threatening to engulf the world. Here in the Philippines, we face the threat of the Hukbalahap rebellion. But we must not be discouraged. We must remain firm in our resolve to defend our country and our way of life.

I know that many of you are worried about the future. You are concerned about the rising cost of living, the lack of jobs, and the problems of peace and order. I understand your concerns. I share your anxieties. But I want to assure you that we are doing everything we can to address these problems.

We are working to improve the economy. We are creating new jobs. We are strengthening our defenses. We are cracking down on crime. We are committed to building a better future for all Filipinos. *Kailangan nating magkaisa* to achieve this goal. We must work together, hand in hand, to overcome the challenges that lie ahead.

Let us remember the sacrifices of our heroes. Let us honor their memory by living lives of courage, integrity, and service. Let us show the world that the Filipino people are a people who are worthy of freedom and democracy. *Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!* Long live the Philippines!

EXCELLENCIES, LADIES & GENTLEMEN, SECRETARY SANTOS, GENERAL CABAL, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES:

ON THIS bright sunny morning, against the background of this magnificent phalanx of our armed forces, it is reassuring to feel and to know that we live in a democratic country that is stable and free. This is the greatest gift God has bestowed on us. Let us as a people not cease thanking Him for this great blessing.

On behalf of the Filipino people, I acknowledge with humility and gratitude your renewal of loyalty, which is really your singular way of rededicating yourselves to the principles of patriotism and devotion to duty which you have shown in times of peace and in times of war.

I invite you and our people to pause for a while and focus our attention to a very serious aspect of our national existence—the problem of our national security. Too often, in the heat of partisan politics, the bigger problems of the nation are set aside or even forgotten.

Happily for our country, however, we have succeeded in maintaining peace and order throughout the land, thereby creating conditions favorable to the healthy development of our political institutions and the steady growth of our national economy. Nevertheless, the threat to the national security which stems from the local Communist party continues to be a real and present danger. We know that the communists in our country sought to seize national power through the use of armed force. They attempted this a few years back and failed. They pursue this objective now by using the rights and privileges of citizens enjoyed in a free country such as ours. We also know that the communists in our country today are exploiting for their own purposes the legitimate and valid aspirations of our government and people. It should not be difficult for us to realize that the battles we have to wage must be fought with much greater wisdom. These battles must be fought with equanimity, We must guard against losing our sense of balance because if we don’t, we may unwittingly help the communists destroy the Very freedom we seek to preserve. Moreover, should we lose our sense of balance, there is the much greater danger of losing our sense of direction.

A good hard look at the state of the national security must be viewed in the light of the international situation which of late has been marked by the continuing tension in Berlin, crisps situations in several parts of Asia and Africa, and the growing communist pressures all over the world. Our people must Remain united. We should join the rest world in defending the democratic way of life of the free world in defending the way of life.

Nurtured by the noble tradition of our forefathers and steeped in democratic principles, there is no choice left for us except to remain firm in our policy to fight communism or any other form of human bondage, the threat of a 50-megaton bomb notwithstanding.

Some nations may have the power and the resources to be neither red nor dead; others may prefer to be red than dead; but for our people, if we are to remain true to our God, true to the noble traditions of our forefathers, and to the democratic principles for which we paid so dearly with our blood, should it ever be forced on us, God forbid, we have no other choice: We Would Rather Be Dead Than Red.

Officers and men of the Armed Forces, you have the responsibility of contributing positively to the task of nation building, and I know you are deeply aware of such responsibility. It is with singular pride that I note your unstinted support and participation in the efforts of your government to cope with vital economic and social problems. Your agro-industrial projects, such as building prefabricated school houses for the education of our youth in the democratic way of life, your building of roads to connect far-flung communities to the roads of civilization, your exemplary role during the recent calamities—these are but a few manifestations of your versatility in helping meet the pressing needs of our nation. I urge you, therefore, to continue and unite in your efforts, ever alert for new ideas and approaches that will make more effective your role in national growth and security.

I enjoin you all, officers and men of the Armed Forces, to be ever vigilant, to be ever loyal to the principles of democracy that you, even as I, are sworn to uphold. Remember at all times that your loyalty is to God and to our country, to our democratic institutions and certainly not to individuals. In this coming elections, you will be doing the country a great service by maintaining strict impartiality. Give favor to no one. As a candidate for president, I should like to make it clear that I would rather go down in defeat than win by means of terrorism or by means of frauds. Exert all your effort to insure a clean, honest and free expression of the people’s will. As your Commander-in-Chief, it is my desire that you do no less.

God grant that this, land of ours preserve its birthright of freedom; and that you, the vanguards of our bastion of liberty, continue to have the strength, the discipline, the dedication, the self-sacrifice, which alone can guarantee the perpetuation of our well-being. God bless you all!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library