Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the formal launching of this year’s fund campaign of the Community Chest

[Delivered at the Malacañang Social Hall, June 1, 1959]

I SHOULD state at the very outset that the joint program of the Community Chest and the eighteen Red Feather agencies affiliated to it in a most praiseworthy way, has been the heart these past years of a unique humanitarian service.

It has also, from year to year, renewed our faith in the constancy of goodness and charity as virtues of mankind.

If for nothing else, therefore, we meet here this afternoon to pay just tribute to community spirit, public welfare, and charity, all of which the Community Chest and the Red Feather agencies have time and again translated into various deeds.

The beneficiaries of those deeds are the less fortunate members of our society who, but for the foresight and the noble spirit of those who have always supported the Community Chest, might never experience normal life.

In a large sense, however, it is their families, the neighborhoods and towns in which they live, and ultimately the country itself who are the real beneficiaries. Generosity and compassion were never so small and so limited that they did not touch an entire society. The Community Chest program, like every gentle thought and deed in man’s experience, will always leave its impress not only upon so many lives—such as those whom I am certain we will also decide to help—but upon Life itself.

Today’s occasion will make it possible to continue the program that has already, through various welfare agencies, provided comfort, material assistance, and even a new lease on life to countless thousands.

The aged and the disabled have been afforded refuge through institutional care partly financed through contributions to the Community Chest.

Orphans have been sheltered in special homes and brought up to face a world in which opportunity would otherwise be scant.

The children of indigent families have benefited through proper nutrition, and older members of those families themselves assisted in securing gainful employment.

The deaf and blind have been taught productive skills.

Personal misery and lack of opportunity resulting from various other ailments of mind or body have been provided ample remedies.

The extent to which all these have been accomplished from year to year has been made possible mainly through the joint endeavors of the Red Feather agencies.

The harmonious spirit that informs those endeavors has been encouraged by public support of the financial program managed by the Community Chest.

The benefits to society in terms of greater opportunity, peace of mind, and individual happiness, have been the ends to which this financing program has been dedicated.

I wish to appeal, therefore, for your continued sympathy for the humanitarian work that the Community Chest and its 18 welfare agencies are undertaking. I call upon the various elements of our society—private individuals, firms, and organizations, all of whom have in various ways demonstrated similar support—to help make the Community Chest fund campaign as successful, at least, as it has been in previous years.

I realize that by paying tribute to the Community Chest and the Red Feather agencies for conceiving and carrying out their humanitarian program, I am inevitably paying equal tribute to those others—citizens of every calling—who have contributed to their operations. It is to such men and women that we address ourselves. Their magnimity and sense of charity is the key to the continuing success of the Community Chest program.

The Administration’s own program is not unlike that of the Community Chest. It is pledged to the task of eradicating poverty from our midst, of combating long existing ills in various fields of national life.

In wishing to pursue this year’s Community Chest fund campaign to a successful conclusion, we derive added hopefulness from the fact that there is among our people a fundamental sense of unity. It is this sense upon which our national program for prosper and self-sufficiency depends. It is the same sense upon which every other program, smaller perhaps but no less necessary, must depend for success.

Apart from the humanitarian purpose of trying to improve the personal circumstances of our less fortunate countrymen, it seems to me the Community Chest program has one timely lesson to provide. All too often these days, charity and sympathy and moral responsibility are confined to mere public utterances. It would seem today that it sufficed to make public avowals of the Christian virtues, that one needed only a platform and a group of listeners to keep those ageless virtues alive and useful.

The Community Chest program, on the contrary, is a call for that greater and more durable charity—charity by deed. I hope, that, if some have failed to demonstrate such charity in other matters affecting the nation, they shall not do so with respect to this program, which to us is a great opportunity to alleviate by actual deed some of the suffering and misfortune which we, as a society, would wish to banish from our midst.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the formal launching of this year’s fund campaign of the Community Chest held Monday afternoon June 1 at the Malacañang Social Hall. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (23) , 4226-4227.