PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE JOINT SESSION OF UNITED STATES CONGRESS IN WASHINGTON, D.C., AT 12:30 P.M., WEDNESDAY, JUNE 18 (12:30 A.M., THURSDAY, MANILA TIME)

MR. VICE-PRESIDENT, MR. SPEAKER, AND HONORABLE MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES CONGRESS:

FROM THE BOTTOM of my heart I thank you for this high honor you have accorded me by inviting me to speak to the great American nation through its Congress.

I come here on behalf of the Filipino people, your best friends in Asia who live in the faith that the heart of this great American nation has for them a soft spot. I speak for 23 million Filipinos who renew the vow that we stand by this great nation, the United States of America, as long as her leadership of the Free World continues to be nobly dedicated to the supreme cause of world freedom and peace.

In pledging help to the friends of freedom everywhere to achieve their own security and well-being, the United States, through President Eisenhower, said: “Recognizing economic health as an indispensable basis of military strength and the Free World’s peace, you shall strive to foster everywhere and to practice yourselves policies that encourage productivity and profitable trade.”

On this state visit of mine to your grand country—thanks to the hospitality of your great President and people—I hope to avail myself of the opportunity to exchange with you renewed pledges of Philippine—American solidarity on the basis of equality, mutuality of interest, and identity of ideals. This is also an opportunity to reiterate the resolve that we the Filipino people, within the limits of our capabilities, will assume our just, burden in the common defense of freedom and in the common pursuit of peace.

Twelve years ago, on July 4, 1946, you granted us the precious boon for which we had longed and fought through almost four centuries: our independence. You gave it not by compulsion but by a voluntary sovereign act. You gave it as free men and as champions of freedom and in, just recognition of the fact that we deserved it, and were willing to assume its tremendous responsibilities. With our cities and provinces buried at the time under the ruin and rubble of the world’s most devastating war, with the national economic structure wrecked by four years of ruthless enemy occupation, with our industries despoiled and destroyed, and our agriculture neglected, we nevertheless gladly accepted the responsibilities of independent nationhood.

We then believed, as we still do, that with freedom and independence as our instrumentality and with the courage and determination of our people as our inspiration, we could build again what had been destroyed, we could restore what had been lost, and could establish a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy.

We in the Philippines like to believe that in our 12 years of independent national existence, we have proved to the world that we have not betrayed America’s trust and confidence. We like to believe that we have shown that your 50 years of arduous and altruistic effort to help us prepare for our independence were neither fruitless nor wasted. We like to believe that the thousands of American soldiers who fought with us in Bataan, Corrigidor, Leyte, and other hallowed places, did not fight or die in vain. We like to believe that the financial assistance you have given for our country’s reconstruction and rehabilitation after the war bespoke the gratitude of the American nation to the Filipinos who were confronted with the double task of building the foundations of the Philippine Republic and at the same time rebuilding what had been destroyed during a war fought for a common cause. We think that in 12 years we have, with your assistance and inspiration, successfully completed the task of reconstruction and restoration.

Now, as we start a new chapter in the unending work of nation-building, we face another great challenge; namely the building of a national economy capable of affording to the humblest citizen of a democratic Philippines economic well-being, social security, and stability. We are determined to succeed in this task. Only then shall we be able to establish the validity of claim in Asia that the product of 50 years of Philippine-American collaboration is a democracy that offers to its people the reality of a free and abundant life. We shall have proved that freedom means the building up of human dignity, that democracy means more productivity on the farm and in the factory and more harmony and contentment in the home; that liberty means the utilization of our national resources and the full employment of our manpower for the enrichment of our lives and the winning of peace and contentment. By our success in this endeavor, we hope to be able to demonstrate to the world that not communism, but democracy, which stimulates productivity of mind, the heart and the hand, is the answer to the needs of the hungry and the prayers of the oppressed in Asia: that democracy which is founded upon the eternal verities is the answer to the spiritual wants of one billion Asians, as it is the answer to the material wants of more than half of mankind.

In this great task we ask for your understanding, your encouragement, and your assistance—not your charity. We need your faith. We seek from you the strength to make our country an effective force for democracy in Asia.

The historic role of the United States in Asia, in my humble view, is far from completed. It is true that by the grant of the Philippine independence you have started a libertarian cycle of far-reaching consequences, resulting in the independence of other Asian countries like India, Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia, and lately, Malaya. And I would add that this cycle which has rolled on irresistibly into Africa, will not be completed until every nation of the world shall have become free and independent.

Nevertheless, may I be permitted to suggest that the logic of events and the dynamics of history will not permit the United States of America, the recognized leader of the Free World, to stop there. She led triumphantly the forces of freedom in two world wars. She gave the best of her gallant youth to redeem the cause of liberty. She has given billions of dollars of her substance to help break down the ramparts of poverty, ignorance, and disease, and to clear the way for a better world. But when these battles have been won, destiny yet calls on America to continue leading the forces of freedom and democracy in the battle for a universal peace founded upon justice, liberty, and economic security. The last war taught us to reject isolationism as a national policy. It compelled us to accept the principle of the fundamental unity of the human race—the brotherhood of man. The peace and freedom of Asia, where one-half of humanity lives, is therefore unavoidably the concern of the free world of which the United States of America is the acknowledged leader. Asia must therefore be won for democracy. She must be won for peace. To the end, Asia should be helped to develop a political, economic, and social climate in which freedom and peace can nourish. Asia, the birthplace of the greatest religions of the earth, must not be allowed by the folly of passive indifference to fall under the control of a godless ideology. Asia, with her thirst for capital and modern technology, must be won to the conviction that democracy can lead her out of the depths of poverty to the heights of fulfillment. She must be convinced that the democratic ideology which contains the eternal truths preached by Christ and other great religious leaders, prophets, and poets is in modern times the ideology that can best satisfy her deep spiritual longings.

In the fields of commerce, industry, agriculture, art, and science, the Asians should be led to the conviction, not by words but by deeds, that human dignity and human freedom are the highest interests of democracy everywhere; that democracy is the sworn foe of oppression, intolerance, social injustice, and economic insecurity everywhere; and that democracy stands squarely on the principle that the state was created for man and not man for the state. These being the very principles upon which American democracy stands, it is difficult to conceive that her leadership coupled with understanding and helpful and imaginative policies, should fail to win the heart of one billion Asians whose deepest longings are freedom from want, freedom from fear, freedom to grow and develop in peace, and freedom to lift themselves up from abasement of the body and the spirit.

The Filipinos happen to have culture that is an amalgam of the best-in the Asian, Latin, and Anglo-American cultures. It is the only country in Southeast Asia where the overwhelming majority of the people profess the Christian faith. By geography and racial affinity we are of the East, and by culture we are of the West. Our jurisprudence is a confluence of Asian, Latin, and Anglo-American jurisprudences. The greatest of our writers wrote in Spanish, Tagalog, and other vernaculars, and the modern ones in English. Thus, the breadth and depth of our culture, its varied and many sided quality, permits us to claim, without being immodest, a fair understanding of both the East and the West and to become a bridge of understanding between the two. This is a role which we would be happy to perform in the higher interest of the Free World and in the service of world peace.

No one, therefore, should underestimate the tremendous impact upon the Asian peoples of the Philippines success in establishing among its people a real, substantial, and effective democracy as envisaged by Jefferson and Lincoln, and by our own Rizal and Mabini. On the other hand, no one should discount the possibility that the failure of democracy in the Philippines might prove to be a fatal setback to the expanding frontiers of Democracy in Asia.

If you will bear with me for a while, may I be allowed to present to you in bold strokes a picture of the political and economic conditions of my country, The twenty-three million Filipinos are closely and affectionately attached to you in warm friendship, for you have lived with us for more than half a century and have left imperishable influences oh our history, politics, economics, and culture. We fought side by side with you when the fortunes of war were at the lowest ebb, and ever after. We never wavered in loyalty, not even under the fire and sword of a ruthless enemy. Our veterans who survived after risking their all have unflinching faith that America will always remember their devotion and they are confident that Congress will ever be mindful of their interests. While Bataan and Corrigidor were fought by armies, the Philippine resistance movement was fought by the masses of our people. During our association of nearly half a century, you inspired our people with the immortal principles of your declaration of independence. You gave us both the letter and the spirit of your Constitution. The political thinking and practices of our people bear the deep imprint of American political institutions and usages. Our democratic way of life has been enriched and vitalized by your own. Thus, when under the dynamic leadership of President Magsaysay, we quelled the communist-inspired Huk rebellion and outlawed communism in the Philippines under a law signed by me last year, we acted under the inspiration of our spirit of 1896 not less than under your spirit of 1776.

The English language is the official language of the Philippines and will so remain indefinitely. It is one of the cultural bonds that bind our country to America and to the English-speaking world. American culture has cut a deep swath in our own. Even now, the English-language newspapers in the Philippines continue to be the favorite newspapers of Filipino readers. Side by side with the development of the indigenous culture, we appreciate more and more American art and literature. Your cultural legacy now forms part of the soul of the Philippine nation.

The economic bond between our two countries is equally important. The biggest market for our foreign trade is the United States to which we sell 52 percent of our exports and from which we buy 55 percent of our imports. The Philippines occupies the eleventh rank among the foreign markets for American products. Your total investments in the Philippines amount to $250 million and is thus the biggest foreign investment in the Philippines. Under the so-called parity amendment to our Constitution, Americans enjoy the same rights as Filipinos to develop the natural resources of the country and to establish public utilities. We have not given this privilege to any other foreigner. No other country in the world has given it to you. For that reason, the biggest power companies and mining companies in the Philippines are American owned. American investors come in slowly, but they keep coming. American capital and Philippine labor have harmonious relations. Both our elite and our labor force come from 21 universities 352 colleges and 31,000 public and private schools in all of which the democratic ideology is accepted and communism rejected by free choice.

So, I venture to submit my considered view that long; after government-to-government treaties are made and unmade, long after agreements are emptied of meaning, long after covenants expire, this people-to-people relation between Filipinos and Americans will endure through the centuries. These, ladies and gentlemen, are some of the priceless, intangible stakes in our wedded national destinies.

I said a while ago that our task of reconstruction and restoration is over. We have accomplished that with generous American aid. But now, we are starting the more difficult task of building a national economy that will afford the humblest citizen of the country a fair share of the comforts and conveniences of modern civilized life, a fair assurance of continuous employment of our manpower, and a fair measure of economic security and stability for all. Our natural resources in land, mines, forests, marine, and hydro-electric power potential are vast and the greatest part of them are yet untapped. Our potential production of rubber, cotton, rice, corn, and other cereals is unlimited, Our actual production of copra, hemp, and sugar is limited only by the demand of the world market. Some of the world’s biggest deposits of nickel, iron, copper, and minerals are found in the Philippines. We are hopeful that someday the tremendous efforts of exploration for oil conducted by American companies will yield the expected results. These, in short, are the vast potentialities of my country.

But I must be frank with you and say that our economic situation leaves much to be desired. We are far from our economic goals. To exploit the vast natural resources I have referred to, we lack the capital and in certain cases, the know-how. Our balance of payments in our international trade has been unfavorable in the post-war years. It is true that we have increased our exports from $263.4 millions in 1947 to $428.9 millions in 1958. But our imports have increased faster, from $511.1 millions in 1947 to $614.6 millions in 1957. It is also true that from 1953 up to the present, pursuant to our industrialization program, we have established with very little foreign borrowing more than eight hundred new industries. But we are encountering difficulties in providing the dollar requirements of these new industries in machinery, spare parts, and raw materials which have to be imported. This has strained our international reserves. We have extensive irrigation projects to bolster our food production. We have also big harbor improvement projects, especially for Manila, to provide adequate port facilities for a growing foreign and domestic trade. We have power development projects to cope with the rapidly expanding industrialization program in Manila area, Visayas, and Mindanao. But principally, we want to realize thereby an ambitious but necessary program of rural electrification by which we hope to stimulate home and cottage industries in the rural areas; bring to the countryside the blessings of newspapers, movies, radio and television, and other modern urban conveniences and facilities; improve the living standards of our rural folks and brighten up their social and economic outlook. But these can no longer be financed with our own resources alone. To finance these development projects, we therefore need foreign capital and credit.

These are some of the urgent and economic problems we have in our country. So much of our working capital has been invested in the building of the projects and industries we have so far undertaken that refinancing has become imperative. We have progressed half-way toward our objective; we cannot turn back. We need strength to take us to the legitimate goal which we believe we can reach with the assistance of our friends.

Lastly, may I express a parting thought as a tribute to this great American nation by borrowing the words of one of its great Presidents, Franklin Delano Roosevelt. He said: “The state of this nation is good—the heart of this nation is sound—the spirit of this nation is strong—the faith of this nation is eternal.” The Philippines, your loyal friend and ally, appeals to that heart, to that spirit, and to that faith.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library