Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the Independence of the Philippines

[Delivered at the Independence Memorial Grandstand on July 4, 1957]

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

THE cycle of time has brought us once more to the fourth day of July, that day which we celebrate with reverence and joy as marking our emergence as a unified and independent nation of free men. Today, throughout our beloved land, in the quiet countryside and in crowded city streets, the millions of our people gaze upward with misty eyes at the bright flag of the Republic, proclaiming to the world our sovereign nationhood. I know that the throb of pride and happiness in my heart is echoed in the bosom of each and every one of you.

There is good reason for our pride, good reason for each of us to share in a sense of national accomplishment. Freedom is a right of man. Independence is a right of peoples. But the history of man tells us that neither freedom nor independence is lightly or easily achieved. As we very well know, they are the prize of ceaseless efforts, and to keep them securely within our grasp calls for a continued struggle. Our own struggle was long and it ranged from the field of battle to the area of ideas. But ours was the prize of victory and, as we enter the second decade of our national existence, there is basis for the conviction that with God’s help, it well never be wrested from us.

This Republic was born upon the ruins of a land laid waste by a terrible war, its people exhausted by long years of suffering, its social, political, and economic structure very badly shaken from its foundations. It came into being in a world equally ravaged, its air still heavy with hate, fear, and distrust. Men and nations were still under the influence of wartime jungle law, and the agents of Communism already were prowling all over the earth, feeding upon human misery and chaos. The outlook for this infant nation was indeed black.

How have we met the challenge? Does the chronicle of our experience bear out the prophets of doom? On the contrary, I hold that the history of our Republic during this critical period of its existence is one of the bright pages in the annals of man, a glowing justification of our confidence in our selves and of the encouragement and sympathy of our friends abroad.

In a world plagued by post-war scarcity, disruption of trade, and general economic confusion we painfully reconstructed our own economy by bringing to bear our native ingenuity and resourcefulness upon whatever materials were at hand. To me, the lowly jeepney—so often the object of our derision and irritation—is a symbol of our sturday refusal to acknowledge defeat. When standard transportation was still not be had, these unique creations of Filipino imagination and resourcefulness appeared to meet a vital community need, their gaily painted bodies a banner of cheerful challenge to adversity.

In much the same way we came to grips with other problems and surmounted other obstacles gradually but steadily, restoring our material means of existence and, in some measure, even rising above our pre-war levels. America helped us in this effort but, herself bearing the awesome burden of world-wide reconstruction, told us honestly that the major effort would have to be our own. It was, and it is this very fact that is the source of greatest pride in our national accomplishment.

No nation today, lives alone. The greatest powers are affected in some measure by events transpiring in lands thousands of miles distant. The smallest powers, likewise affected by the same token, exert influence far beyond or independent of their size. Thus, in taking the measure of our national accomplishment we must give due weight to the world environment in which it was achieved. We must relate it to the record of others in similar circumstances, making such comparisons not for the purpose of feeding our vanity but rather that we may pass accurate judgment upon the effectiveness of our own policies.

The result of such survey is indeed encouraging. As I have already pointed out, the magnitude and nature of our economic reconstruction and expansion, while not up to our needs and hopes, is most impressive when judged against the background of a strained and disrupted world economy. Other nations better endowed with resources and experience have suffered painful and damaging fluctuations of price levels and currency Values while we have succeeded in keeping both within a relatively narrow and controlled range. Other peoples have had to suffer far more drastic denial of essential—let alone luxury—imports with no commensurate improvement of their national finances.

Let us view other aspects of our internal situation in the same light. Against a world background of toppling governments, civil wars, tragic losses to Communist assault, destroying their military strength and winning their followers with a program of democratic social justice as opposed to the false promises of red propagandists. To cope with the more subtle forms of Communist aggresion, we have just pioneered a legislative defense in which the mask of social justice is ripped from the sinister face of Communism, revealing it as a criminal conspiracy and prescribing stern punishment for those who encourage or take part in its plot to destroy our free institutions.

I have signed into law the CAFA bill, outlawing the Communist Party of the Philippines. With the CAFA law, Republic Act No. 1700, our people have not only officially made the fight against Communism a matter of national policy but we have also acquired a potent weapon in the fight against subversion. We invoked the police powers of a sovereign state to protect itself and the institutions entrusted to its care from criminal attack.

At the same time, we have successfully pursued by peaceful democratic means the liquidation of feudalism and the application of significant agrarian and other social reforms for which other peoples have shed blood. And certainly a legitimate source of pride is the manner in which, contrasted with the bitter experience of others, we have effected desired changes in our government by orderly constitutional process and without impairment of any of our precious civil liberties.

Under this program we have built 6,100 kilometers of developmental and feeder roads. We have drilled 8.483 artesian wells, thereby increasing potable water supply by 300 per cent in the rural areas. We have completed 32 national irrigation systems, 81 communial irrigation systems, area of 220,000 hectares, representing an increase of 200 per cent. We have erected more than 6,604 classroom units of prefabricated and other types of school buildings, accommodating 15 per cent more of children of school age. We have increased four times the health service appropriation from ₱12 million to ₱43 million, thereby enabling this administration to employ doctors, nurses, dentists, and midwives for the rural areas. Rural health units are now organized in 1,280 out of the 1,300 municipalities throughout the country.

While directing our national effort particularly on rural development, we have not lost sight of projects basic to industrial development. The country’s potential for hydro-electrical power development alone is estimated at three million kilowatts and by the end of this year 13 per cent of this potential will have been developed ready to augment industrial activities in the principal areas. This means a total of 400,000 kilowatts of installed capacity where there were before only 180,300 kilowatts. When the Binga and the new Maria Cristina projects will have been completed in the early part of 1960, the country will be able to pursue intensively its rural electrification program which is already being installed in Central Luzon.

By and large we have gone far in our goal of agro-industrial economy envisioned in our five-year economic plan. The Administration has given land to the landless and home to the homeless by a vigorous prosecution of land reforms and housing projects. The Bureau of Lands during the last three years of this administration has granted a total of 124,200 land patents to home-steaders, covering 650,000 hectares of agricultural land.

In the field of commerce and industry, approximately 700 new industries have been established during our administration with the help and support of our foreign exchange reserve. We have extended help to agriculture by subsidizing the farmers and extending to them extensive and undreamed of credit facilities through the AGCFA, the RFC, the PNB, and other financial institutions.

To help our retail merchants, we have appropriated and released ₱10 million apart from the assistance that the NAMARCO extends to Filipino retailers. We have done everything humanly possible to implement the National Retail Trade Act and all nationalization laws of the country.

In fine we have cut short distances and brought the people close to each other, and the government closer to the people. At no time in the history of our country has the masses of our people been given the opportunities for a richer and fuller life than today.

The task of nation-building is long, ardous, and continuous. It requires the united physical efforts, spiritual oneness, and firmness of objectives of all the people. While our young Republic is well on the highway of achieving the desired goal set by the architects of our national destiny, especially by my most illustrious predecessor in office, much yet remains to be done. And we need more time and resources to achieve our objective. In a world beset with uncertainties we cannot afford even for a moment to lose sight of our country’s ultimate objective, much, less can we slacken in our task of nation-building owing to divisive forces that might dissipate the power of our people.

It is, therefore, most appropriate that we have adopted as the overall theme of this 11th anniversary of our independence: NATIONAL UNITY. Now more than ever, we should; put together our collective shoulders and will, and follow unflinchingly the path that will eventually lead us to be the full realization of our national destiny.

Turning to external affairs, what has been our role upon the world stage? What has been our contribution to the community of free nations of which we are a member? Here, I feel, we have risen considerably above our physical limitations in terms of both the quality and quantity of contribution and initiative. In the United Nations organization, our vigorous and consistent espousal of a world ruled by law, of peace secured by justice, and of the fundamental right of peoples to self-determination, has earned us the respectful attention of our neighbors. As early and active participants in the system of collective security proposed by the United States as a realistic solution to the problem of small nations unable to bear the tremendous costs of modern military defense, we share the credit in the demonstrated success of that system. World Communism was made to realize the danger of continuing its unbridled program of military expansion, and was forced to fall back upon its more devious tactics.

Closer to home we have been no less active and no less successful in developing closer intercourse, friendship, and understanding with our fellow Asians. At Bandung we demonstrated our community of interest with the peoples there represented and at the same time helped prevent the perversion of that historic meeting into a Communist propaganda medium. To the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Pact we not only contributed initiative and constructive participation but succeeded in securing commitment of the signatories to the pact to the vital principles of the Pacific Charter, an unequivocal repudiation of colonialism in any form, calling for orderly but speedy liquidation of its surviving remnants. On the more specific personal level, one of the most treasured fruits of our foreign relations is the friendship and gratitude of the people of the Republic of Vietnam to whom we extended a welcoming hand when they needed encouragement most, and with whom dedicated Filipino professional men and women have worked heroically to heal the wound of Communist aggression and flight from tyranny.

Our relations with the United States are particularly noteworthy. With this one time conqueror of our land we subsequently developed a warm and sympathetic friendship which reached its highest expression in the peaceful yielding to us of sovereignty on this date eleven years ago.

Our relations since that date might well serve as a pattern for the world community. Assistance has been extended and accepted by us in the spirit of friendship rather than subservience. We have cooperated in the achievement of common objectives with due respect for each other’s views, freely exchanged as equals, and with the course of each party determined solely by sovereign initiative in serving the best national interest: Our policies have paralleled those of America only when it served our national interest to do so, on other occasions following an independent course. And be it said to America’s credit that no pressure ever has been exerted to have us do otherwise. To that great nation, which today celebrates its own achievement of independence, I know our people extend heartfelt greetings and a reaffirmation of our dedication to common ideals of peace, justice, and liberty.

In presenting these highlights of the early pages of what I trust will be the long and glorious history of our nation, I have deliberately left for the last what I personally consider to be a proud Filipino contribution to mankind. Unfortunately our pride in this contribution is overshadowed by grief. Our pride is in the fact that in this time of challenge and crisis our race produced a Ramon Magsaysay. Our grief is for the fact that he was too soon taken from us, that we were bereft of a great and dynamic leader still in the prime of his vigor, still holding in his hand so much of his people’s future welfare.

There is no need to recall the grief of our people, who were as one in mourning his tragic death. But we may take some comfort and due pride in the fact that his passing was mourned not only by his own people, so many of whom knew him and loved him as a personal friend, but by the peoples of all nations as well. Certainly never in our history and rarely in the history of other nations has there been so universal an outpouring of sorrow from distant and unkown friends on every walk of life. This world-wide acknowledgment of Magsaysay’s great qualities of leadership will remain as one of the most precious treasures of our nation’s heritage. We cannot do less than to dedicate ourselves to the perpetuation of Magsaysay’s ideals and principles as the foundation of this nation’s aspiration.

Let this be a day not only of rejoicing but also one of solemn dedication and national unity. Reflecting upon our past, we draw strong hope for our future. As a people we have proved by deeds our right to be a nation. As a nation we have proved our competence to take, a position of dignity and honor in the community of free nations and to participate in the efforts of that community ultimately to embrace all peoples of the earth, a community in. which man with God’s blessing, may achieve its noblest design.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library