Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Philippine Columbian Association

[ Delivered at the Columbian Club House, January 29, 1958 ]

FELLOW COLUMBIANS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

IT IS NOT often that we find human institutions able to resist the decline and eventual disintegration which the erosion of time unfailingly brings. Yet, we find the Philippine Columbian Association celebrating its Fiftieth Anniversary today—vigorous as ever, constructively active and progressive, and most important of all, keenly conscious of the challenge of change. This speaks very highly of the lofty principles on which the association was founded; it depicts the underlying strength of spirit which the founding members originally imparted to this association in 1907. That is why I feel highly honored to be a member of the Philippine Columbian Association, especially since my membership is linked with our Club’s Golden Jubilee.

Tonight, with your permission, I would like to address you as a humble member, to consult with you in the same manner that President Quezon in his time utilized the Club as a sounding board for some of his ideas. I would like to discuss with you the challenge of our time, to seek counsel and strength in your company, and to draw inspiration from the great traditions of this great institution.

As I listened to the reminiscences of our distinguished members recalling the highlights in the history of our Club, I could not but ponder on the great changes which have taken place in our country during the last fifty years. At the turn of the century, as we emerged from Spanish colonial rule, the task of our leaders was to unite our people into a nation. At that time, the feeling of regionalism was rather prevalent and this undermined the cohesion of our population. But spousing the cause of equality among Filipinos in social business and government circles, our Club greatly assisted in effecting the changes necessary to our oneness as a people. It also influenced the attitude of foreigners towards us and gained their respect. We gradually achieved self-confidence and self-reliance in public affairs—traits that were prerequisites for the attainment of political sovereignty.

Having attained the goal of racial equality, and with it, national dignity, our political leaders headed by the inimitable President Quezon and Speaker Osmeña, rallied the nation towards obtaining complete and absolute political independence. The foresight of our leaders gave the Philippines the honor of being the first Asian nation to be freed from colonial rule.

In the historic struggle for Independence, our Club indeed played an important role It served as a platform from which President Quezon tested; the validity of his policies. It gathered the live elements of our population and formed them into a cohesive group of leaders which propagated the norms and mores necessary for a successful democracy.

In this, the second half of the twentieth century, the next question, confronting our country is: WHERETO NOW? As an association composed of the leading elements of the community, this Club should lead the way towards finding a valid answer to this question. If in the past years the Philippine Columbian Association spearheaded the movement for liberty, why should we not take a hand in seeking a new direction for the nation? Are we to stand idly by now and remain as a purely social club or tennis club, when there are economic problems that threaten the nation’s stability?

If our Club played a vital role in directing our country’s activities and political struggles culminating in the grant of our independence on July 4, 1946, why can we not now exert the same influence in the establishment of a strong national economy? Our political independence will be empty of meaning unless we can strengthen our economy which will enable our humblest citizen to enjoy the comforts and conveniences of a civilized life. But the only way we can successfully bolster our economy is through the development and application of scientific research.

This is the challenge brought about by swift changes of time and circumstances. This is the challenge, not only before the Philippine Columbian Association, but also before every civic and social organization throughout the country and before every Filipino for that matter. We must now marshal our intelligence and resources and throw them behind the great effort to ward off suffering and misery and to raise the standard of living of our people.

I see in your program that the theme of your celebration this year is “National Progress through Science.” No theme can be more timely or more proper. You might have noted that, both in my inaugural address and in my state-of-the-nation message to Congress, I made reference to the need of science-and scientific research to step up our economic development program. Taking advantage of this select group constituting this audience, allow me to say a few words by way of amplification of the ideas expressed in those addresses.

It should not be necessary for me to point out that in this age of the atom, the jet plane, the guided missile, and the artificial-satellite, we cannot afford to have our actions continue to be governed by unscientific methods. We need what Emerson calls “faith commensurate with the grander orbits and universal law which science discloses.” Indeed, we must move forward and attack our problems scientifically if we wish to be able to hold our own in the eternal struggle for a place under the sun in this highly competitive world.

It is a matter of common knowledge that across the centuries man has been able to progress because of his continuous efforts to harness the forces of nature to his higher purpose.

The experience of the progressive countries of the world, particularly the United States and England, should serve as object lessons for us. These countries have shown how science and scientific research have helped advance their economic development and progress. The Industrial Revolution, which had its beginnings in England in the eighteenth century, was accelerated by the studies of such scientists as Sir Humphrey Davy, Henry Bessemer, and Michael Faraday. In the United States the studies of Robert Fulton which led to the invention of the steamboat of Samuel Morse, who invented the telegraph, of the Wright brothers, who produced the airplane, and of Edison, who introduced the multifarious uses of electricity, have brought about great changes in the lives not only of the American people but also of the people of the whole world.

The practical application of science in these countries points the way for us in the Philippines to follow. We are fortunate to have been endowed by Divine Providence with a wealth of raw materials for the manufacture of useful commodities. The nipa palm, for instance, can be a source of fuel for the machines in our factories as well as for motorized land and water transportation. With the great variety of trees in our forests, there is no reason why we should not be able to produce our own pulp for the manufacture of high-grade paper. In the case of rice, which is the staple food of our people, our scientists should be able to discover ways of making our country self-sufficient in this cereal by importing or developing new high-yielding varieties through plant breeding, and by more effective control of pests and diseases, scientific analysis of soils, proper use of fertilizers, and painstaking study of production costs. What has been said of rice may well apply to corn.

Turning now to livestock raising, we need extensive research in order to improve our production which at present is far from satisfactory. Then, too, our principal export crops such as sugar, abaca and copra need to be the subject of continuous research in order to find ways of improving production, processing and marketing, and of making profitable use of by-products.

My friends, I have spoken of science in relation to our economic development program because, at this juncture of our national life, the economic problems of the country must receive preferential attention in order that our people may enjoy a greater measure of prosperity than they have ever enjoyed before. I am of the firm conviction that scientific research can accelerate the improvement of the economic condition of our people. If statistics mean anything at all, it should be interesting to note that countries where science has attained a high degree of progress generally have a higher per capita income than those in which science is still in the beginning stages of development. Thus, Sweden and the United States, which are far advanced in this respect, have a per capita income of $993 and $1,847, respectively. On the other hand, the Philippines still has very far to go, with our average annual real per capita income of only ₱361. With such a law income, it is no wonder that our standard of living cannot compare favorably with those of countries which have made great strides in science.

However, as the adage goes, “Man does not live by bread alone.” We should progress not only in the economic field but also in the realm of art and culture. Ideas, after all, are far more lasting and far more important to this world than any monumental work of masonry. The pyramids of Egypt, the temples of Greece, and the coliseum in Rome have stood for centuries in majestic grandeur. But how insignificant they stand measured in terms of contribution to the progress of mankind as compared to Aristotle’s or Plato’s thoughts or to Einstein’s theories!

It seems beyond dispute that our present civilization relies more on brains than on brawn. For instance, a team of two or three scientists in an obscure laboratory, intent on a new scientific discovery, may contribute more wealth to a nation than a thousand laborers working to deathly fatigue in our sunburnt fields.

These things we all realize. But what is being done in this country to encourage art and culture in the true sense of the word? While I shall strongly support our artistic and cultural development, I hope that our people should also give their enthusiastic and active response to this endeavor. It is high time that the Philippine Columbian Association and other similar organizations take the initiative in this field. It is not for me nor the government to outline in detail the role of civic and social organizations in the development of various aspects of art and culture. Here, for instance, in this very hall are men who can do the planning and the thinking. Here is a challenge for them.

In a period of trial, a nation that can utilize all its resources in solving various aspects of the overall problem will survive. But it will take the highest patriotism on the part of all citizens to reach a happy solution. It is well for us to remember that any generation that works for itself selfishly is decadent. History is full of such cases, of people and generations whose grasping opportunism led them to national ruin. There was Greece; there was Rome—to name only two instances. To attain greatness, a people must not work for itself; it must work for the future; it must work for posterity.

With the Philippine Columbian Association providing the leadership and inspiration, other civic organizations can show to our people the way to true economic development through the growth and application of scientific research, and the enjoyment of a full life through the flowering of our own art and culture.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library