Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Opening Plenary Session of the 7 th National Convention of Manufacturers and Producers

[ Delivered at Winter Garden Manila Hotel at 12:15 p.m., February 27, 1960 ]

PRESIDENT SISON DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE CHAMBER OF INDUSTRIES, FRIENDS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I WISH to congratulate the Philippine Chamber of Industries for the initiative and great efforts it has exerted in holding for the 7th time, the National Convention of Manufacturers and Producers of the Philippines. It cannot be denied that it is in national convention like this where our common economic problems could be effectively ventilated and threshed out for the interest and benefit of the national economy.

After almost a decade since we launched our program of agro-industrial development, plenty of water has passed under the bridge, and I feel that we can now look back and scan the industrial horizon with the view to taking stock of the achievements and progress Philippine industry has attained during the most critical period of her national life.

On various occasions in my state-of-the-nation messages to the Congress of the Philippines, I have invariably emphasized that the primary and lasting concern of our government is to provide and maintain a dynamic, diversified, and stabilized economy for our country in order to promote the economic and social well-being of our people.

This very desirable objective can be attained if we could only provide a progressively increasing number of job opportunities and steady employment for our growing labor force, increase per capita income in this country, and bring about a more equitable distribution of wealth arid income.

Because of these fundamental economic objectives, we have embarked on a bold program of agro-industrial development geared towards the total mobilization of our potential wealth, technical know-how, capital, and man-power resources so as to strengthen and accelerate the pace of our economic development.

As early as 1946, our Congress enacted R. A. No. 35, known as the tax exemption law, to encourage our entrepreneurs to engage in new and necessary industries. This law was amended by R. A. No. 901 in 1953, which provided for more incentives to investors willing to invest in manufacturing ventures.

With the institution of exchange and import controls in 1950, our program of industrialization was provided a forceful “leap forward”, and with the enactment of the protective New Tariff Code, with its Anti-dumping and Banning provisions as well as liberal credit facilities, the backdrop was beautifully set for the speedy development of our manufacturing industries.

To buttress further the economic scene, we have oriented our economic structure to the ultimate goal of providing a more abundant and fruitful life for the ultimate goal of providing a more abundant and fruitful life for the masses of our population.

While it is the fundamental policy that the private sector should lead the role and participate actively in promoting industrial and economic growth of the country by providing the mobilizing force in business undertakings, the Administration, within the limitations of its resources, has been devoting increasingly larger amounts each year for economic development.

Starting at ₱162 million in 1953, appropriation for economic development have increased considerably as follows: ₱287 million in 1954 ; ₱355 million in 1956; ₱378 million in 1958; and ₱389 million in 1960. I feel that, as private enterprise develop industrially to full capacity, these appropriations for stimulating and pioneering economic development should correspondingly be increased.

For capital outlays alone in 1960, our 5-year fiscal plan recommended 4.5 million for credit facilities for the private sector; ₱43.6 million for irrigation, agriculture, river control, and land reform; ₱100 million for transportation, communications, highway, railway, port facilities, and shipping; ₱21.7 million for power and steel development; and ₱7 million for other essential projects, reaching a total of ₱176.8 million.

With these economic development projects, I feel that the private sector would be in a better position to participate vigorously in engaging in productive enterprises because of the favorable climate and facilities provided for them, all of which are essential and important to the over-all economic progress.

Our economic planners have envisioned that if the 5-year fiscal plan which I submitted to Congress would be effectively implemented and we succeed in creating a healthy atmosphere for the growth and expansion of our country’s productive potentials, and with the full support and cooperation of the private sector, it is estimated that the national income would reach ₱11.3 million in 1964, showing an annual average increase of about 4 per cent from 1959, while the per capita income of the people would increase from ₱384 in 1958 to ₱399 in 1954 which is definitely higher than most of the per capita incomes of the countries in Southeast Asia.

In order that we can achieve our national economic objectives in an atmosphere of stability and strength as well as higher productivity for the private sector, the emphasis on expenditures outlined under the 5-year fiscal plan is laid on (1) programs which directly promote industrial and agricultural productivity, (2) expenditures which facilitate the operation of dollar-earning and dollar-saving industries in the private sector, and (3) income producing projects. In the long run increased productivity provides real guarantee for economic stability.

Ladies and gentlemen, the establishment of manufacturing industries is frequently considered as the ultimate aim of economic development While this view is not exactly right, it however indicates that a spirit of enterprise now pervades among our people and that our entrepreneurs have gone far beyond the beaten paths of an agricultural economy to venture out into the realm of technical and more complex productive activities—manufacturing.

But lest we forget in our over-enthusiasm in the industrialization effort, let me remind you that we cannot ignore the importance of agriculture in our economic set-up. I feel that no lasting development in industrialization can be achieved if agricultural development were neglected. Agriculture; and industry must progress hand in hand. Real industrial development to be enduring and strong must rest on the solid foundation of agriculture.

I must congratulate most warmly the leaders of industry that compose this organization who have taken counsel with the pioneering and romantic spirit, and have disdained to listen to the reactionary and the prophets of doom and the professional fault-finding critics by daring into new frontiers of industrial enterprises. Now we can proudly say that we have proven equal to the dream of Rizal in his famous writing entitled The Philippine a Century Hence. The industrial center on highway 54 is the fulfillment of Rizal’s vision in the immortal chapter of El Filibusterismo entitled “Dreams.”

This romantic spirit of our industrialist is the force which brought about the transformation of our economy from that of purely agrarian to that of agro-industrial economy. The advances we have made were very impressive, and again I say for emphasis that the pioneering and enterprising spirit of our people accounts mainly for the great advancement of our national economy.

The Philippine Chamber of Industries, which is the leading exponent of industrial progress in this country, fully deserves the popular plaudits showered upon it.

As your President I make the following pledges and recapitulations: (1) I shall continue to extend all the protection and incentives to industry. Government corporations that now can be taken over by private enterprise will be liquidated and turned over to the private sector of the economy. (2) To spread the benefits of industrialization to our rural population, we are drawing up plans for the dispersal of industries. In this industrial dispersal plan, we will take into consideration the relative development of the provinces, the existing natural resources and available man-power, and the various methods by which reasonable incentives and assistance may be provided by the government to accelerate the establishment of industries in rural areas. The permanency, location, and reliability of raw material for a particular industry have to be considered. (3) I will cause the Reparations Agreement to be implemented in such a way as to spread more equitably to the greatest number the benefits of such reparations agreement of industries. (4) As we are in great need of investible funds for economic development, I have strongly recommended the abolition of the capital gains tax so that resources tied up in these assets could be converted into liquid assets, provided that these liquid assets shall be ploughed back to industry. (5) The establishment of the integrated steel industry will be pushed vigorously by the Administration because iron and steel and its alloys constitute the backbone and basis of 101 other industries. Our program of industrialization will not be complete if we will continue importing the machineries for manufacture and we cannot produce machinery and equipment for manufacturing without the steel industry. Hence, our determination to establish the steel industry.

The proposed steel plant will be located in Iligan, Lanao, so that it will be near our hydro-electric power in Maria Cristina Falls. It will be versatile and flexible in the sense that it could be made to produce economically the multiple iron and steel products needed by the country and if demands increase in the future, the plant has the flexibility to expand its productive capacity without major additional expenditure in machinery and equipment. The estimated capitalization for the project is ₱120 million with 51 per cent thereof coming from the government and 49 per cent from private sector. It shall be under private management. If in full operation, the plant is expected to produce 230,000 tons of steel products annually with a value of about ₱86 million, sufficient to meet the normal demands of industry. It will be so constructed as to double production without new capital investment. (6) I realize the vital role played by the institution of controls in accelerating the pace of our economic development and the incentives they provide for the establishment of industries. While these industries are in infancy stage, they need government protection. Immediate withdrawal of protective controls is to court disaster. The gradual lifting of controls therefore must be preceded with a serious study of its consequences to industry and immediate institution of safeguards and complementary legislation and regulation for the safety of these industries. This is the reason why in my last message to Congress, I have strongly recommended the creation of a Special Bicameral Congressional Committee to undertake a comprehensive study on integrated gradual decontrol program with the assistance and cooperation of the Central Bank, Tariff, Customs, and Budget Commission, and with the participation of the Chambers of Commerce, Industries, and Agriculture. (7) Last but not least, no new taxes will be approved this year, although there will be intensification of tax collection drive.

As you are the architects of our industrial development, I feel proud and happy of your accomplishments. With the full support of our people and with the help of Divine Providence, I have absolute faith that this generation will accomplish its part in the continuing task of nation-building and will achieve for our people the enduring progress and national contentment.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library