PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE CEREBRAL PALSY FUND DRIVE KICK-OFF, MALACANANG SOCIAL HALL, TUESDAY EVENING, APRIL 2, 1957

MY FRIENDS:

THERE are few projects which I consider worthier of government and public support than this educational fund campaign for the victims of cerebral palsy. The name given to this project faithfully calls attention to the two weapons we must have to fight the inroads of this crippling disease. We must spread education about cerebral palsy, for the truth is that in our country very little is known about it—and we cannot subdue an enemy we do not know, and we must have the funds to cope with it.

It is estimated that there are about 20,000 cerebral spastics in the country today. For the most part, they have been neglected and ignored, or left to deal with their disability with crude and haphazard methods. It was only lately that the government, through the National Orthopedic Hospital, and civic spirited citizens, through the Elks Cerebral Palsy Clinic, have initiated efforts to deal with this painful affliction scientifically and effectively. Even so, the problem still far exceeds our capabilities for coping with it.

I am therefore happy and encouraged to see that the unselfish citizens behind this project, rather than submit helplessly to the enormity of the challenge confronting them, have been inspired to even greater and more determined efforts. Surely such determination and courage deserve the government’s encouragement and assistance. It was for this reason that I readily agreed to sign the proclamation authorizing the Elks Cerebral Palsy to undertake this educational and fund campaign. It is for this reason that I now call upon all our people to extend a helping hand to this most worthy endeavor, for the sake of our severely handicapped cerebral spastics. For myself, I consider it a privilege to start off this campaign with my personal contribution of five hundred pesos.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library