PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH DURING THE INAUGURAL CEREMONIES OF THE OPENING OF DAVAO AIRPORT, HELD AT 9:30 A.M., AUGUST 25, 1958

MY FRIENDS:

THE PROFICIENCY with which the flight from Manila to this city was negotiated in just about two hours abroad the Viscount tends to make this trip pleasantly routinary in retrospect. Yet today we have just witnessed another epoch in the history of aviation in our country— the diminution of travel time in our part of the world.

We have made progress. And progress has been made possible with the opening of this new Davao airport. The opening of this airport has enlarged the horizons of trade, commerce, and communications in this country to embrace nearly all points in the South now. Within the next few years, I predict that Davao, progressive as it is now, will ride high on the upthrust of progress.

I see in the opening of this modern airport greater opportunities for business activities here. Your present method of buying and selling or of distributing your products will be immensely altered with the introduction of the fastest means of transportation available hereabouts.

Air travel likewise will increase personal contacts among our people. And this will generate better understanding among us, a basic factor for business, sound economy, and the attributes of all political, social, and cultural progress.

I am gratified to note that the Civil Aeronautics Administration has undertaken to develop airports with a view to linking major centers of trade and, at the same time, pursued its policy of increasing feeder air routes. This program will doubtless bear results in terms of greater benefits to the masses.

I also note with great satisfaction that you people are actively extending wholehearted support for our government’s program not only in civil aviation matters but likewise in several other aspects of governmental activities designed to improve the welfare of the people.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey to you my thanks for this support. Being positive of your continued interest and assistance, I know I cannot fail.

The principal mission of my administration is to promote and raise the economic life of our people. To achieve this goal, many varied factors and activities must necessarily come to play.

I am placing more emphasis on the building of more and better airports in the country, without in any way slackening on the construction of roads and bridges in the different parts of the country. Today, I am particularly happy that the construction of this concrete runway has been effected in Davao, as this highly progressive province lies in the farthest south and therefore stretches the trunkline route considerably so as to make this route the longest one today.

Other principal cities and places in the Philippines will be the next construction targets, since one of the salient policies of my administration is to afford to the largest number of people the benefits of modern air transportation.

As I have already mentioned, the furnishing of air service to various parts of the Philippines will contribute immeasurably to the economic development of the country arid to the raising of the standard of economic life of our people.

I wish, on this occasion, to commend the men behind our aviation projects for this splendid accomplishment in promoting civil aviation and air transportation in our country. Projects and activities such as this will always receive attention and encouragement from my administration.

Last but not least, I would like to extend my congratulations to all persons and entities who contributed in kind and in deed to achieve this important project. From here, we can all look to greatly expanded use of air transportation. We can look forward to affording greater service to the citizens of this city and to helping raise their standard of living.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library