Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Upon arrival in Tokyo

[Delivered over TV-Radio at 6:30p.m. (5:30 Manila time), December 1, 1958]

I BRING to the people of Japan the greetings and best wishes of the people of the Philippines.

On this happy and memorable occasion I wish first of all to express my deepest appreciation for the cordial of all to express my deepest appreciation for the cordial welcome extended to me and Mrs. Garcia by their Imperial Majesties, the Emperor and Empress of Japan, and other leaders and representatives of your nation.

When His Imperial Majesty and the Prime Minister extended to me the official invitation to visit Japan, I was more than glad to accept. Pressure of official duties, however, prevented me from coming earlier or projecting a longer sojourn in your beautiful country.

I assure the Japanese people that I derive deep spiritual satisfaction to be able to reciprocate the visit to the Philippines of His Excellency Prime Minister Kishi and to undertake this mission of goodwill.

As the first Filipino president to pay an official visit to Japan, I feel at this moment something more than mere personal satisfaction. I consider your welcome for me as one more eloquent manifestation of friendship and goodwill between our two countries and peoples.

On the other hand, my visit here betokens and attests to our desire in the Philippines for better understanding with Japan whose proffers of friendship are welcome by the government and people of my country.

Japan and the Philippines have been cast by Destiny to exist close to each other—politically, economically, and culturally. Neither of us can afford to ignore this geophysical fact. As you know, the relations between the Philippines and Japan have not always been fortunate. A costly and destructive war involved the two countries not so long ago.

But Time, the great healer, has been at work. It may truthfully be sad now that the bitterness of former years is being washed away by compassion and forgiveness. One touch of misfortune has indeed made us kin before the implacable horrors of war.

Rather than prolonged recriminations, the present time calls for sincere determination and redoubled efforts that such a holocaust may never, never be repeated. For this reason we Filipinos hail the new Japan for having renounced force as an instrument of national policy.

Our two countries have much in common other than material interests. Both adhere to democratic principles and both believe in progress through science and technology. And both, while holding fast to national culture and tradition, have benefited from their oneness with the Free World. Thus, our ideological and geophysical affinities are strong bonds that should hold us together in lasting friendship and enduring peace.

Through the visit of Prime Minister Kishi to the Philippines last year, the people of Japan have demonstrated their goodwill towards my country in clear and unmistakable terms. I am here now not only to return that visit and that goodwill, but to water the friendship which has been reborn following the conclusion of the Peace Treaty and the Reparations Agreement. Your efforts and ours during the recent years have been directed towards giving substance to the spirit of these treaties. Filipino-Japanese cooperation has thus become a reality where formerly it had been but a hope. But this state visit, I like to believe that I may be able, if only in a modest way, to contribute towards the growth of this cooperation, to establish genuine friendship between neighbors, and to foster honorable peace not only in our part of the globe but throughout the world as well.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia upon arrival in Tokyo. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(35) , 8052-8053.