My countrymen:

FIFTEEN years ago today the free world was thrilled by the stirring news that the American forces had at last landed on Philippine soil. In fulfillment of a solemn promise previously made by her acknowledged leaders, America had resolutely fought her way, island by island, until finally she reached our shores to deliver our country and people from the clutches of the enemy. There had been days when our hopes were getting dim as the occupation stretched out into months and then into years. Enemy propaganda had kept dinning into our ears the idea that America would never return, that she would liberate the countries of Europe but would leave the countries of Asia to their fate. However, in spite of everything, we clung steadfastly to the belief that America would redeem her plighted word. We were not disappointed, for she did come. On that rainy October morning General Douglas MacArthur and former President Sergio Osmeña waded ashore together as the head of glorious American forces of liberation symbolized that act historically the unity of purpose of the two countries they represented. The landing of these two great leaders seemed to signify that, as our two peoples had gone down in temporary defeat two and a half years before, so could they how stand proudly together on that momentous occasion to usher in the reality of victory.

The landing in Leyte was fraught with significance for the Filipino people. For one thing, it meant the beginning of the liberation of the Filipinos from the untold hardships and sacrifices which we had stoutly borne ever since we came under enemy control. It meant the end of the mental agony and the painful uncertainty under which we had been living during the long and terrifying night of the enemy occupation. For another thing, it meant the end of house searches and forced labor, of tortures and executions. No longer were our people to be subjected to all kinds of indignities. No longer were our crops and our animals to be forcibly commandeered in order to feed the occupation forces while many of our people starved. All of these were to come to an end because the Supreme Commander of the American troops had vowed to destroy every vestige of enemy control over our country and to restore the liberties of our people. And he made good that pledge.

And so it is no wonder that, everywhere the American soldiers went, they were received with unrestrained rejoicing and jubilation. Men, women, and children met and greeted them as heroes and saviors. The people, whether in stately mansions or in humble nipa shacks, welcomed them into their homes and gave them a taste of Filipino hospitality. Thus the long standing friendship between the American and the Filipino peoples, which had been tested in the crucible of war, was further strengthened through social contact at the advent of peace.

One decade and a half have passed since the American landing in Leyte. In the meantime events of great import have taken place in our country. For one thing, we have attained independent nationhood, with freedom to work out our own destiny as a people. In conformity with our newly acquired status, we have endeavored always to assert and defend our rights as a sovereign nation. We have determined to establish friendly relations with other nations on the basis of dignity, equality, and honor. And we have tried our best to give our own people ample opportunity to enjoy those rights which are theirs by reason of their being citizens of the Philippine Republic. All of these are manifestations of a strong spirit of nationalism that has swept and is sweeping across the length and breadth of the land. This spirit is making itself felt in the principal fields of human activity. It is in the political field, as may be seen in the desire of our people to assert our right to enjoy all the attributes of sovereignty. It is in the economic field, as evidenced by the demand of our people for a greater share of our national economy than they are now enjoying. More than ever, the conviction is gaining ground that political independence will have but little meaning without economic independence. Nationalism is also manifesting itself in various forms in the field of education and culture.

However, neither our political separation from the United States nor the upsurge of nationalism in our midst can serve to dissolve or weaken the ties of friendship and goodwill which have closely bound our two countries together for more than half a century. On the contrary, these ties will endure and will even grow stronger across the surging decades because they have been sanctified by the blood of the American and the Filipino soldiers who fought bravely side by side in defense of a common cause—the cause of democracy, and in peace these are consecrated by the solidarity of our two countries for universal freedom and universal peace.

World War Two is over. As in the case of the first world war, democracy won over totalitarianism. However, this is no time for smug complacency, for once more history is repeating itself. The first world war was fought in order to make the world safe for democracy. The war was won, but democracy was not made safe, for a new danger soon arose which finally led to the second world war. In the same way democracy is today being menaced anew, this time by a new type of totalitarianism. As we look without and within our borders, we see insidious forces at work, threattening the safety of those institutions which we hold dear. As a result, two conflicting ideologies are today struggling for supremacy—one under which the State controls the actions and even the spiritual life of the individual, and the other under which the individual enjoys freedom of thought and action under the law.

In this struggle we have decided to cast our lot with the second. We have rejected Communism, with its materialistic theory of the nature of the human being. Instead, we have embraced democracy and its underlying principle of respect for human personality. We believe that democracy is the form of government and way of life which will serve us best. It is the form of government which our people chose when they approved the Malolos Constitution in 1899 and it is the form of government chosen by our delegates when they approved the present Constitution in 1935. Our decision, therefore, to adopt democracy as a form of government and as a way of life is clear and categorical and any attempt on the part of anyone to mislead our people by telling them that any of the policies or acts of the administration is tainted with Communism is a disservice to the nation. I strongly urge every Filipino to rally behind the government in its efforts to make democracy a living reality in our country.

My friends it is well that on this day we pause from our labors in commemoration of that glorious event which signalized the liberation of our country. On this solemn occasion let us remember the soldiers and men who made our liberation possible; in particular, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Commander of the American forces, General Douglas MacArthur, whose feat will forever stand, out as one of the greatest in the annals of military history, And let us not forget those of our own countrymen who, through their activities in the resistance movement, kept alive the spirit of our people until the day of their deliverance. All of them deserve the gratitude of a grateful people.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). The President’s speech in Tacloban City on October 20, 1959, commemorating the 15th anniversary of the landing of Liberation Forces. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(43) , 9021-9023.