PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE GRADUATES OF THE HARVARD ADVANCED MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE, AT THE ST. LOUIS SCHOOL AUDITORIUM, BAGUIO CITY, SATURDAY AFTERNOON, AUGUST 17, 1957

I SHARE your feeling of personal satisfaction and achievement for your successful completion of the Harvard advanced Management Course. To your professors from Harvard who came a long way to make this course available to their Filipino friends, I express the sincere appreciation of a grateful people. The managerial knowledge and skills you have thus acquired will be of incalculable value in the advancement of your respective private businesses. However, I hope you will not begrudge your newly-acquired skills by using them exclusively for your private gain. As enlightened leaders of private enterprise, your interest is not merely good profit in business. It is more. You also have a share of responsibility in the national effort to step up the pace of our national development in order to bring, in larger measures, the blessings of peace, prosperity, and happiness to our people.

We are today forging our economic destiny. We are transforming our economic environment to the benefit of the common man. We are effecting a rapid transition of our economy from its trade-oriented beginnings to a balanced development in both its agricultural and industrial phases, taking full advantage of our rich store of human and natural resources in the national interest. The problem becomes the more pressing because what, under other circumstances, we might indifferently allow a generation to achieve, we are determined to do in five years or less.

Therefore, it is of the Administration’s cardinal mission of accelerating our national development and the precise action measures and tools of implementation it has taken to achieve this paramount purpose that I wish to speak today.

A VIABLE ECONOMY—OUR SUPREME GOAL

A clear understanding of the economy is necessary in order to plan the most advantageous direction of future economic growth. Failure to comprehend the structural weaknesses of the economy is in evidence in many public discussions lately.

Our economy is a heritage of the colonial era. We are still largely dependent on the production and exportation of a few specialized agricultural products and on the importation not only, of capital goods but of many essential consumer items as well. This situation subjects our economy to the vagaries of international trade and to severe repercussions of economic crises abroad, conditions over which we have no control.

The export-import pattern of our economy is beset with the chronic problems of low production, unemployment of our abundant natural and manpower resources, and an unfavorable balance-of-payments position. These are undeniably the most urgent problems of our country today.

There have been differences of opinion as to the optimum course of action to solve these economic problems. One political headquarters has taken the position that the development of the agricultural sector of the economy represents the most advantageous approach to the problem. He believes that industrialization could come about only after we have developed to the fullest extent our agricultural and natural resources.

On the other hand, another political camp calls this a plan for development of a “pastoral economy” and advocates instead full industrialization based on nationalism as the theme of his development program. According to him, real industrialization which would include heavy industries would result in progress in all directions, including the agricultural sector.

Our Administration chooses neither an agricultural nor an industrialized society alone. For under our Economic and Social Development Program we are implementing a balanced agricultural development and industrialization program as the best means of achieving a strong and viable economy. We believe that in the immediate years ahead we need to bring about a fundamental change in our economic structure from a trade-oriented type of economy to a balanced agro-industrial society where both agricultural and industrial advancement complement and reenforce each other.

Considering that our country is still basically agricultural, as evidenced by the very nature of our resources, the dependence of nearly three-fourths of our population on this industry and the predominance of farm products in our export items, we can not afford to neglect-the development of the agricultural sector in every sound and reasonable manner. Our goal in, this direction is the attainment of basic self-sufficiency in the production of food crops. Increased agricultural output has been the motivating factor and objective of our intensified rural development program.

However, agricultural development alone can not be depended upon to produce the desirable effects on income, employment and balance of payments. Most of our primary agricultural export products have a limited and/or inelastic demand abroad. While we will strive to expand our export trade by diversifying both products and markets, we must also face the reality that world market conditions and international economic trends are not too favorable.

Thus, we need to balance our agricultural development with an even more intensified industrialization program. Agriculture can supply industries with raw materials, and with the increased income that the farmers would have, industrial products would then be assured of a local market. In this complementary progress, we will be able to strengthen our otherwise lopsided economy by having a greater number of people engaged in productive enterprises, by broadening the opportunities for employment and by reducing our dependence on foreign markets.

THE ADMINISTRATION’S ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM

In the achievement of national development objectives, our effort has been guided by the economic plan adopted at the start of our Administration and announced by the late President Magsaysay on March 20, 1954. As had been emphasized by him, this Plan is not inflexible but is to be updated periodically on the basis of past performance, changing conditions, and prospects of further advancement.

In fact, on January 3, 1957, the National Economic Council submitted its recommendations for updating this 1954 economic development program. These recommendations included a system of industrial priorities to govern the allocation of foreign exchange, the administration of the Government’s fiscal operations, and the extension of credit to agriculture and industry. We have adopted this industrial priority system as a guide in the implementation of projects which will make the maximum contribution to production, employment, and income.

To be sure we have had many economic plans and programs of national development since Liberation. But seldom were these plans translated into practical financial terms and backed by well-defined fiscal policies to assure their faithful and effective execution.

One such economic plan is the so-called Total Economic Mobilization Program which the standard bearer of the Liberal Party is trying to resurrect from its ignominious demise and hold out as a panacea for all our economic ills. It was framed without an eye to the realities of the present economic environment, giving primary emphasis on goals per se but without any long-range and integrated fiscal and investment program implementing the public sector to back it up. As such it has become a mere sanguine expression of high aspirations, and bur people not only spurned it but repudiated its advocates in the 1953 national elections.

FIVE-YEAR FISCAL PLAN

Now, for the first time, we have joined our broad plans for social and economic growth with specific measures required for their financial and administrative realization. I refer to the Five-Year Fiscal Plan embodied in the President’s Budget Message this year. The Plan portrays the strategy of how the Government intends to fulfill its responsibilities in the great national effort of vanquishing unemployment, poverty, disease, and illiteracy from our land by applying the absolute maximum of our financial resources to public investments for economic development purposes; by improving our educational, health, and social standards within the limits of available government revenues, giving particular emphasis to those services which directly enhance the productive skills and capacities of our people; by maintaining the strength of our armed forces and internal security facilities; and by financing the total government sector by a sound and judicious balance between taxation and public borrowings. It imparts to the national economy an optimistic and buoyant trend while at the same time keeping monetary expansion within bounds and thus avoiding inflationary tendencies by prudent fiscal, monetary, and credit policies. It seeks to accelerate the process of industrialization while improving and broadening our agricultural base. And, finally, it gives to private enterprise every encouragement and opportunity to play an increasingly significant role in the development of our country.

Realization of the basic goal of national development, however, involves tremendous amounts of public investments. Public funds from all sources will not be adequate to finance all the desirable projects designed to achieve balanced development within a relatively short period of time. We have, therefore, carefully appraised these needs, prudently planned the financial measures needed for their implementation, and taken every means to assure that available funds are earmarked only for the most productive and urgent projects which will bring the greatest social and economic benefits at the lowest cost.

Knowing that the manner in which the Government budgets its expenditures and raises the funds to finance them has profound effects on national income, prices, production, and employment, we prepared the Five-Year Fiscal Plan guided by fiscal policies and principles which are bold and forward-looking but, at the same time, prudent and discriminating. We are not attracted by transitory schemes with Utopian appeals for prosperity without sacrifice; nor are we deterred by those who advocate a policy of excessive caution and the maintenance of the status quo. For the welfare of the common man, our paramount concern demands that we move forward vigorously but surely.

Our Five-Year Fiscal Plan is founded on a rising national income level and aims to achieve a sizeable increase in both national and individual income during the five years from FY-1957 to FY-1961. It is designed to create a national-income growth of 30 per cent and a per capita income growth of 17 per cent (adjusted for population rise) by 1961 in comparison with the base year 1956. This means that we can double our national income in seventeen years. We have deliberately employed fiscal policy as an instrument of economic development by allocating the highest possible proportion of available financial resources to this supreme purpose. I am gratified to tell you that we have assigned steadily increasing amounts to economic advancement—from ₱151.0 million only in FY-1953, the last year of the Liberal Party Administration, to ₱267.7 million in FY-1954, ₱330.9 million in FY-1955, ₱467.0 million in FY-1956, ₱506.6 million in FY-1957, ₱549.7 million in FY-1958, and rising to ₱617.4 million in FY-1961.

Previous to our Administration, domestic investment from the public sector had been meager. As a consequence, the growth of private domestic investment has also been retarded. Recognizing the critical need for greater domestic investment to accelerate economic development, our Administration has been allocating large sums of public funds in the form of capital outlays. Three types of programs are accorded priority emphasis in the use of these capital investments: (1) directly productive undertakings like steel, power, coal, cement, and other basic industries which are at present within the Government’s responsibility; (2) lean programs for the private sector; and (3) overhead facilities and services which are of importance as a foundation to the productive processes, including transportation and communications.

These amounts of public investments, increasing from ₱329.4 million in FY-1956 to ₱420.1 million in FY-1961, will induce private initiative to participate more fully in the task of national development. This contribution to capital formation, together with the participation of the private sector, is of significant magnitude that will stimulate measurable increases in national income.

Inadequacy in the total supply of available credit is the central financing problem in the private sector. This is because the rate of voluntary savings is low, and our present credit facilities are quite rigid in their requirements, tending to favor the needs of real estate, export-import trade, and speculative activities. The Government has therefore assumed the responsibility of supporting private credit with public funds in order to provide a larger base for credit expansion.

Accordingly, the Five-Year Fiscal Plan has allocated funds to the private banking institutions, on the basis of a time-deposit-loan arrangement similar to that so successfully pioneered by the Industrial Development Center. Such funds will be loaned through the banks on reasonable terms primarily for medium and long-term credits to enable private organizations fully to carry on their part in the economic development of the country.

PROGRAMS FOR NATIONAL PROGRESS

This being an election year, our critics have suddenly become impatient. They demand now an immediate and complete solution of all our chronic economic ills. While distorting facts to suit their self fish interests and to mislead our people into believing that our Administration has not done a thing to solve these problems, they themselves know for sure that economic problems will always be present. Even in a highly developed economy like the United States, possessing great facilities and technical know-how, economic problems persist.

Regardless of what the critics and the dreamers say, we must be under no illusions about the hard road to national development. No palliative can ease the path to national progress. It is a long and narrow road beset by the clarion call of cheap-money advocates, exchange-rate jugglers, and dark-doom prophets exuding cynicism and fear.

The full effects of our program can not be felt all at once in the short period of three and a half years. Even so, our Administration has already laid firm foundations for the development of an integrated steel industry for the Philippines; for increased power and fertilizer output essential to industrial and agricultural expansion; for the development of commerce, industry, and agriculture; for rural community development and the implementation of land-for-the-landless policy, as well as improved land tenure; for the improvement and expansion of agricultural credit and marketing facilities; for the revitalization of afforestation and reforestation measures; for the establishment of an integrated and efficient transportation and communication network; for the strengthening and improvement of our education, health, and other social facilities and services; for the promotion and development of scientific, engineering, and technological research and invention; for the improvement of our revenue and debt administration; and for the promotion of industrial peace. I am gratified to tell you that we have already made significant gains along all these fronts. But this achievement will not deter us from continuing our dedicated efforts to move farther ahead until our task is done.

One protagonist in the present political arena is strongly advocating the establishment of steel and heavy industries. We have already initiated and are effectively implementing a program for an integrated steel industry. The NASSCO steel project covers a broad front embracing the smelting of iron ore into pig iron, conversion into steel ingots, rolling and finishing into billets, slabs, plates, sheets medium structural sections, bars, pipes, and other miscellaneous steel products. The completed plan envisages a total production of about 200,000 metric tons of pig iron annually which will be converted into steel manufactures and castings.

Of the initial capital investment of ₱71.3 million required for the NASSCO project, ₱50 million is already provided under-Republic Act 1396. Of this amount ₱12 million was released during FY-1957, ₱16.7 million to be released during the current fiscal year, and ₱20.6 million in FY-1959. These sums for financing an integrated steel industry in this country will insure a steady supply of vital steel products for domestic use, save large amounts of foreign exchange, develop and revitalize our coal and iron ore resources, and expand business and employment opportunities.

Over the next five years we have programmed the development of the best known and feasible major power projects in the country. These cover areas where-there exists a large and important power market critically dependent on fuel sources abroad. With the completion of these major and multipurpose projects, we can start to integrate an effective system of interconnected major and auxiliary power plants and distribution systems.

Funds earmarked to finance our power, fertilizer, and distribution projects range from ₱19.7 million in FY-1957 to ₱30 million in the current fiscal year, and a total of ₱85 million scheduled for the fiscal years 1959 to 1961. With the completion of Ambuklao, Loboc, Binga, and other minor projects currently scheduled or planned, we shall have increased our power capacities by 237,150 kilowatts, from the present 88,000 kilowatts to 325,150 kilowatts, or by 269.5 per cent. Our fertilizer capacities, furthermore, will be increased by 260 per cent, or from 50,000 metric tons to 180,000 metric tons a year.

I have authorized the release of additional amounts to finance the expansion of irrigation facilities. In the past fiscal year we spent P19 million for this purpose. For the current fiscal year we have scheduled ₱21.2 million and for fiscal years 1959 to 1961, ₱32, million each year. With these sums, we shall be able to extend the hectarage under irrigation to about five times that irrigated by the systems constructed from 1907 to 1953.

We are still busily engaged in re-energizing an economy which was permitted by the Liberal Party administration to drift into a state of deterioration during the last decade. We are suffering today the cumulative effects of the dissipation by the infamous Import Control Commission of an exceptionally large volume of foreign’ exchange resources which could have been used to increase our productive facilities, the lack of a positive and progressive tax policy, resulting in chronic budgetary deficits, and the diversion of public borrowings and foreign loans to current operating expenses, instead of to productive capital outlays.

In spite of this heritage of fiscal and economic mismanagement by a corrupt and incompetent Liberal Party administration, we can take encouragement from the gains we have made during, the past three years.

A striking feature of the current economic scene has been our success in maintaining a measure of monetary stability in the face of large-scale national development financing, through the implementation and coordination of fiscal, monetary, credit, and exchange control policies.

The inflationary effects of an increasing money supply occasioned by a rising level of government expenditures for economic development and expansion of bank credit were safely contained within the economy. General levels of prices, while exhibiting an expansionary trend in the past few months, have not reached alarming proportions characteristic of run-away inflation. The limit of 4 or 5 per cent annual increase in prices of domestically produced goods, as stipulated in the FY-1957 Budget Message, has not been exceeded in the past year.

In fact, the price levels during the years of our administration are very much lower than those prevailing during the years 1949 to 1953. Prices of locally-produced commodities for home consumption in June, 1957 increased by 2.9 per cent over the previous year’s level and by 4.9 per cent since 1955, and yet were lower by 9.7 per cent than the 1949 level and by 1.8 per cent than 1953. Consumer prices increased by only 2.2 per cent between 1955 and June, 1957.

Over the years we have made significant progress in expanding national production. The index of total physical volume of commodities produced in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing was 142 (1952-100) in 1956, showing an increase of 9.2 per cent over the previous year, 31.5 per cent over 1953, and 97.2 per cent over 1949.

Reflecting these gains in overall production, our gross national product and national income have been increasing steadily year by year. The gross national product was estimated at 9 billion 415 million pesos in 1956, or 8.4 per cent over the previous year and 14.4 per cent higher than the highest figure recorded during the Liberal Party administration. We are confident that this healthy economic trend will be even more pronounced in the years ahead under the investment program envisioned in our Five-Year Fiscal Plan.

By 1956, our economy has been able already to provide additional employment for new entrants into our labor force. Between 1948 and 1956, while the labor force increased by 2,081, 200, the number employed also increased by almost the same figure. The labor force participation increased from 56.5 per cent in 1954 to 65.1 percent in 1956 of the total population ten years old and over, or an increase of 8.6 per cent. The level of employment rose from 43.9 per cent to 57.0 per cent of the total population ten years old and over, or an increase of 13.1 per cent over that of 1954. In spite of a rapidly growing population which increases about 1.9 per cent annually, we have succeeded in slowing down the growth of unemployment.

CONCLUSION

For any political party to aspire to lead our people, it is not enough that it has grandiose intentions. It must also have the vision and it must know the way. I say to you that only the Nacionalista Party fulfills both.

We have a comprehensive, coordinated, and integrated program of government about which I have already spoken. These are found in two public documents—our Economic and Social Development Program and our Five-Year Fiscal Plan—which are open to public scrutiny. I challenge the opposition parties to present to our people equal or better plans

These plans and programs are the crystallization of the thinking of the best minds of our nation. They have been forged in the crucible of public debate as befits our democracy. They are not the empty words of self-seeking politicians nor the abstract pronouncements of suddenly awakened messiahs. These programs are under actual implementation. Through them the country has made significant progress.

Upon these we state our claim for continuance in office.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library