PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE HARVARD-YALE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION AT DINNER GIVEN IN HIS HONOR AT THE CLUB FILIPINO, MANGA AVENUE, QUEZON CITY, AT 8 P.M., JULY 21

MEMBERS OF THE HARVARD-YALE ALUMNI ASSOCIATION, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM proud and grateful to be accorded the honor of addressing you and felicitating you on this memorable occasion of the reunion of the alumni of two of the greatest American Universities, the Harvard and Yale. These two highest institutions of learning represent the best that there are in the world of culture and education. So, there can be no gainsaying of the fact that among the highly educated Filipinos, those of you who graduated from these universities represent the best type of educated manhood in this country. It is, therefore, .no wonder that the gates of opportunity in public service, as well as in business, industry, and finance are thrown wide open to the graduates of Harvard and Yale. It is, therefore, only natural that the alumni of these two institutions are leaders, in their respective fields of enterprise. And that is the reason why to be a graduate of these two American universities is to derive just pride and distinction.

But it is good to remember that education, while on one hand confers privileges and opportunities for the holder thereof, on the other, it imposes certain duties and obligations which must be discharged to the satisfaction of the state and nation. After all, the life of a nation is what the people make of it. Congressional enactments and Presidential actions are all important factors in the making of a democratic nation is the action or participation of the people themselves. There is where the highly educated men like the alumni of Yale and Harvard play a vital role in their respective fields of enterprise.

The Philippines as usual, like many progressive countries in the world, is confronted with many problems, the most important of which at present are the economic problems and the problem of setting our house in order. We are actually engaged in the thankless task of general house cleaning in the government. It must be obvious to you that while this work is difficult and thorny, it has got-to be done. The institution and authority of government and even the vitality of constitutions cannot long endure unless they rest on sound and solid moral foundations. People may talk of military might and economic abundance; rulers may found their illusions of grandeur upon such things, but 7,000 years of history in all times and climes have clearly demonstrated that the indestructible foundations of any nation, whether it is a republic, an empire, or a monarchy, are the laws of morality based on the eternal ten commandments.

Let me, therefore, avail myself of this magnificent opportunity to call upon the alumni of Yale and Harvard to harness their learning, their influence, and even their wealth to this crusade of house cleaning in the government, and help restore it to the old moral moorings. The biblical injunction: “But seek ye first the kingdom of God and His justice, and all these things shall be added unto you” has been borne out by centuries of practical application as an eternal verity. And in our aspirations for national security, economic stability, peace and happiness, this principle is an infallible guide. Let us adopt it in order to attain these aspirations, the realization of which is the dream of the administration, of the opposition, and of every citizen of this country.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library