Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the inaugural rites of Ateneo University

[Delivered on June 19, 1960]

I AM happy to be able to participate in these solemn ceremonies in connection with the formal inauguration of this new university, the latest one to be added to the expanding honor roll of universities in this country. I wish to take this opportunity to extend my warmest congratulations to the Reverend Rector and the members of the faculty of this institution for this auspicious change of status. This occasion augurs well for the continued growth and progress of this institution which has done so much to advance the cause of education in this part of the world.

It is significant that the elevation of this institution from a college to a university took place upon the completion of the first centenary of its foundation. Starting in 1859 as the Ateneo Municipal de Manila, with an enrollment of 33 students, the school has grown to its present stature as one of our leading institutions of learning. This event, therefore, is a happy culmination of its long and meritorious service to the Filipino people and youth.

It is highly significant also that the inauguration of this new university has been made to coincide with the birthday of the greatest alumnus this institution, has ever produced—our foremost national hero and martyr, Jose Rizal. It is well to bear in mind that it was within the halls of this venerable institution, under the inspired tutorship of understanding and scholarly professors, that the early years of Rizal’s youth were spent. It was here that he went through the rigid discipline that characterizes the schools run by the members of the Society of Jesus. And it was here that his latent powers were awakened and developed to full flowering, to be used later on in the service of his country and its people. And so, as we inaugurate this new university, let us not forget the greatest Ateneo scholar who ever passed through the portals of this institution. Let us ever be inspired by his life and labors which he so unselfishly dedicated to the welfare of his beloved Motherland.

When we speak of the origin of the university as we know it today, our minds inevitably hark back to those centers of learning which came into being during the. Middle Ages. It was then that the universities of Salerno, Bologna, and Paris were established on the European continent, and Oxford and Cambridge in England. To these centers flocked the eager youth of the civilized world of the period in order to sit at the feet of the masters and be inspired by their profound learning in the realms of law, medicine, and theology.

Succeeding years saw the rise of other universities, notably Salamanca in Spain, Louvain in Belgium, and Leipzig and Heidelberg in Germany. These institutions have won fame and popularity among the student population of medieval Europe and have drawn to them many of the great and renowned leaders who have helped shape the destinies of their respective countries.

In conformity with the traditional concept of the university as a community of masters and mature scholars, the European universities required their students to be holders of the baccalaureate degree before they could be admitted. In other words, the student must first secure in the secondary schools a broad and solid foundation of culture before he could enter the university, which was the place for his professional preparation or his advanced studies. As may be expected, this was the practice followed in the Philippines during the Spanish regime. The courses in our secondary schools, which were known as colleges at that time, were liberal arts courses, which derived their inspiration and, content from the ratio studiorum of the monastic schools. Not until the student had completed these courses and received the bachelor of arts degree did he become eligible for entrance into the pontifical university.

But with the change of sovereignty over the Philippines following “Admiral Dewey’s epochal victory in Manila Bay in 1898, there naturally came a change in the theory and practice of higher education in this country. The early colleges of the United States, like Harvard, Yale, and King’s College, were patterned after those of England. Even after their elevation to the status of universities, they still retained the main characteristics of their European counterparts. These schools were established during the frontier days of the American nation. But at the time that America came to our country, her frontier life had practically disappeared. America was then at the height of her industrial development. Economically, she was going through a period of technological progress, large-scale production, and rapidly expanding market for her products. It was a period of giant industries, of newly born professions, of recently discovered knowledge.

All of these dramatic changes in American life had a tremendous effect on higher education in that country. Mass production and the methods of the factory brought about a multiplicity of course offerings. Because of the vast amount of knowledge that had accumulated, it. was no longer possible for anyone to know what there was to be known. Consequently, students had to confine themselves to a narrow field in order to attain some degree of mastery. And so knowledge was compartmentalized. To cite just one example, natural philosophy, was broken up into physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on. Then, too, with the value placed on material welfare, functionalism came to dominate educational thinking. Short courses were worked out in order to enable young people to earn as soon as possible. In short, specialism in education became the order of the day.

Such was the situation in the United States when she took over the administration of our country at the turn of the century. And just as our educational practices during the Spanish regime were influenced by those prevailing in Spain, so were our practices under the new regime influenced by those prevailing in the United States at the time of the occupation.

But it was not the American influence alone that was responsible for the dominance of specialization in our schools. The conditions obtaining in our country at the beginning of the American administration also favored early specialization. There was a dearth of people who could attend to the various services of which our country was sorely in need. There were only a few physicians, and so epidemics of cholera, smallpox, and dysentery were of frequent occurrence. There were not enough lawyers to assist in the administration of justice and to man the offices of the government whose functions required an adequate knowledge of law and administration. Engineers were in demand who could design and construct buildings and bridges. Teachers were needed for the thousands of schools which had to be opened to. lay down the foundations of a Philippine democracy. Under the circumstances, workers had to be trained in the shortest time possible. Consequently, early specialization became the vogue. Young people took up the study of law, engineering, dentistry, teaching, and even medicine without an adequate background in the humanities, mathematics and science, and the social studies. The result was the production of fairly efficient professionals but not quite adequately prepared citizens of our democracy. There were exceptions, to be sure, but they were the exceptions that proved the rule.

However, conditions have changed for the better. Sanitation in most communities has improved considerably and the supply of physicians and nurses has greatly increased and is continually increasing. In the case of law, there is a general impression that the point of saturation has been reached. The teaching profession is overcrowded. Consequently, the need for early specialization is no longer acute. Furthermore, both in this country and in the United States the feeling is gaining ground that too early specialization is detrimental both to the individual concerned and to society. The conviction is growing that one must not be merely an efficient professional; he must first of all be a well-balanced citizen who, in the words of the Harvard Report, can think effectively, can communicate thought, can make relevant judgments, and can discriminate among values. And so the movement for general education stressing the symmetrical development of man’s faculties which has gained headway in the United States, is likewise finding considerable support among our Filipino, educators today.

At this juncture, it may be proper to ask: what is the function of a university? Abraham Flexner, an American educator and an Oxford lecturer, writing on the characteristics of American, English, and German universities, defined this function as the conservation of knowledge and ideas, the training of men, and the advancement of knowledge. This view is not unlike that expressed by the late Spanish philosopher, Jose Ortega y Gasset, who stated that the mission of the university is three-fold; namely, the transmission of culture, the teaching of the professions and scientific investigations, and the education of new men of science.

I shall not dwell at length on the first two functions because they can be grouped together under the category of teaching. Suffice it to say that as of today our universities in this country are devoting practically all of their time, energy, and resources to teaching; that is, the dissemination of culture and the training of young people for the professions. Even our state university, as may be gleaned from its charter, limits its activities almost entirely to teaching; that is, general education and professional and technical training.

However, it is my considered view that a university should not be merely a teaching institution and nothing more. For it is also expected by the requirements of tradition to be able to seek new facts and truths and thus help push forward and outward the frontiers of knowledge. As Flexner has put it, the pursuit of science and scholarship belongs to the university. Therefore, the scientists in the universities must lift the veil that hides the secrets of Nature so that she can be made to serve human purposes and needs. That is what the French professor of chemistry, Louis Pasteur, did. By dint of patient research, he succeeded in finding a scientific explanation of fermentation. He also established the germ theory of disease, which revolutionized the practice of medicine and surgery. In the same way, Enrico Fermi, the great physicist from the University of Chicago, succeeded in splitting the atom, the fission resulting in the release of atomic energy which may have peacetime uses in medicine, agriculture, and industry. And so did the many other scientists who, working in the quiet and seclusion of their laboratories, were continually adding to the rapidly accumulating fund of human knowledge.

I am firmly convinced that the time has come for our universities in the Philippines to devote greater attention to scientific research. They must no longer be satisfied with mere teaching, for no country in the world today is in greater need of scientific studies and investigations than ours. Whether it be in the government, business, agriculture, industry, or medicine, we need the help of the scientists in our universities. In my inaugural address two and a half years ago, I made reference to the need for research as an essential aspect of the economic development program of my administration. I have reiterated this reference in my messages to Congress on the state of the nation. I did this advisedly in order to stress the importance that I attach to scientific research as a means of accelerating our economic, social, and cultural progress. Our higher institutions, and particularly the universities, must address themselves to the solution of the many problems that beset our people, among them the attainment of self-sufficiency in food, clothing, and shelter for a rapidly growing population; the improvement of our economy; and the eradication of the many diseases that decimate or at least sap the vitality of our people. The universities can find no better way of rendering public service than to utilize their resources in the attempt to solve these problems through careful and painstaking research.

What I have just said refers to applied research. However, it must not be implied that I am indifferent to basic research. I wish to state positively that I am a believer in basic research. We must have basic research because we should not depend upon other countries for the basic principles we need in our search for practical solutions to our problems. Otherwise, our progress will be retarded. On this point, I feel that, in the main, the basic research in our country should be done in our universities, leaving the practical problems to the research agencies of the government and industrial establishments.

But in order to avoid unnecessary duplication and useless dissipation of effort, some coordination is advisable and even necessary. For this purpose, we have the National Science Development Board, created by Republic Act No. 2067, otherwise known as the Science Act of 1958, and charged with the task of integrating, coordinating, and intensifying scientific and technological research in this country. I urge our universities to take full advantage of the possible assistance that this body can extend to the institutions that are seriously contemplating research projects either by their faculty members or their graduate students.

To conclude, higher education in this country has been continually in a state of flux. This is as it should be, for, being social institutions, our colleges and universities must respond to the changes that are taking place in our dynamic social order. In this age of unprecedented progress in science, it behooves our people to apply the methods of scientific research to the solution of our problems. However, let us not delude ourselves into thinking that the hope of the world today lies in science. It does not, and, in fact, scientific progress also carries with it the seeds of the world’s destruction. Therefore, if our civilization is to be saved, the people of the world must move forward, pari passu, in their appreciation of human dignity and worth, and in deeper appreciation of moral and spiritual values manifested in actual life as well as in the acceptance of the concept of world brotherhood consecrated by the Divine Teacher himself, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. To the attainment of this lofty goal, let our higher institutions of learning here contribute their genius and their best efforts.

The first century of the Ateneo as a college has been a devoted service to the greater glory of God and true happiness of man. Let the next century of the Ateneo as Loyola University be a glorious chapter in the Grand Saga of the Crusade for world peace, universal freedom, universal prosperity, and universal brotherhood.

God bless the Loyola University.