PRESIDENT CARLOS P. GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE OCCASION OF THE ROTC FIELD DAY, FEBRUARY 20, 1960, READ BY DEFENSE SECRETARY ALEJO SANTOS

THIS yearly gathering of ROTC cadets of the various colleges and universities of Manila serves to remind one and all that a young republic like ours recognizes in its fullest sense the importance of the role that the educated young men of this country must play in the common endeavor of nation building.

The defense of the fatherland is incumbent upon every citizen. Of our multifarious civic responsibilities the duty to take up arms in defense of our sovereign rights must take precedence. You, the ROTC cadets, realize this fact more perhaps than the rest of your generation. Those of you who have done some readings in the development of constitutional government must know the historical fact that survival of democracy vis-a-vis determined efforts of despots to suppress human freedom and dignity depends mainly on equally determined efforts on the part of lovers of freedom to prepare for self-defense.

The framers of our constitution knew this. Reason and the instinct for self-preservation actuated them into unanimously legislating as the first law of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, Commonwealth Act No. 1, otherwise known as the National Defense Act. It provided among other things for the creation of a citizen army whose training would be a joint endeavor of the national government and the educational institutions of the country. You belong to that citizen army. You go through systematic military training to prepare yourselves not for war but for peace. You will be a part of a reserve force of officers and noncommissioned officers who when the need comes will be called upon to lead the fight in defense of our existence as a free and happy people should this be endangered by enemies within or enemies outside our own borders.

The citizen army should not be confused with the regular defense force whose members are professional soldiers. Unless called to active duty, a reserve officer is no more a professional soldier than an ordinary citizen. This distinction you must bear in mind, for as civilians you have special duties to perform in relation to nation building, duties which are peculiar to your own individual pursuit in life. For the present and in the foreseeable future we have no reason to feel our way of life will be threatened by forces so strong and so destructive as to necessitate the calling of our reserve force to active military service. Nations, great and small, the world over are continually seeking the peace that would make our world a happier place to live in. And for as long as all nations desire peace, and we have no reason to believe they do not, we hope never to see again the day when, as I in the last war, the flowers of our Pilipino manhood shall I be sacrificed in the fields of battle.

Your military training therefore must be harnessed towards the fulfillment of another vital role that you must I play as responsible citizens of the republic. The efforts I and the expense that went into preparing you for the I military service shall have been amply paid back a hundred fold should you apply the experience and the discipline you have learned in the process in helping to give substance and meaning to the spirit of Filipino nationalism which has become the guiding principle of my administration.

You have the fortunate advantage of enriching your educational background with the rigid discipline of military life short as this might have been. You are, so to speak, prepared to understand and assume the responsibility of erecting in this land a truly great nation, conscious of its right to make full use of the gifts of life and substance God in His divine justice has given our people.

The nationalism I speak of, is not, as the critics of my administration would want to understand it, designed to exclude from participation in the utilization of the opportunities in commerce and trade with which our country is so abundantly endowed the aliens among us and those who might want to come here to share with us the wealth of the land, but to give to every Filipino preference and priority over them, since this is the only way we as a people can assert our independence, and to keep alive national dignity and self-respect. Neither does it contemplate isolation from the rest of the world. Rather than deny, it promotes healthier relations with other nations since in asserting our national sovereignty in international affairs, we bring to the attention of the whole world the fact of the equality of nations be they large or small. This is a national philosophy which you can be proud of You and your children after you shall enjoy the glory of the day when the motives behind the Filipino First Policy shall have become a reality. Contrary to the claims of my friends in the opposition, Filipino nationalism,—the Filipino First Policy—is not an insuperable barrier to the attainment of our aspiration to remain a part of the community of nations. It is only when we shall have learned to appreciate our own culture and history and the righteousness of being truly in control of our economic and industrial resources that we can fully be cognizant of our rightful place in the brotherhood of nations.

The Filipino First policy is not merely a slogan. It is a practical program for national survival and has gone far beyond the blueprint stage. I am particularly happy for this opportunity to bring to your attention the fact that your advantages of education and military background can play an enviable part in the implementation of this design for a happier way of life. You can be the instrument with which the prosperity and national dignity of our people envisioned in the Filipino First policy can be realized.

The physical training that you have gone through has made you strong in body and mind. You are, therefore, fit to undertake the hard and strenuous job ahead. We need your strength to pursue without let-up the demands of our expanding agricultural, economical, and industrial areas.

We must have leaders in all the fields of endeavor in which our people are engaged. The ROTC is primarily a training institution for future leaders. You have been prepared to take positions of leadership as officers not only in a military command but also in the community where you life. In business, a highly competitive field, leaders for the task of steering our march towards economic independence are vitally needed. You will be equal to the challenge. Those who preceded you had more than proved beyond doubt that, when the occasion demanded, the ROTC cadet would be there to assume leadership. And so was it in the election of 1951. What was generally believed to be an election fraught with disorder and mockery became a most peaceful and clean one. Thanks to ROTC cadets who volunteered to police the election.

The spirit of patriotism which must temper every activity in which you will be engaged has been instilled in you. This too goes a long way towards preparing you to accept responsibility without misgivings. We must have men possessed of a well-balanced sense of values lest we mistake unbridled nationalism for the gentle severity of true nationalism.

I, for one, am of the opinion that conditions have changed since our illustrations leader and statesman, Manuel Quezon, in righteous indignation made the following statement:

… “We the Filipinos of today are soft and easygoing. Our tendency is toward parasitism. We are uninclined to sustained strenuous effort. We lack earnestness. Face-saving is the dominant note … of our existence. Our norm of conduct is . . . expediency rather than principles. . . . We are frivolous in our view of life. . . . We take our religion lightly. We think that lip-service and profession are equivalent to deep and abiding faith. We are inconstant. We lack perseverance; the first difficulties baffle us, and we easily admit defeat.”

What was painfully true at the time when this statement was made may now be but only apparent. A profounder sense of values has taken possession of our people. No less than a deep sense of nationalism among our countrymen today has lead me to take exception to this fatherly admonition given at such a time as try men’s soul by a man no greater nationalist succeeding generations has yet produced. A demonstration of my belief in the capacity of our people for national discipline is not hard to find. Young, imaginative men, enthused with the spirit behind the Filipino First policy are now invariably found in almost all fields of human endeavor; in high finance, in industry, in commerce, in education—nationalistic Filipinos all are found who merit emulation by all Filipinos for they have the courage to lead the way to follow.

You are no less capable, no less imbued with the sense of duty to go forth with vision and with the will to do the right in the fulfillment of a great promise. You are ready to be a “Filipino First” whatever your chosen profession may be. Having the advantages necessary to lead other young men and women in the common task of building a truly Filipino nation, you cannot in conscience say to yourself, “This I cannot do.” The promise is there—the fulfillment is in your hands, and when the time comes I would with Zulueta de Costa cry out:

“I see man standing up to the challenge of the centuries, head flung skyward, proud, pushing darkness back with a single candle.

I see man naked and shivering in the four winds, defiant, and arrogant in the clamoring blast, warm with the fire of his single candle.

In him I see multitude of long accumulations and great prophesies hastening to fulfillment.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library