LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

NATIONS usually mark their progress by various achievements in the realm of government, industry, and culture. But one of the most striking evidences of a nation’s progress lies in the achievements of private institutions and individuals who have voluntarily assumed their share of public responsibility, willingly and generously.

This ceremony we are witnessing now does honor to such a group of citizens whose selflessness is manifest in their collective concern and unceasing solicitude for the unfortunates of our country. However, it is only a small tribute as compared with the gratitude of the several hundreds of formerly handicapped persons who are living normal lives today, thanks to the efforts of this group, the Philippine Band of Mercy.

There are indeed, several hundreds of these rehabilitated today who have found new happiness and new hope because this organization of volunteers plucked them from the shadows which had concealed their deformity and brought them back into the light. In silence, their unvoiced applause quickens the pulse of this gathering.

My friends, I join this silent applause in recognition of the work of these civic-spirited men and women, and I pay homage to a great man whose vision it was that started this national humanitarian work.

This is Irving “Daddy” Hart, American by birth, Filipino at heart. His almost single-handed efforts in founding this civic organization some 15 years ago at his residence in Sampaloc, Manila, are a testament to man’s unbounded love for his fellow men.

“Daddy” Hart captured the imagination, sympathy, and cooperation of other individuals. Today his friends and supporters have already grown by the thousands.

Volunteer medical specialists offered their services gratis. Prominent social workers willingly gave up part of their time to assume a materially unrewarding responsibility. Many hospitals offered their facilities free of charge to patients, and inter-island steamship companies and national airlines afforded free transportation to the indigent handicapped persons.

Such volunteer services, and donations in kind, have enabled the Philippine Band of Mercy to function effectively in spite of the very small number of paid personnel in its office.

Today, the directors have announced that a Convalescent Home, the construction of which was made possible by the donations of the people of Manila, is ready for occupancy. In addition, more provincial chapters of the organization will be formed as soon as funds are available.

It is encouraging to note that this organization intends to pursue its humanitarian work to embrace the entire country in the not too distant future. The response of our civic-spirited citizens to this worthy cause cannot but be praised too highly.

I enjoin those of our fellow citizens who have not already done so, to give their wholehearted and unstinted support to this worthy project of the Philippine Band of Mercy.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C.P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the inauguration of the Convalescent Home and Administrative Building of the Philippine Board of Mercy. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(29) , 7045-7046.