Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Golden Jubilee Celebration of the UP College of Law

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel, January 14, 1961]

TONIGHT, as we cap the celebration of the Golden Jubilee of the LLP. College of Law, with this occasion, we have before us a-telescoped view, as it were, of the half century just past. Looking over this period with the lighting eye of memory and remembrance, we note with some astonishment the far-reaching changes which time and events have wrought in our society. Within that period of time, which is short enough to be compressed within the memory of many living men, we have metamorphosed from a colony to a republic, independent and sovereign, and a member of good standing in the family of nations. We have ceased to be a mere conglomeration of tribes, with parochial outlook and a narrow self-regard, and have become one people and one nation, not without differences to be sure, but still conscious of a common heritage and bound by common aspirations. From what was chiefly a barter economy, we have evolved a modern entrepreneurial system, characterized by large-scale agriculture, fast-rising manufacturing industries, commercial activities, financial establishments, and other enterprises usually associated with modern business. Our people have grown vastly in number; during the fifty years just past, our population has trebled. This was due in part to our increased facilities in combating disease and improving sanitation, in increasing our food supply as well as other necessities of life. As a consequence, tremendous areas of what was once farmland and forest have become urbanized giving rise to towns and cities. Hand in. hand with this development, we experienced a tremendous improvement in facilities for education, transportation, communication, recreation, as well as in other convenience essential to civilized living.

In this upward movement towards progress and prosperity, the contribution of law and those who take part in its administration is crucial as well as substantial. I do not say that the law and its ministers are responsible for the better things which have come about for our people. I do not insist that the law has been efficient cause behind our progress. I do maintain, however, that the law, with its coercive methods and techniques, was an indispensable condition for the proper development of our society. Our progress could not have taken place except in the context of our law.

This is not the place and time for a disquisition on the relation of law to civilization. Nevertheless, the general observation must be made that it is the law which give organic unity to the nation, harmony and stability to personal and institutional relations in our society, and opportunity for peaceful changes. From the viewpoint of social organization, it is through law that the State is established, its government ordained, its powers and limitations thereon specified, and its relations with the citizens ascertained. From the standpoint of stability, it is through law that general security for all citizens is made possible by punishing criminals and other evil doers, by enforcing agreements and by holding everyone in the Islands to the obligations expected of civilized men generally. Lastly, from the standpoint of opportunity for peaceful reform, it is through the methods of law that new forces in our society are able to achieve expression and to bring about the necessary changes, whether social or economic. Essentially, therefore, law is the instrument by means of which our society has made possible the accommodation of the three prime requisites for national progress, which are an effective and just government stability and security in personal as well as property relations, and an opportunity for peaceful reform.

From this consideration of the importance of our law in fostering progress and national growth, the role of the U.P. College of Law in the advancement of the country becomes manifest. Through its alumni, including the thirty whom we are honoring tonight, its influence has been deeply felt in matters vital, even crucial, to our common life. Many of them are zealous libertarians and have fought honorably for national dignity, for democratic processes. Their views have exerted a powerful force in the formulation as well as in the implementation of public policy.

In the executive branch of the government, the U. P. law alumni have endeavored to make the government machinery responsive to the pressing needs of the people. They have contributed their effort and their knowledge in the ascertainment of serious social and economic problems and in directing the flow of government activity to deal with such problems. President Roxas sought to alleviate the evils of tenancy; Mr. Justice Laurel aspired to protect our people from the capacity of the enemy during the dark days of the Occupation; and President Quirino is still remembered for his program of total economic mobilization. Together with many others, these men have been instrumental in keeping the government, in its fight with the enemies of the people, along the constitutional path. In those turbulent days when they held the helm of power, crisis after crisis confronted the government; but on the whole, the democratic process was preserved and our traditions of liberty tenuous as they were, remained unbroken.

In the judiciary, the primacy of the U.P. alumni remain undisputed. I need not stress the fact that nine of the eleven justices of our Supreme Court as at present constituted were graduated from the U. P. College of Law and are now in the list of honorees for this occasion. By their zeal and learning, by their rectitude and fair dealing, the alumni in the various courts have enabled our judiciary to maintain the faith and confidence of our people, and thus aided greatly in the survival of the Republic in its darkest days. On the technical side, their contributions are equally impressive. They have done a good deal in purging our legal system of anomalies and expendable fictions, in the refinement of legal rules towards consistency, and in shaping the mass of legal rules to meet the demands of fundamental, public policy. Our Supreme Court is specially to be commended in construing controverted legislation in the light of the nationalistic spirit of our Constitution. Mention must also be made of the Code Commission, which has been chiefly constituted of law alumni headed by the former Dean of U. P. College of Law and President of the University, Mr. Justice Bocobo. In their expert study of our legal system, they have gone a long way towards purging it of anachronisms.

Then, in the legislative branch; U. P. alumni continue to be dominant personalities and wield an influence far out of proportion to their number. The list is too long for us to risk the mention of any names. Their leadership is acknowledged and their learning is unsurpassed by any other group. They have been always on the forefront in the fight for progressive legislation. They have been behind many measures for economic development, for labor and social welfare benefits, for an equitable sharing in the national wealth. They have led also in the struggle for the preservation of our national dignity, for the conservation of the national patrimony, for the primacy of Filipino businessman in terms of economic opportunity in the led of his birth.

Summing up the role of the U. P. College of Law in the field of law as it has affected progress, we can say without exaggeration that through its alumni, it has helped nourish the creative energies of our people by its enlightened influence in the formulation of administrative policy, in legislation and in the administration of justice.

But freedom has many phases. The winning of one phase of it only underscores and makes more patent the lack of the others. Without in the very least understating the achievements of our past leaders, I must say to you that the winning of political freedom does not, and should not, mark the end of our aspiration as a nation. That fight has been fought and won. We must preserve and maintain the fruits of that victory. But there is a bigger fight that we must fight, a larger battle to which we must commit our forces. I refer to the fight for economic independence—the fight for economic emancipation of our people.

In the evolution of our life as a nation after political independence the battle for economic independence logically flows. This is the battle we can not afford to lose. If we do so, if we lose this fight for economic dominance in our country, even the present political freedom that we enjoy today at a cost of so much hardship and sacrifice may yet be lost.

Economic dominance by Filipinos in our own land is the key to true progress and prosperity. It is the key to the uplift of our masses, the key to real freedom. It is imperative that we fight and win this battle. If we refuse to do so, we shall have lost by default to the communists who are putting up their system as the alternative way.

It is in recognition of these imperatives plus my own desire to see our country become truly free and prosperous under the aegis to democratic institutions and free enterprise that I have committed my administration to this battle. It is this, administration which has enunciated “Filipino First,” as an official government policy in matters of economics and trade. This administration has embarked on a “no-quarter-asked- and-no-quarter-given” war against graft in the government which is a weapon used by some aliens to maintain and to further their economic dominance over our people. During my administration you saw for the first time Filipino businessmen receive bigger and bigger dollar allocations over these of all other aliens. In the years before 1958 the bulk of dollar allocations went to alien businessmen. In 1958 this was radically changed. That year Filipino businessmen received 43.8 per cent, Americans 36 per cent, Chinese 10.1 per cent, British 8.2 per cent, and others 1.9 per cent of dollar allocations. The change was even more radical in 1959. This time Filipinos received 52 per cent of dollar allocations, more than all other nationalities combined received. The others decreased propor­tionately. Americans got 33 per cent; Chinese 6.8 per cent, British 7 per cent, and other 1.2 per cent. The percentage for Filipinos rose higher in 1960.

But I cannot fight this battle alone. Your government cannot carry by itself on this task. I need your help and your support. I stand here today to ask you to march shoulder to shoulder with me that we may fight on to victory on this economic Armageddon of the Filipino people.

During the last half century, graduates of the U. P. College of Law have stood on the forefront of the fight for political freedom. They manned the barricades, so to speak not only in the bloody terrain of physical war but also in the less bloody but no less tricky and dangerous terrain of peace. That battle has been won and the front has shifted. I call on you to follow the footsteps of your noble predecessors and fellow alumni, to be on the forefront of this new fight to be the leaders and the strategists of this new quest. And God willing, when that battle is won sometime in the foreseeable future, posterity will proudly say of our generation thus: They have done their duty as true Filipinos.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech during the Golden Jubilee Celebration of the UP College of Law held at the Manila Hotel, Saturday evening, January 14, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(5) , 810-814.