PRESIDENT GARCIA’S LABOR DAY SPEECH DELIVERED THURSDAY EVENING MAY 1, 1958, AT THE INDEPENDENCE GRANDSTAND

Secretary Castaño, distinguished guests, great workers of our nation:

TODAY, May first, the entire nation of the Philippines pays tribute to the honor of our workers, who are the true pillars of unity and strength of our country.

As President of this nation, I will gladly accept all criticism directed at me, if only to provide sincere happiness and a bright future for all workers in our country.

It is very surprising that those who have been blessed with a comfortable life are the ones who have many complaints or things to say to the government, while the poor and oppressed are the ones who endure to give the government enough opportunity to improve our livelihood. If we examine the lives of these successful men, they are the ones who do nothing to help the situation of workers in our country.

I was the first to truthfully tell the Nation that our way of life is precarious right now. I know that I will be criticized for that confession. But I mustered the courage to be honest so that we can all work together to steer our Nation through this difficult path. Incidentally, my countrymen, this hardship that we are experiencing is not only in our Nation. It is being experienced by the whole world now. Even the wealthiest countries are feeling this hardship in their way of life. What more the Philippines, a small country and newly independent?

Discovering a way to solve our problems is not achieved through anger. Nor is it through hasty methods. Slow but sure is certainly better than fast if it is mistaken.

If there is anyone we should thank today, it is none other than the workers of our nation. They are the most oppressed, yet they continuously help the government; they lack comfort, yet they know how to look after the welfare of the nation.

More important to me is that our workers, who comprise the majority of our nation, are given a larger share of life’s blessings and that each one of them is granted a prosperous and stable livelihood. This is what dominates my heart.

In this instance, I would like to thank the workers of our nation for all the help they provide to our government. I am pleased to confess to you that other countries, including America, have wondered why, amidst the hardship we are currently experiencing, we have no sensitive riots or strikes, something that has not happened in any other country. This is a sign of the good character of our workers: with them, nothing is unbearable if it is for the good of the nation.

I would also like to thank you for defending my humble self when a newspaper from a country close to our hearts attacked me.

All of this I cannot forget, and I will strive to reciprocate to you through a service that is honest and pure.

I hope that the light of the torches you carry in the parade today, will be the same light that illuminates the path to a bright future for our nation.

Thank you very much to all of you!

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!

[MOCK TRANSLATION] Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!