Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the labor leaders

[Delivered at the Manila Hotel on November 6, 1959]

SECRETARY CASTAÑO, LABOR LEADERS OF THE PHILIPPINES:

THIS is the first time, in our short but checkered career as a nation and as a Republic, that one of the most elemental forces that propel progress has been massed in such numbers in one hall as to brook no argument that at last, in our country, this elemental force has come into its own.

I refer to the force of the workers organized.

I make no attempt to flatter you, gentlemen of organized labor. The time has indeed come, when no one, not anyone, can dare ignore, or be indifferent to the workers as a leading and decisive, social and political force in our country.

Let the record of the past few years bear witness to the validity of this statement.

In 1953, the last year under the Liberal Party regime, there were a little more than 800 trade unions in the Philippines. When the Nacionalista Party took over the reins of government in 1954, a big boost was given to organized free labor that, today, the free and democratic trade unions have attained a spectacular total of more than 3,000 organizations scattered throughout all the industries and trades.

Without intending to minimize the favorable influence of the law known as the Magna Charta of Labor, the Nacionalista Party regime marked a period of determined effort by our government to promote the growth of democratic trade unionism and to keep civil liberties, particularly the right to freedom of association, untrammeled and complete.

I cite the record of the past few years, not to impress you, for you know the record as well as I do, but rather to fix certain facts in the foreground as we essay on to analyze the role of labor in the fulfillment of our aspirations as a people.

I feel deeply that the nation should be told of what the Administration has done to raise the standard of the labor mass in our country.

Let us now essay further into the role of present-day workers in the building of our country.

You, Ladies and Gentlemen, the leaders of Philippine Labor, can proudly claim a rich and colorful tradition. For you are, in a historical sense, the descendants of Andres Bonifacio and the Katipunan.

It was mostly the Filipino workers of Manila and the surrounding towns who, at Balintawak, raised the prophetic cry heralding Asian Nationalism of the 20th century. Remember that the Katipunan Revolution was a revolt of our masses. The Filipino masses made the first nationalist and social revolution in the long ages of Asia’s colonial hibernation, foreshadowing with remarkable exactness the shape and content of the Asian revolution in our own time.

The Revolution of 1896 was unique in more than one sense. Our people rose and fought predominantly with bolos and talibongs against the modern arms, the overwhelming firepower, of the enemy. Implicit in this is not only a courage of the highest order, but the capacity to invent, to improvise, and to achieve great things in a small physical capital, the true measures of a people’s greatness! It is this genius and this spirit, which stamped the Filipinos of an earlier day, that we seek to resurrect today in the hearts and minds of our people. To do this, we must appeal to the patriotic sentiments of our people, sometime dormant, which in earlier times goaded a small, just-born nation of less than ten million souls to deeds of daring and greatness that fill our hearts—the Filipinos of today—with admiration and humility.

The foremost task which the generation of Rizal, Bonifacio, Mabini, and Jacinto set out to accomplish was the task of political emancipation of the Filipino people. Underlying this aim was their desire for the economic and social well-being of their countrymen. This was their primary and ultimate objective; and in the beginning, the intellectuals of our reform movement under Spain thought that this objective—the economic and social well-being of the Filipinos—could be accomplished by making the Philippines a province of Spain, in the same manner that the Federalistas during the early days of the American occupation believed that the national aspirations of our people could be realized by making the Philippines one of the states of the American Union.

It is a credit to our genius as a people that both our masses and their leaders realized in the past, as they do today, that the keys to fruitful and purposeful self-determination lie not in political tyranny and economy enslavement, nor yet in political freedom and economic bondage, nor still yet, in political serfdom and economic being; but they realized that fruitful and purposeful self-determination can spring only from untrammeled political freedom coupled with economic emancipation and social well-being.

It is for this reason that the twentieth century has been and will be for us a century of fighting for freedom. Its first fifty years, heralded by the Cry of Balintawak which also sounded out the Cry for Freedom in this part of the world, saw our fight for political freedom come to fruition.

Political self-determination for us has been substantially accomplished.

The next fifty years of the twentieth century will see the Filipino people waging a relentless and determined war for economic emancipation. Already, the call-to-arms in this battle has been sounded by our people and my administration. Already, the battle lines are being drawn. The outcome of this struggle will determine whether the Filipino people are fit to live in a free world of free men.

If I may disgress a bit, I would like to point out to you the role of the Nacionalista Party, of which I am proud to be a part, and of which I have the honor to be the present titular head, in these great Filipino fights of the twentieth century.

The fight for political freedom was largely won by our people under the leadership of the Nacionalista Party. Here is a party dedicated to freedom and to the welfare of the common man.

When political freedom was finally won, the nation’s administration temporarily passed into the hands of the Liberal Party. The confusion and misgovernment of those first years of independence, coupled with that administration’s blatant disregard for the welfare of the common tao, precipitated an armed revolution against our duly constituted authorities instigated by professional agitators working for an ideology that was seeking to destroy our way of life, but who nevertheless gained adherents because of the discontent among our masses.

This was the state of affairs then, because the Liberal Party failed to give direction and meaning to our aspirations as a people. “Whither are we going,” could very well have been the question of the day.

It was only after the Nacionalista Party got back into power in 1954 that our aspirations as a people again took shape and acquired meaning. Again, we had something to strive for as a nation under God.

First of these aspirations was the well-being of the common tao. This received full attention during the term of our late beloved President Magsaysay. Since I assumed the Presidency, new projects have been added, especially in the rural areas where the great number of feeder roads and community projects have served to improve the living standards of our brothers in the fields.

The Nacionalista administration has also turned its sight to other problems just as pressing, for it is our primary goal to achieve economic emancipation during the second fifty years of this century.

We, therefore, find the Nacionalista Party, championing successfully the cause of political freedom before this century was half-over and the same Nacionalista Party today championing the concomitant and indispensable adjunct of that freedom, economic emancipation.

It is in manifestation of these nationalist goals that the Nacionalista administration is dedicated to the creation of a balanced agro-industrial economy that will be capable of giving to all our people the blessings of a decent, full, and active life.

I intend that labor shall play a major role in the realization of our aims.

I, therefore, pledge to you, the leaders of the Filipino trade unions, that this Government under my leadership will continue the policy of encouraging, promoting, and assisting the development of free, democratic, and responsible trade unions in the Philippines.

I think some of you know that recently I incurred severe criticism when I upheld the validity of the strike duration pay principle, although the courts themselves have tended to shun this principle.

I like to hope that under my administration, labor can claim more extensive participation in the policy-making organs of government corporations and economic-planning agencies. I intend to draft more and more competent representatives of labor in positions of responsibility in the government in the days to come.

Because I also believe in raising the fitness of the rank and file, I intend to give all-out support to the leadership training programs of the University of the Philippines for union men. Our program of developing skilled manpower, which has greatly accelerated under this administration, will be effectively pursued. Our object is to be able to build up a reserve of technicians and skilled workers from among our own people so as to put an end, in due time, to the importation of technical experts from abroad.

I also take this occasion to assure you of my personal willingness to collaborate in new and more effective efforts to bring about the nationalization of labor in the Philippines, consistent with due process and the equal protection clause in our Constitution.

I stand opposed to any attempt to revise the Minimum Wage Law at this time, where the intention is to reduce wages. We do not intend to go back and nullify the hard-won gains of our workers in the legislative field, modest as these still are. In our march toward progress I would consider this a backward step!

The right to speak, write, organize freely shall remain inviolable under my administration. This right is one of the great objects of Filipino nationalist struggle and I intend that it remains secure.

I ask your support in my own modest efforts to place our Government squarely on the side of our Nationalist goals, and to press for consummations, in our own time, of our dream to achieve in this country a modern economy resting on moral ideals, on social justice and the fraternity of all Filipinos, rich and poor.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech before labor leaders at the Manila Hotel, Friday evening, November 6, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(45) , 9426-9430.