PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE CHICAGO CLUB, SATURDAY NIGHT, MAY 4, AT THE ARISTOCRAT PAVILION

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

WHEN the invitation was extended to me to join you this evening, especially after I have been apprised that this occasion is a get-together of many of our fellow-citizens who have for sometime sojourned in the United States, I thought that it would be a momentous opportunity to address a group of leaders in their various fields of endeavor.

Filipinos like you who have gone to United States at the beginning of the century up to the middle 20th are hailed as pioneers in the advancement o{ our country’s educational, social, and economic life. In a true pioneering spirit, you have ventured all over the American continent in your desire to be imbued with democratic ideas and advanced educational training.

Your vision and enterprising spirit in going to that great country many years ago, in some ways, is comparable to the great adventure undertaken by the Pilgrim Fathers. But while those American forefathers sailed to the World seeking to develop for themselves a freer and more contented way of life, you have gone there urged by the thirst for knowledge, and by a desire to learn and assimilate the good ways of life in that bulwark of democracy and prosperity; and thereafter, to share with our people the rich stores of knowledge and experiences you have amassed during your sojourn there. It is because of this fact that when you came back to our country, you were looked upon as enlightened citizens fully prepared to lead our people, or help guide them during our formative years as a nation. I have much thrust that you will not deny now our countrymen the rich values of your inspiration, guidance, and leadership.

My friends, I have assumed the stewardship of our Ship of State under very tragic circumstances, when our great and beloved President Ramon Magsaysay was snatched from our midst by the hand of God. His passing is, indeed, a great loss for all of us, at a time when we need him most. I have taken the helm after him, with the firm resolve to dedicate my total efforts to lead our people to finish the tremendous task he so nobly and dynamically began; and I call upon you and all our countrymen to share in our gigantic struggle to build our country into a stronger, more prosperous, and tranquil one.

We and the whole free world admire and embrace the great ideals and principles which our late President stood for and labored so much to achieve. It behoves all of us Filipinos to work together to attain the goals towards which his administration was dedicated.

Foremost among these is our relentless fight against a godless ideology that seeks to disrupt and destroy our orderly democratic processes. As men schooled in the ideals of democracy, it is incumbent upon you to lead our people in that struggle. The high esteem and confidence reposed in you by our fellow-citizens certainly place you in good stead to help crush the enemies of democracy in our land.

So varied and multifarious are the problems of our country today that their solutions call for the services of fellow-citizens and groups of citizens, such as you, who have been trained in various fields,—social, economic, and political.

One of the greatest challenges faced by any administration in our country is the amelioration of the lot of the masses,—the teeming millions living in our rural areas. It is to the everlasting credit of the late President Magsaysay that the Government under his devoted leadership during the past few years, extended to our brethren in the farms and barrios solicitous care and assistance. We intend to pursue this policy as vigorously as he did.

But, of course this is only one of the many ways by which we can realize the uplift of our lowlier countrymen. There are so many more things to be done,—and with greater efforts and unity and true dedication, they could be done, whereby our people can rise from the morass and poverty and economic misery.

It has been said that the root of most of the problems of mankind is economic. I think this is true. At least it is true of our people in the Philippines today, and of the people of so many nations all over the world, especially among the submerged races in the less developed areas of the earth.

It is for this reason that much emphasis is being extended by the Administration to the solution of our economic problems.

With the natural wealth and resources that a provident God has endowed our country, there is no reason why we could not provide our people with better shelters, better foods, more comforts in life,—if only the national effort should be geared with determination towards this end. We can not do these things overnight; we can not achieve our avowed goals amidst petty squabbles, intrigues, and greed. We need to be guided by sound economic statesmanship and a genuine concern for those who have less in life; and not only leaders in the government can share in the gigantic task of nation-building, but also civic-spirited and enlightened citizens such as you, members of this Club.

I have spoken of pernicious ideology that is daily seeking to spread its ugly tentacles among free men: communism. Let us ever be on the alert, lest this merciless, soulless, treacherous way of life again attempt to creep into the lives of our people.

This is not a problem of our country alone. It is the problem of all free men to the free world who endear freedom as life itself, and who have been witnesses to the miserable plight of those nations who have fallen victims to the scythe of communism.

Yes, freedom is such a priceless thing that men die fighting to preserve it. Look at what happened to Hungary. Even boys and girls in their teens joined their compatriots in a historic protest against their ruthless rulers for denial of their freedom, and with outmoded rifles or homemade gasoline grenades or stones or their bare fists, battled with the tanks and the artilleries the .mass infantries of communism.

In this crucial struggle against this ideology, our country has been fit to join the democracies, under the leadership of the United States of America, and we intend to maintain this alliance.

Aware that this part of the world is being eyed with watchful waiting by the overlords of communism, we have also joined our Asian brothers in the formation of a South East Asian Treaty that is dedicated to our collective security. In this organization the United States is again a member of the alliance. This is, for us Filipinos, significant, because of our special relations with that great country which has helped us a great deal in surmounting the many difficulties and problems we have encountered since we regained our independence in 1946.

My friends, I like to consider you, who have spent many good years in the United States, as constituting a great span of that bridge of friendship and understanding that links our two countries together; and I appeal to you to keep that spirit of kinship with America burning warm and bright.

We are a young nation, and in our endeavor to develop a fuller and more tranquil life, we can benefit much from the lessons of history and from the rise of progressive nations of today, like America. With more men like you, with the native genius of our race and with the moral fiber of our people—with all these factors joined together, and guided by a Government and an Administration that is truly inspired by the devotion and dedication of the late President Magsaysay, I can envision a bright and hopeful picture for our country, and that we will, in due time, become a true rampart of prosperity, peace, and freedom.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library