YOUR EXCELLENCIES, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

THE REPUBLIC of the Philippines is deeply honored for having been chosen the site of this First Asian Labor Ministers Conference. It is my understanding that the purpose of this conference is to hammer out among the leaders of labor in Asia, of whom your excellencies are most outstanding, a basis for a collective effort in Free Asia to attain and maintain an effective democratic economy in Asia where free labor and effective management collaborate and cooperate to raise the prosperity of the region and afford every citizen a just share of the comforts of modern life.

We are faced with grave issues, the most important of which is the preservation of the peace of mankind. This conference here will make a positive contribution to the solution of this great issue via the economic approach by pooling our resources to combat poverty, illiteracy, and disease.

Let this convention be guided, therefore, by the spirit of the Philadelphia Declaration that “poverty anywhere constitutes a menace to prosperity everywhere.” It is about time it is realized that the ideology which would solve this issue by sowing seeds of hatred against our free institutions and which would capitalize on the miseries and frustrations of the poor and the ignorant, is not the road to industrial peace and world peace. It is about time it is realized that under the infallible working of cosmic law, we cannot win the heart of humanity by the fostering of hatred among social classse, or among nations. It is about time to realize that we cannot annul the freedom of millions of mankind, stifle human dignity, and deny the Supreme Being, and then achieve world peace. The way to peace is still the way of justice and love and freedom. The fight for peace is the fight against poverty, disease, and ignorance everywhere. Faith and hope and love are still the redemptive forces for all mankind.

Here in the Philippines we have tried this approach by the enactment of progressive labor measures, outstanding of which are the Industrial Peace Act, better known as the Philippine Magna Carta of Labor, the Minimum Wage Law, the Blue Sunday Law, the Social Security Act, and the Workmen’s Compensation Act.

Believing that land reforms is one of the fundamental principles of social justice, we have also instituted the Land-for-the-Landless program. A high level of agricultural production is likewise being undertaken to accelerate our economic development. An orderly process of economic growth is only possible to the extent the agricultural section of the economy lends full support to the scheme of development.

We offer these epoch-making labor and social legislations to you for examination for whatever they may be worth.

Distinguished delegates:

I have come here mainly to extend to you the welcoming embrace of the Filipino people. I have come to inform your excellencies that we Filipinos are with you in the great objectives of this convention. I know you are determined to reach at some concrete accord that will redound to the common benefit of all free Asian peoples.

May the Convention be a complete success.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the Labor Ministers Conference. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(23) , 4247-4248.