SPEECH OF PRESIDENT GARCIA FORMALLY LAUNCHING THE CANCER SOCIETY FUND DRIVE IN CEREMONY HELD AT THE SOCIAL HALL IN MALACANANG MONDAY AFTERNOON, DECEMBER 15, 1958

THROUGH the centures of human history, one of the most horrible and mysterious of the dread scourges of mankind has been cancer.

Although the disease has become recognized and investigated scientifically only over the past few decades, there is evidence showing that cancer existed even in the ancient civiliziations of the world.

Today, mankind has massed itself in a drive against its common enemy. In the United States, Europe, and the enlightened parts of Asia, cancer is being pushed back by progressive public health programs primarily designed to detect and treat the disease during its early and curable stages.

Because of the fact that we do not know the real cause of the disease, the efforts of the Philippine anti-cancer groups have been directed to detection and preventive treatments. Again, because of lack of funds, our own technical men have been unable to go into the actual and expensive research on the causes of, and new treatments for, cancer.

We are very much gratified to note that here in the Philippines, the citizenry has not lent deaf ears to the call of duty in the fight against cancer.

The establishment of the Philippine Cancer Society two years ago marked a milestone in the country’s fight against the effects of the disease. It was a manifestation of the fact that Filipinos will band together, give generously of their talents, time, and money to fight a common enemy that is killing hundreds of thousands annually.

The construction of the first cancer detection center by the Philippine Cancer Society is undoubtedly one of the important battles won in the fight against the disease in the Philippines.

The government, on its part, has not been idle. The Reorganization Act for the Department of Health which I certified for implementation provides for the creation of a Division of Cancer Control which’ we all anticipate, will go a long way toward achieving a concerted action against the plagues of cancer.

The activation of the cancer control division of the department will be able to do much, I am sure, in fighting the disease and will furthermore be instrumental in the saving of many lives.

The cooperation and unity of purpose manifested in the work of the Philippine Cancer Society and the health department is entirely in keeping with the modern concept of progressive government. It reflects the attitude that joint participation of both the government and the responsible and generous members of the community is essential to any successful large-scale and long-range undertaking.

I therefore call on every Filipino to contribute generously to the country’s war against this disease, realizing that every peso given may save the life of a fellow-Filipino.

I congratulate the Philippine Cancer Society for the work it has done. . . and done well. I hope that it will carry on its humanitarian efforts boldly, encouraged by the support and generosity of the average Filipino citizen.

It is my privilege to present my personal contribution today to the third Philippine Cancer Drive.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library