PRESIDENT GARCIA’S “BATAAN DAY” SPEECH DELIVERED WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 9, 1958, AT THE LUNETA

MY FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

TODAY we commemorate a great moment in our history, for on April 9, 1942, a valiant nation succumbed to the force of numbers. On that day, the guns that heralded a nation’s will to survive in freedom and dignity were silenced, and the lips of heroes who grinned defiance in the face of an onrushing horde were sealed, many in perpetual silence. But not for long. For the whispered words, “Bataan has fallen,” which was beamed by a freedom radio station that fateful day, merely signaled the start of a liberation struggle that was to rank the Filipinos among the world’s most intense and courageous freedom fighters.

The epic of Bataan and Corregidor has withstood the test of time and the incisive ruthless scrutiny of posterity. History has shown that while it was a defeat from the materialistic point of view of war, it was a victory in many respects. It showed the world how a people, determined to continue to be free, could; translate material defeat into moral victory. It also showed the world how a people, again desirous to continue to be free, could overcome material inadequacies and obstacles in its forward march to greatness and to a place of honor in the great family of nations.

In this respect, I must congratulate the Defenders of Bataan and Corregidor for sponsoring the festivities commemorating the anniversary of the Fall of Bataan. It is well that we as a people take time out now and then from the hectic grind of our existence to commemorate, rededicate ourselves to the memory of the heroes and martyrs of that epic. In the warp and woof of that epic was beautifully woven Philippine-American heroism as shown when Filipino and American soldiers fought and died side by side on the bloody fields of Bataan, Corregidor, and other sacred spots. Facing common dangers, fighting for the common ideals of freedom, Filipinos and Americans wrote in astral fire on the summits of Bataan an immortal story of heroism and sacrifice in defense of country, liberty, and democracy. This common stand on the rock of freedom is both historic and prophetic.

Bataan, Corregidor, Capas, and other landmarks of the last war, are more than just symbols of a people’s physical courage and undauntedness. Much more that they constitute a lasting testimonial to the quality of greatness of our people. Bataan and Corregidor, while assured of a place of honor in history, must therefore continue to fire the spirit of nationalism and to strengthen unity among our people. They must continue to inspire us into a life of peace, prosperity, and dignity.

They must continue to prove to1 us that in nation-building, as in war, sectional and partisan bickerings and breast-beatings have no place. Above all, they must continue to inspire in us the highest order of national discipline and unqualified patriotism.

I must deeply emphasize this last consideration because I believe that if there was any time in our post-war history when the need for the highest order of national dedication and selflessness on our part is greatest, it is at this stage of our national life. The disturbed state of our economy needs the institution of remedial measures which would entail degree of sacrifice on the part of our people.

In our determination, however, to put an end to the economic difficulties in which we have found ourselves, we must not lose sight of the fact that our problems are not limited to the economic field. We must endeavor—by providing the great masses of our people with the maximum essential services of government that they, as the backbone of the nation so truly and rightfully deserve. Within our means, we provide for the minimum requirements of our national defense and security agencies, to enable them to enforce our laws and guarantee the reasonable assertion of our sovereignty as a free and independent nation. Towards this end, we live up to our obligations as a member of collective and bilateral arrangements for peace and security. As a member of the United Nations, we stand squarely behind every effort that is designed to widen the scope and latitude, and to strengthen the stability, of world peace. In the same manner, we are quick to condemn unscrupulous and undemocratic acts of other countries, and espouse the right of captive peoples to freedom and self-determination. In the social field, we provide for the education of our youth and the invigoration of the social justice program of the government. We continue to provide for adequate safeguards and guarantees for the continued enjoyment by our people of their political rights under our form of government. We continue to strengthen the foundations of our democratic institutions, in order to insure the stability and permanence of our free way of life.

To succeed in all these, it is necessary that we give to our country the full measure of our devotion. Government is not the sole and exclusive concern of those who govern. No government, unless it be a dictatorial one, can even as much as hope to succeed without the cooperation, support, and encouragement of the governed. We must, therefore, individually and as a people, strive to translate the intense fervor of patriotism and courage that we so nobly displayed in war, into a mighty force that will turn the wheels of progress for the country in peace.

Veterans of this country, you are the living segment of our heroes who fought to earn for us our right to freedom and progress. God has willed that you live, not to stand still as unmoving symbols, but to witness and participate and actively inspire the rest of our people, and to continue in other fields, not of battle, the fight for security, progress, and prosperity.

It is within the context of our past and in the perspective of the future, that we should view the present problems that we face. When the heroes and martyrs who have now become the subject of our song and lore, laid down their lives in the service of country and people, the welfare and happiness of this and future generations must have been uppermost in their minds. It is in appreciation of these sacrifices undergone for our sake by our forebears that we of this generation must strive towards the enhancement not only of our own lot, but also of the succeeding generations of Filipinos. Inspired by the example of nobility of character, patriotism, and service of those who in Bataan, Corregidor, and elsewhere, have hallowed the Filipino soil with their blood and the tears of their loved ones, we of this generation should endeavor to build in this part of the world a nation strong and united—a nation worthy of the toils and sacrifices of our forebears, and worthy of the 21st century.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library