PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE PHILIPPINE ELECTRIC PLANT OPERATORS ASSOCIATION, MONDAY AFTERNOON, MAY 6, AT THE MANILA HOTEL

OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE PHILIPPINE ELECTRIC PLANT OPERATORS ASSOCIATION, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I WISH to thank very sincerely the officers and members of this association for the invitation to be with you this afternoon, and for the privilege of addressing this convention. I feel a community of interest with you in your earnest belief in the important role of electricity in our development as a nation and in your desire to accelerate that development through the widest use of electricity in our homes, farms, and factories. I wish to commend you for your part in bringing this general objective about.

I am informed that the members of your organization, exclusive of the Manila Electric Company, are presently serving approximately 180,000 customers, or a total of 800,000 people outside of the Manila franchise area which includes some of the remote districts and towns of the Philippines. That you have attained some measure of success in carrying this service to your customers can be inferred from the fact that in the areas served the use of electricity in the homes and shops is now taken for granted in much the same way as the other daily necessities. It is a well established fact that in the last few years much has been done by the various members of your group to improve, extend, and popularize the use of electricity.

It is thus a matter of genuine satisfaction to us to note the sizeable strides that have been attained by the Philippines in the expansion of the electric industry during the last decade. Starting from the ruins of the last war when practically all generating facilities were destroyed, we have rebuilt and augmented our electric facilities to the point where we now have in terms of capacity about four times what we had before the war. The progress has been such that our electric energy consumption per capita annually has risen to 54.8 Kwh as of last year, before the completion of Ambuklao, compared to 29.2 Kwh for 1951 and about 13 Kwh just before the outbreak of the war. In terms of capacity of central electric station plants, we now have in operation about 330,000 KW compared to 78,000 KW in 1938.

But while definite progress has been achieved as shown by these figures, our present per capita electric consumption is. still far below : those of more developed nations which indicates that still much remain to be done. Com­pared with our 54.8 Kwh per capita per annum, the corresponding figures for some of the other countries are as follows: Canada, 4,830; United States, 3,220; Sweden, 1,734; United Kingdom, 1,314; Japan, 625; Porto Rico, 315; Formosa, 179.

Considering that the per capita consumption of electric energy is one of the reliable indices of the extent of a nation’s industrial development and progress, these figures should convince us that we should do much more in the development of our electric power resources and in the industrial use of such power to enhance our productive capacity.

Not so long ago, an English paper published a paragraph which reads as follows:

“If our children are going to produce twice as much as we do, they are not going to do it by working harder than we do or by being cleverer than we are but by having twice as many inanimate slaves to assist them. The way to plenty is to build up the national capital of machines, of buildings to house them, of power to drive them, and of communications between them.”

I am certain that the reason for the prosperity of other advanced countries and their enjoyment of more of the necessities, conveniences, comforts, and luxuries of modern life is their ability to produce more goods and services than the others. And the reason why they produce more is because their productive strength has-been multiplied enormously by what the writer previously referred to calls “inanimate slaves”—the power, the tools, and the machines of modern industry,—of which they have more than the other countries of the world per capita. They have ceased to depend, as we do largely still, on the physical efforts of human beings. So, among the urgent needs of our country is the development of its power resources mainly, its native water power and fuel, while at the same time we are equipping our workers with the tools and devices which, making use of that power, will produce wealth and goods for our people. In this undertaking, the government and private enterprise should join forces in a genuine spirit of cooperation, one being supplementary and complementary to the other.

Following the realization of this great need, the government as you all know, through the National Power Corporation has been undertaking a continuing accelerated program of construction of power facilities. Up to now, the National Power Corporation has completed or is in the process of completion 14 projects with a total capacity of about 170,000 ,KW, including the Caliraya-Lumot, the two units of Maria Cristina, Ambuklao, and several small projects with a total capacity of 220,000 KW. this will include the Binga in the Mt. Province and Marikina in Rizal to serve the increasing industrial loads of Manila and North and Central Luzon, the Maria Cristina No. 3 to provide additional cheap power for steel, fertilizer, and other electro-metallurgical and electro-chemical industries, and several small projects in Camarines Sur, Sorsogon, Bukidnon, Cebu, Oriental Negros, Basilan, Quezon, Leyte, and Davao to supply-the domestic uses and light and cottage industries in those areas. Within the next five years, the corporation is planning to start other projects totaling 120,000 KW more. All these projects are expected to meet the rapidly increasing demands of industry as well as the increasing utilization of electricity by the people in their daily lives.

Under its rural electrification program, the National Power Corporation is also presently installing transmission and distribution facilities in Central and Northern Luzon and in Laguna and Batangas which will form part of what in the future will be a huge power network to make available to consumers of electricity plenty of cheap reliable electric power. This program is pursued with the main objective of alleviating the living conditions in the rural areas. It will incidently provide the necessary power for light and medium industries and check the growing tendencies of too much overcrowding in the urban areas.

Thermal plants for areas uneconomical to supply with hydro power and for firming up existing hydroelectric units-to increase the latter’s utility, will also be built. It is for this phase of our country’s power development program that we have to rely largely on private enterprise, on members of your association, as patriotic Filipinos, to participate more actively and vigorously, using Filipino capital, technical know-how, and labor with the end in view of greater self-sufficiency and independence of this facet of our economic life which is so vital to our national interest.

Following the long established policy of the government, to give the fullest encouragement to private enterprise, the government has distributed its electric energy output through existing franchise holders. To the extent consistent with the welfare of the ultimate consumers, the government will certainly continue to sell its power output through the private electric operators for distribution by them. It will, therefore, be your responsibility to see to it that this plentiful supply of electricity are delivered to the consumers efficiently and at the lowest possible cost which will encourage their fullest utilization in productive undertakings.

I mentioned the item of cost deliberately. It is not enough that we should have plenty of electric power. It is likewise important that this power, to be useful as an instrument of production, is supplied to the ultimate consumers at the minimum cost possible. I am advised that the national average cost of power in the country is 6.9 centavos per kilowatt hour. Some systems charge much more than this figure. These rates are too high for our low income groups to meet, or to encourage competitive industrial use. We have to bring the rates down, and I will urge you to deliberate painstakingly on measures to bring down the rates.

The government, by utilizing to the fullest extent economical hydro-power resources, by lowering further the cost of financing, by systems interconnections, and effective coordination of hydro and thermal units, will do its part in bringing down the cost of power to the consumers. The power utilities, on the other hand, should cooperate in this regard and bring down their cost to the customers by more efficient operation, by discarding of units already uneconomical to operate, by improved management, by reduced overhead, and by application of more advanced technical methods. We will rely on the Public. Service Commission to supervise the distribution and retailing of government generated power by private franchise holders. Only in clear cases where franchises are abused against the public welfare, where electric rates remain unreasonably high, and where the public is mercilessly exploited, that the government will intervene and adopt other measures to protect the people.

As I stated a while ago, the electric power industry is a joint undertaking between the government and private enterprises. You have a large measure of the joint responsibility. In all ways possible and reasonable, you may rely on the government for assistance so that you may better discharge your end of the bargain. The Administration will bend all efforts to the end that you can get the power supply from the government at lowest rates consistent with the safety of the investment. I will see that you can secure the necessary dollar allocations for your valid requirements for important equipment and supplies. The Administration will see that you should be able to secure adequate credit accommodations from financial institutions at the lowest interest rates applicable. You can get technical assistance when needed.

It is a hopeless cause to make the high existing rates still higher. Private enterprises are entitled to reasonable profit but this should not be made by excessive rates, but rather by efficient service, economical operation, and expansion of markets—with low rates but large volume of sales.

In this manner you can serve your customers best and more than that you will be playing your important role in the development of our country effectively and well. In this manner, too, you can help maximize our multiplication of the productive capacity of our people by making available to them the millions of “inanimate slaves” that will do the work for us and make possible the rate of economic growth that we all aspire for.

Once again, I wish to commend you for your efforts and hope for your success in your deliberations.

I would like to conclude by saying that the people’s well-being is the supreme objective of the Administration. The private enterprises in this country supplying the people’s industrial power can grow bigger and stronger and more prosperous by the building up of more and bigger industries among the people which can be obtained only by cheap industrial power. I know the Philippine Electric Plant Operators Association will rise equal to the grand task of making the Philippines one of the biggest powers of Asia.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library