PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH UPON BEING AWARDED THE GRAND CROSS OF THE CHEMICAL SOCIETY OF PHILIPPINES, THURSDAY EVENING, JULY 24, 1958 AT THE MALACANANG SOCIAL HALL

IT IS a pleasure to be with this scientific group composed of the officers and members of the Chemical Society of the Philippines and other technical men. I am not a scientist or a chemist by profession like you, but I am aware of the myriad contributions of chemistry to the economic and social progress of mankind.

I would like to thank you for according me this privilege of addressing you today, more, so, for conferring on me this distinct honor, which as a layman in science, I may not be “too technically” deserving. However, in gladly and humbly accepting this “Grand Cross” award by your society, I wish to assure you that this Administration, under my patronage and guidance, will steadfastly give science its proper place in our economic and social development program in consonance with the constitutional mandate regarding the science promotion responsibility of the state and in attunement with the times.

As I have enunciated on several occasions in the past, starting with my inuagural address, and particularly in my talk at the opening of the 1958 National Science Week, I wish to reiterate here the deep concern of this administration in coordinating and accelerating scientific research and technological development so that their application, geared to the multifarious needs of our industry-oriented economy, can bring about beneficial results to the great mass of our people. With this new emphasis on science, we will strive to give better incentives for the promotion of science and for our scientists.

In this modern age, when significant events of global import are happening abroad, many of which are within the realms of scientific discoveries resulting from the work of scientists in their laboratories, we can not afford to lag behind. We must not only train and harness our scientific and technical manpower, but also utilize properly this know-how in order to exploit efficiently, as well as to conserve wisely our bountiful natural resources. Research and development, I admit, is an essential factor necessary to achieve this objective. Science controls the factors of civilization; sustains industries; generates wealth, health, peace, and security. Paradoxically, it can also bring havoc and desolation. I wish to speak on the constructive blessings of science which concern us most, not the destructive aspects.

Science and technology, properly directed and adequately sustained, are the keys to productivity and sufficiency. Productivity in all aspects of the nation’s economy should be the goal in national planning. It is gratifying to note that those of our countrymen in the scientific professions have continued to pledge their loyalty and support to the administration towards this end. It would be a worthy contribution to the progress of our country for us to accept the unending challenge of scientific inquiry and to explore the horizons of fundamental and applied research, in order to seek ways and means by which the needs of our fellowmen, basically involving food, clothing, shelter and medicinals, could be multiplied and made readily and cheaply available to them.

Premised on this truism, it will be timely to consider more seriously how the tools of modern science and technology now at our command can be dovetailed into our economic development scheme and, applying their proven potentialities, can facilitate increased production, particularly in food staples and consumer goods for our growing population.

In a broad sense, and considering our subject matter, we should endeavor to give due attention to the following aspects of our economic program: (1) coordination in the undertaking of more intensive industrial and agricultural researches according to a suitable program of priorities; (2) esablishment of new and necessary extractive industries; (3) development of our existing cottage or home industries; and (4) improvement of science training and education. In this pattern of scientific and technological promotion and advancement, each of the major operating segments—the government, private industry, scientific professions, and our colleges and universities—should pool resources and contribute their respective share.

The present administration has initiated steps to accelerate scientific and techonolgical research and development. Congress has been most cooperative in our efforts to reshape our agricultural economy into an agro-industrial economy that is backed up by a dynamically aggressive program of scientific research. We have now standing com­mittees on science in both Houses of Congress—the House Committee on Scientific and Technological Research and the Senate Committee on Scientific Advancement. Before my recent trip to the United States, I signed into law, R. A. 2067, known as “The Science Act of 1958,” which is now in the process of implementation. This law recognized the vital role of scientific and technological research in our economic progress, placing the status of science at par with other major activities of the nation. The Chairman of the new National Science Development Board created by this law is of Cabinet rank. I have recently appointed two technically qualified men, former Health Secretary Paulino Garcia and Weather Bureau Director, Casimirio del Rosario, chairman and vice-chairman, respectively, of this new science board. I need not dwell on the details of R. A. 2067, for I know that as scientist you have already perused the said law. I would like to cite, however, some of its salient points.

By virtue of this law, our existing scientific research agencies will be reorganized, particularly the Institute of Science and Technology, which will be recontituted into the National Institute of Science and Technology and the former Inter-Departmental Committee on Atomic Energy, into the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission. These two operating entities are placed under the administrative supervision of the 11-member National Science Development Board which replaced the former National Science Board previously created by R. A. 1606.

The National Institute of Science and Techonolgy will consist in the meanwhile of five research centers, namely: the Industrial, the Agricultural, the Biological, the Medical, and the Food and Nutrition Research Centers, aside from the usual service divisions necessary in the administration of the institute. With these research operating units and their respective compliments of inquisitive, energetic, and creative minds, we accept that the National Institute of Science and Technology will measure up in time to the goals for which we are reorganizing and expanding it. On the basis of his scientific training and long and devoted services as a career official in the government, I have pieced as Commissioner of this National Institute, Dr. Joaquin Marahon, with the equally prominent scientist, Dr. Canuto Manuel, to assist him as Deputy Commissioner.

The former inter-departmental committee on Atomic Energy has been converted and expanded by provisions of the Science Act into the Philippine Atomic Energy Commission under the National Science Development Board, in order to better meet our international commitment and to initiate studies and investigations in the new, important and rich field of atomic science. The Commission is authorized to initiate the establishment of laboratories for nuclear research and training, designed for the utilization of special nuclear and radio-active materials for commercial, industrial, medical, biological, agricultural, or other peaceful and economic purposes. I have appointed Colonel Medina as Commissioner and Engineer Afable as Deputy Commissioner of Atomic Energy, both of whom are distinguished and well-qualified scientists in the atomic energy field.

As you will note from the provisions of R. A. 2067, we have tried to draw up a bold program of undertaking a more intensive, coordinated and directed research in the fields that have close bearing to our more immediate needs and existing conditions. The funds initially needed to implement this science program, calculated as within our budgetary means, has been amply increased as compared with those of past administrations. The appropriations already allocated for the research projects assigned to eight science agencies and other future projects of the Board as provided for under R. A. 1606, amounting to about 13.6 million for a period of five years will continue “as is” to augment the fund currently appropriated for the reconstituted offices. It is expected that under this science act, research will be more productive because coordination rather than duplication in the undertaking of selected and carefully evaluated research projects will be adhered to.

Steps to improve science training and education have also been taken. The Department of Education, in cooperation with the former National Science Board, had started the “Youth Talent Search” in which selected bright and promising students will pursue courses in science, chemistry, or engineering at government expense. The Board of Na­tional Education had approved the revised curriculum for secondary schools giving stress to the teaching of mathematics and science subjects from first to fourth year.

Many of you in the scientific and technical professions have been sent abroad to pursue graduate studies, some to specialize or observe on fields along your particular line of work under the auspices of our government with the help of the government of friendly countries and U. N. agencies. The aid accorded our country in this regard, for which we are grateful, has greatly enlarged our reservoir of technical know-how.

It is also encouraging to note that Philippine industry has recognized the need for a more constructive teamwork ‘between research and production. A closer relationship now exists between government research agencies and private industrial establishments. The scientific bureaus under the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Institute of Science and Technology, and the Industrial Development Center, to cite a few, have, through their basic and applied research findings, their product-testing standardization and quality control, and their technical training and consultation services, substantially contributed to the growth and expansion of local industries. Manufacturing and mining alone, for instance, have contributed to the national economy ₱1,200 million in 1956, compared to ₱400 million in 1949. In agriculture, research has also generated an increase in the crop yield of our lands and forests.

Stepping-up of our export production is an important task in our endeavors for economic emancipation. To gain a measure of economic stability, a balance between our imports and exports should be established. There is an imperative need of prosecuting an industrialization program not only to turn out more finished commodities, for consumption and semi-processed raw materials for further fabrication, but also to provide new employment opportunities for the greater bulk of our unemployed.

While it is a healthy sign that our imports expanded by 5% since 1949 and our exports have similarly expanded by 74%, this expansion, however, in our export trade is hot yet adequate to cover the still higher level of total importation necessitated by our development needs. As I have mentioned in my state-of-the-nation address, I wish to stress again that the acceleration and diversification of our export trade could be greatly assisted by establishing research centers in strategic places, promoting market studies, improving the quality standards of our products, and increasing utilization of the by-products of our major industries. The rice, sugar, and coconut industries, for instance, await the hands and minds of scientists, not only to increase yield, but also to be able to process efficiently their wasted by products and find new industrial products therefrom. The Philippine chemical industry is still in its infancy, and opportunities in this area are great for our technical men and industrialists. If there is one item that we should continue to import or acquire from abroad that could be made dollar-producing, it is scientific and technical know-how, particularly processes and techniques of industrial research and instrumentation that can be readily applied to our raw materials. The positions of science attaches in our embassies abroad as provided for in the new Science Act can help us in this regard.

I have no doubts that the research and development program of this administration as a stabilizing factor in our economy will be successfully carried out in view of the availability of technically trained men and women like you who can be relied upon to help in the various steps of implementation.

As chemists, you have an important role to play in facilitating the diversification and improving the quality of our agro-industrial products. The chemical industry, though one of the younger industries in the world, is now the fastest growing industry. In the U. S. it ranks among the big three industrial giants. The applications of chemical knowledge have been as effective in increasing the efficiency of food production, as has mechanization. Chemical fertilizers, herbecides, fungicides, defoliants, insecticides, and other organic-based chemicals have been of considerable help to farmers. The modern applications of chemurgy in the processing and preservation of fruits, vegetables, meat, fish, and other food products are also of far-reaching significance to the world’s fish supply. It has been reported that almost forty per cent of chemical sales in the world market today is accounted for by products that did not exist fifteen years ago. Medicinal science, in its long search for a cure for the hitherto incurable malady, cancer, has made a promising start. Now, thanks to research, the goal is almost in sight. Dr. C. P. Rhodes, Director of the Sloan-Kettering Institute, biggest cancer research center in the U. S., recently stated at the colse of the seventh international cancer congress in London that cancer can be controlled by chemical means. In the Manila Times, daily magazine of July 17, 1958, Dr. Rhodes was reported as saying: “To talk of a pill for cancer eight years ago would have you labelled as a crackpot. Now, we have some pills. They are awful pills, but they are a start.”

These examples of remarkable chemical discoveries have been achieved primarily through the pioneering work of chemists.

In the golden pages of history are recorded the names of famous chemists, like Pasteur, Madame Curie, and others, side by side with statesmen and generals. If we honor them, it is because they have in their modest ways, contributed just as much, or perhaps more, to the peace, happiness, and well-being of humanity. The field of chemistry, indeed, offers opportunities for service as broad and rewarding as the challenge and fascination that characterize the dynamic and endless frontiers of science.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library