PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE GEORGETOWN ALUMNI ASSOCIATION, THURSDAY EVENING, JUNE 13, 1957, AT THE PHILPPINE COLUMBIAN CLUBHOUSE

FRIENDS OF THE GEORGETOWN ALUMNI ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I am very happy to join the host of friends and well-wishers of Archbishop Jose Maria Cuenco and Justice Delfin Jaranilla on the occasion of the Golden Anniversary of their graduation from Georgetown University. Both of these countrymen of ours have been rendering and are rendering distinguished service to the country, each in his respective line, and it is to the credit of their Alma Mater that both are serving as excellent exponents of the training, background, and ideals of Georgetown as well as inspiring example to our youth.

It is said that the life history of a human society is a series of challenges and responses, and to the extent that these responses are successful or unsuccessful the society either grows or disintegrates.

Different eras and epochs in world history have been marked by different challenges. Military power was once the decisive factor and the right of conquest was then the overriding rule among nations. Then came the era of the struggle for civic freedom and political democracy, ushered in by the American and the French revolutions. This era, we hope, was completed by the last two world wars and the liberation of most colonial peoples after the termination of the last war. Right now, as we examine the problems which vex the statesmen of the mid-twentieth century, the challenge seems to be the attainment of full economic progress. Never before has so much attention been given to the problems of economic development. Even the triumph or defeat of the contending ideologies seems to rest on the outcome on the economic battlefield.

What is this economic challenge insofar as the Philippines is concerned? In the most simple terms, we can say that the challenge consists of how to raise the standard of living of the great masses of our people to the highest possible level, commensurate with our resources, both human and material, and at the shortest possible time.

The term “standard of living” is very often used, and yet one wonders whether it is often fully understood. In the first place, it is not something that can be decreed by edict or by legislative enactment. Neither is it to be confused with monetary wages; if it were to be merely reckoned in monetary terms, it is easy enough to raise the supply of money without improving the real standard of living.

Reckoning in real terms, the standard of living must be considered as the resultant dividend when the national income is distributed among the members of a nation. Here we meet two concepts, quite distinct and yet very often confused; namely, national income which is the sum total of goods and services and the distribution of that aggregate national income. These bring forth two entirely different targets for national policy; namely, (1) the equalization of the distribution of the national income, and (2) the incrimination of the national income.

When the distribution of the national income is unreasonably uneven, a higher standard of living might be attained by measures designed to obtain a more even distribution. But often, no amount of redistribution can improve the per capital dividend when the sum total of the national income is in itself inadequate. In the Philippines, with our rapidly growing population, a redistributory policy will not be enough without an increase in the aggregate national income.

Undoubtedly, aside from windfalls in the form of foreign aid, benevolent gifts and the like, and the consumption of durable consumption goods, national income is the counterpart of, or the reward for, current production. Here the term “production” should not be viewed solely in the tangible form; such as, so many tons of copra, so many cavanes of rice, or so many board feet of lumber. Rather we should consider production under the more comprehensive term of the creation of utilities. This is a subtle term but a most interesting one. When iron ore is extracted from an iron mine, a certain utility has been created; namely, the raw iron ore. If the ore were to be processed into pig iron, we shall have added an additional utility. If the steel were to be processed into some form of semi-finished article, the weight of the material may not have increased, and yet more utility will have been added. If the steel is further processed and converted into a machine, physically the weight might still be the same and yet the utility created will have been much greater. Productive power, or productivity, is therefore the capacity to create utilities or the ability to satisfy human wants.

It is realized that there are determinant factors that control a nation’s productive power. Aside from the God-given natural resources, a nation’s productive power is mainly conditioned by its stock of capital and the temperament and character of its people.

Modern production is highly technological; the use of an increasing proportion of capital goods is of its essence. Savings to permit capital creation is indispensable if we are to increase our country’s productive power.

But ultimately, the productive power of the country is determined by the temperament and character of its people. There should be a reorientation to stimulate a higher degree of creativity among the population. National talents should be directed solely into the enjoyment of living. The change should be towards the development of a national passion to do things rather than to merely enjoy them. There should be developed a higher national propensity to introduce innovations in productive processes, continually improving their efficiency by applying newly discovered scientific truths, and in the long run aim at a national propensity to develop fundamental science by more scientific research institutions.

The choice must be made. Either a nation must follow an indulgent, complacent national pattern—this will be pleasant and carefree but inevitably will lead to stagnation and economic backwardness. Or it must choose to follow the path for an aggressively creative attitude—this would mean an effortful, perhaps a hard way of life, but rich and most rewarding.

I bring these thoughts to you in the hope of interesting you as leaders of the community and as illustrious sons of that great institution—Georgetown University of Washington, D. C.—to follow closely the issues and problems of our country and to contribute your share towards their solution. Our country is embarked upon a program of development aimed to raise the living standards of the greatest number of our population, particularly in the rural sector. We see in this development the basis for a stable democracy nourished in freedom and in respect for the human personality. It will be bigger as we participate freely and generously in understanding its problems and opportunities, and as we do our share of productive effort.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library