Friends:

I AM glad that you have chosen “marketing of sugar” as the theme of your sixth national congress. For indeed, if we do not improve on our position in the United States and on our domestic market, let alone expand to newer fields, I dare say the future of the sugar industry does not look attractive.

I intend to follow your proceedings closely and study the resolutions that you will pass and use them as guides in the charting of our sugar industry.

Price-wise, the world market offers us very little incentives. World sugar production threatens to surpass world sugar demand. And more often than not, world sugar prices have always been lower than our actual production costs. And our national financial position at the moment cannot possibly subsidize the industry to enable it to compete favorably in the free world market.

Unless we can drastically slash our production costs, increase our yields per unit area to the maximum, and at the same time bring down our production costs to competitive levels, there is very little hope for us to compete with other exporting countries blessed with more ideal climate conditions and with more advanced methods of scientific production.

The better part of wisdom and present prevailing conditions therefore would limit us to our preferred position in the United States and in our own domestic market.

However, I believe, we must first try to help ourselves. Greater consumption of domestic sugar should be encouraged. Sound marketing techniques should be employed towards this end. Our per capita consumption is still staggeringly low. The sugar industry as a whole should exert all efforts to bring domestic sugar prices realistically within the reach of the average earner, because, I for one, have never understood why our people pay more for domestic sugar than foreign consumers pay for our export production.

The bright prospects of our sugar industry lies in the American market where our products enjoy a premium. However, unless sugar bills now before the American congress are amended to provide an increase in the Philippine sugar quota, our sugar industry may well resign to a fixed allotment of 980,000 tons.

There are moves in the United States Congress to make permanent the Sugar Act of 1948 as amended. If enacted, the proposed legislation will indifinitely freeze the Philipine sugar quota under the Sugar Act of 1948 as amended in 1956.

Since United States sugar consumption increases yearly and is in fact estimated at 9,200,000 short tons by the Secretary of Agriculture for 1959, the percentage proportion of the Philippines in the total supply of the United States annually diminishes so that, this year, it will be only 10.65 per cent and proportionately lower thereafter as against 15.41 per cent prior to 1946 and 11.74 per cent as contemplated in 1956.

There should be a concerted effort by all sectors of the industry to secure an increasing Philippine participation in the United States market, for here lies our sugar future.

The validity of our request may be supported by the following:

(1) We explicitly went on record when we signed our Trade Agreement with the United States that the establishment of a fixed amount of Philippine raw sugar to enter the United States for consumption shall not be prejudicial to increases which the United States Congress might allocate to the Philippines thereafter;

(2) When President Eisenhower approved H. R. 7030, which amended and extended the Sugar Act of 1948, he said in part:

“It was not considered feasible to recommend an increase in the Philippine quota at this time (1956). I believe, therefore, that when new amendments are being prepared at the conclusion of this act, consideration should be given to allowing the Philippines to share in increased consumption as is now provided for other foreign countries by this bill; and

(3) The reliability of the Philippines as a military ally in the free world defense set-up, particularly in Southeast Asia, depends largely on the strength and soundness of her internal and external economy. The present investment in the Philippine sugar industry is estimated at ₱1.5 billion with approximately three million people depending on sugar for their livelihood, not to mention banks, insurance, shipping, and other commercial institutions that have a large stake in the business. And there is no denying the fact that our national economy depends largely on a steady sugar income.

These arguments and many others should be marshalled and vividly presented to the United States Congress. Planters and Central operators should join cause and, in a unified move, convince members of the United States Congress of the merit and equity of the Philippines’ request.

For my part, I pledge the resources of this administration behind such a move. And I have already instructed our ambassador to the United States, General Carlos P. Romulo, to leave no stone unturned in the fight for an increasing Philippine sugar quota.

At this juncture, allow me to call on all our sugar planters in particular and landowners in general. Of late, there has been rumblings in the sugar plantations regarding the treat-merit and payment of sacada labor. I will not pass judgment on any case.

I plead, however, for more human understanding and tolerance. Our poor brothers who toil under the hot sun planting, cultivating, and harvesting our sugar canes deserve all human understanding.

Limited in education, less fortunate in life, these brothers should participate in whatever windfall that might come across the sugar industry.

I am distressed by reports of mistreatment of sacada labor. Some reports, I feel, are exaggerated. I cannot believe that, in this modern age and in this decade of social enlightment, there are still hangers on of a lost feudalistic cause. I cannot believe that there are still those brand of planters who would not be content to reap from the toils of the downtrodden laborer but would even rob him of a meager pay through usury and other forms of subtle theft.

Our arguments in America will carry more weight if we can successfully prove that the first beneficiaries of any increase in the Philippine share of United States sugar consumption will be large numbers of laborers. The United States Government favors measures which are likely to benefit the maximum number of people.

And viewed from our own local perspective and in the light of our unending struggle against an alien ideology, our nation will be better equipped to meet the enemy if the mass of our citizenry is happy and contented.

What good will a stable sugar market do for us, if the industry is wrecked by acute internal labor pains? What benefits will high sugar prices mean to a planter with unharvested furrows and burned out canefields? What good will all the wealth in the world bring if our country is enslaved by Godless ideology ushered in by grievance and discontent?

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia before the sixth National Congress of Sugar Producers. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(13) , 2228-2230.