Distinguished guests, the Board of Directors and members of the Philippine Trade Unions Council:

This is my second address to the working people, and as in the first, I have endeavored to use the National Language once more so that you may feel that you are all connected to my breath and close to my heart.

I greet you all on the occasion of the celebration of the fourth year of this gathering and I hope that your convention will be successful.

On this day as well, the entire Filipino Nation celebrates the birth of the great leader of our race, the father of our freedom and the first President of our Nation, Manuel L. Quezon. Therefore, on this day, I, your President, remember all the times of my term to propagate the principle of “social justice” of Quezon for the welfare and happiness of all workers in our Nation.

Last year, the great leader of our nation, the idol of the poor and the unfortunate, President Magsaysay, was your guest. Now, I, your President, swear to continue all the principles of Ramon Magsaysay, especially his embrace of the Working People—until true happiness that this government can bring is passed on to you.

These days, as the election nears, all candidates are facing you and promising even the heavens and the stars just to get your vote. There is a candidate who is a ruthless capitalist but has the audacity to say that he loves the worker. There is also a candidate who is a lawyer for big capital but is now pro-worker.

I trust in your intelligence; you know your true friend and you also know your enemy.

I do not need to make promises. My service to our government for 30 years is an open book that the nation can examine. I want you to judge me, not by what I might say but by what I have done for the benefit of all of you. As your President, I enacted three Laws of our Congress—laws for the benefit of all of you, and those are the Social Security Act, Apprenticeship System Act, and 40 Hours a Week Act.

You may ask, my friends, what are the guiding principles of my administration with respect to labor. In a nutshell, I shall enumerate these principles:

1. Our Constitution provides “That the State should afford protection to labor.” My administration shall provide all the necessary protection to labor within the bounds of reason.

2. My administration shall encourage and defend the healthy growth of legitimate and democratic trade unionism in our country, and as a corrolary to this, I shall not only discourage but I shall bust the formation and existence of company unions in the Philippines.

3. Capital and labor are not antagonistic forces in our social order, but each should regard the other as a friendly partner in the economic growth of our nation; and to this end, my administration shall be dedicated to the creation of a healthy atmosphere for a sound labor-management relation.

4. Labor should be given a chance, to participate actively in the conduct of the affairs of the government, and for this reason, I shall continue with my avowed policy of appointing representatives of labor to membership in the different boards of our government corporations and other agencies and instrumentalities of our government.

5. The betterment of the lot of labor shall not only mean protection to the employed, but more so to the sector of our population who belong to the unemployed, and to this end, I will gear all the available resources under our command, to immediately implement a bold economic program designed to wipe out unemployment within the next four years.

6. My administration shall adhere to the well-accepted principle of voluntary conciliation. In case of a labor dispute, I will not countenance the intervention of the Department of Labor nor the Court of Industrial Relations, until the parties to the dispute shall have explored all possible avenues for a peaceful and voluntary conciliation.

7. In line with the fundamental principle “that justice delayed is justice denied,” it is the policy of my administration to accelerate the early termination of labor cases in our courts and the speedy adjudication of claims of laborers for workmen’s compensation, employer’s liability, overtime wages, etc., in the Department of Labor.

8. My administration shall afford all the necessary facilities of our government for the training of responsible labor leaders, but certainly, my administration shall not countenance the exploitation of the ranks and file of labor by demagogues and racketeers.

9. The Armed Forces and police agencies will be called upon only to preserve order in a strike area, but my administration shall not and cannot tolerate the use of these forces to break up a legitimate strike or peaceful picketing.

10. The migration of Filipino laborers overseas shall receive the sympathetic support of my administration, but the same shall be subject to the condition that they will be afforded the same benefit and privileges given by the host nation to their own workingmen.

The principles I mentioned, I will uphold while I am President of our nation with my firm belief that these will bring peace and happiness to your lives.

There are so many problems we are facing now. For the past four months that I have been leading our Government, my hands are full of the problems of our nation. But this does not weaken my spirit, rather my spirit is strong to face these problems, because I know that the Almighty is guiding me, and my fellow countrymen are behind me. This is enough for me to tell you now, that we cannot fail and we will surely succeed.

Before I finish, please allow me to greet and thank you all.

Help me and I will help you.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech before the Philippine Trade Unions Council, Monday noon, August 19, 1957, at the National Press Club Building. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(16) , 5168-5171.