Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Upon being conferred the Grand Cross, Knights of Rizal

[ Delivered at the Manila Hotel, February 20, 1958 ]

FELLOW KNIGHTS OF RIZAL, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM deeply grateful to the Knights of Rizal for the signal honor of conferring upon my humble self the Knight Grand Cross of the organization which, in this case, is the highest award within its power to confer. Since my youth, I have been a great admirer of Rizal, drawing inspiratin from his many-faceted genius in the performance of the difficult tasks that destiny has given to me to perform. I assure you fellow Knights of Rizal, that this honor I have received tonight will serve to inspire me further in serving our country in a period of difficulties.

Jose Rizal is truly the universal genius of our race. In his writings—in his extensive correspondence, essays and novels—he has planted, the seed of every thought of national importance that we have since cultivated, charished, and protected both in peace and in war. Rizal is indeed the fountainhead of our people’s inspiration, faith, and hope in themselves and their destiny.

There is no sector of worthwhile individual and national endeavor upon which Rizal has not left his imprint. He was deeply concerned in the nation’s agricultural, industrial, and commercial progress. The entire spectrum of social and economic well-being meritted his conscientious study and thought. But among the most farsighted, the most imaginative, and the most democratic ideas he planted in his lifetime for Filipino posterity to harvest, those aimed at the general improvement of the masses, stand out like giant molaves among small trees.

Rizal was the father of social justice in our country, Every aspect of our present program of mass uplift was a facet of his deed and dream for the common man. For the common man he envisioned better schooling, sturdier health, broader economic opportunities, greater .rights and dignity, higher social development, and more substantial participation in his government.

Aside from farthering our social justice, Rizal also dreamed of our industrialization. In his novel El Filibusterismo Rizal, speaking through Isagani, said: “Ah yes, the future is ours! I see it rose-tinted; I see the movement that stirs the life of these regions so long dead, lethargic. I see towns rise along the railroads, and factories everywhere, edifices like that of Mandaloyan! I hear the steam hiss, the trains roar, the engines rattle! I see the smoke rise—their heavy breathing; I smell the oil—the sweat of monsters busy at incessant toil . . .!”

Not only did he think deeply and write constantly of these matters but in the end he converted his undeserved exile in Dapitan into a practical demonstration of the need and feasibility of his ideas. Out of that lonely place of captivity, he lovingly built a model community with roads, irrigation system, piped water, school, medical clinic, park, and other modern community facilities. Dapitan was his eloquent reply to those who refused to listen to his ideas of reform: with good will and hard work, the entire Philippines could be built into a progressive Dapitan.

On this occasion, however, I believe that, by way of showing how far was his vision and how vast was his hope for his country and his people, it will suffice to trace one of Rizal’s basic social ideas through our history to the present time.

Land for the landless, an idea culled from Rizal’s writings, became one of the strongest motivations and the loudest battlecries of the revolution against Spain. Before the storm and the deluge, thoughtful Filipinos like Rizal had hoped merely for peaceful reforms in this respect. When petitions and memorials did not suffice, hawever, land reform became one of the great sparks that ignited the fires of revolution. And even when peace was forced upon the revolutionary armies, as a result of their inferior arms and training and in the face of constant military reinforcements from Madrid, the Pact of Biak-na-Bato included the return of the land to the people as one of the reforms pledged by the Motherland.

In the interregnum between the two great waves of the revolution, the terms of the Pact were forgotten. When, as as an incident of the Spanish-American War, the American forces reached the Philippines, the promised reforms seemed to have been completely lost. For sometime it appeared that Rizal, Bonifacio, del Pilar, and the other heroes of the nation had died in vain.

It was not so! In the democratic mind of America, the ideas and ideals of Rizal found a natural soil in which to germinate and proliferate. This fact was clearly evident in the Philippine Bill of 1902. Although there was very little if any Filipino intervention in the enactment of that law, since our leaders of that timewere obsessed by the thought of annexing the Philippines to the United States, it included Rizal’s idea of land reform.

The act of the American Congress provided for the purchase of the frair lands by the Philippine Government. To finance the purchase, it authorized .the sale of American Government-guaranteed Philippine Government bonds here and in the United States. And to consummate the purchase, the Civil Governor, the Hon. William Howard Taft, made a special trip to Rome to conduct negotiations with no less than the Pope. The purchase of the friar lands for re-sale in smaller parcels to Filipinos was the first great step in the actual implementation of Rizal’s dream.

Given its initial impetus by Taft, the land reform became a major government policy during the leadership of Sergio Osmeña and Manuel L. Quezon. Gradually, it also broadened to the proportions of Rizal’s original concept of mass improvement. It was under the Commonwealth that such related reforms as the minimum wage law, the eight-hour labor law, and other mass-uplifting legislation reinforced the work of land redistribution and came to be identified as “social justice.” The purchase of haciendas to be subdivided and sold was directly supplemented by the opening of virgin lands for the resettlement of families, and among the most successful of these new communities carved out of the wilderness was Koronodal.

Under the late President Ramon Magsaysay, the program of mass uplift anchored on land reform was greatly broadened and expanded. Not only was the acquisition of big landed estates for subdivision and redistribution accelerated under the Land Tenure Act, but many supplementary efforts were undertaken under a program that aimed to make every Philippine rural community measure up to Rizal’s Dapitan. Artesian wells, irrigation systems, barrio roads, barrio schools, mobile health clinics, agricultural experts, public works engineers, rural physicians and dentists, and many other boons first dreamed of by Rizal became common sights and sounds. Only financial limitations conditioned the extent and intensity of the. efforts to improve the lot of our masses.

This administration is resolved to continue and, if possible, accelerate and expand the rural uplift of our worthy’ predecessor. This resolve is buttressed not only by bur desire to keep faith with Rizal and the other patriots who made the supreme sacrifice that our people may rise from degradation and poverty to dignity and prosperity it is also dictated by our loyalty to democracy, that kind of government which alone permits the respect for human rights and the observance of human dignity for which Rizal died that his people may live to enjoy.

When the space era just emerging reaches its full development, it may be that man will be emancipated from his present complete dependence on tierra firma. It may be that man will then live in homes orbitting in space; it may be that food will no longer have to come out of earth’s soil but from now-unknown materials and substances in space; it may be that other planets, once interplanetary travel has become an ordinary accomplishment, will offer greater and healthier living conditions. Even so, it will take generations before the material and sentimental value of land ownership on earth will wear out—if ever. Without, therefore, shutting our eyes to possible future develpoments, we should, in our time and in our world, continue without let-up with our efforts to improve the lot of our masses the Rizal way.

We shall more particularly proceed with the work of giving land to the landless. The possession of a plot of ground as a family anchorage is a condition most conducive to peace and order, civic consciousness, democracy, and love of country. To this condition, for instance, the fierce patriotism of the French masses is attributed. And it is easily understandable. Where a man has a visible and tangible stake in his own country—a stake that constitutes his own palpable and measurable share of his Motherland to protect and cherish unto death—he can be depended upon to uphold peace and order, to be industrious, to possess strong social and political instincts, and to love his fellowmen and his country.

Jose Rizal has won his cherished place in our hearts and in the heart of the world because of his great and humane vision. The more we search for his recorded thoughts, the more we scrutinize his theories and principles of citizenship and nation-building, the more we discover the sturdy seeds of individual and personal progress and greatness. Your group is the particular custodian of the wealth of humane ideas and ideals that are Rizal’s. You are fortunate in the honor of this task, yet you must also realize the heavy responsibility that you have assumed.

You, gentlemen, are Knights of Rizal; you have sworn abiding loyalty to his ideals; you have promised to dedicate yourselves to their propagation and triumph. It will be mere presumption on my part to try and tell you how best to carry out your sworn commitments. I shall therefore limit myself to urging you to translate your oath into a positive, living reality.

By this I do not mean that you should stop your profound studies of Rizal’s works and times: this you must continue to do. I do not mean that you should stop writing about Rizal: with this you must go forward. I do not mean that you should cease communing with the great hero and patriot in thought and contemplation: this you must carry on.

But I dare say that a Rizal Knighthood should partake of the pure courage and of the deep sense of mission among the Knights of King Arthur’s Round Table. It should embody Rizal’s selflessness, fearlessness, and practicableness. Every Rizal Knight should, I believe, perform a “Dapitan” by applying to the life around him, as Rizal did during his exile, the Rizal ideas and ideals.

And whenever any of you enters upon this precious and lucid moment, I hope that you will decide to do your positive deeds In the area of rural uplift. For if we can improve our rural communities in the way Rizal envisioned, we shall also have built a progressive, happy, and enduring Philippine nation.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library