Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines During a ‘Pass in Review’ by the Armed Forces in honor of their Commander-in-Chief’s 63rd birthday anniversary

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, November 4, 1959]

OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE ARMED FORCES:

FIRST of all, I wish to congratulate you once again for your magnificent display of soldiery as you passed in review. The precision with which you made every step and every turn speaks eloquently of your military training and, what is more important, it shows your high sense of mission and devotion to duty. This makes me particularly proud of the leadership in our Armed Forces today.

It is universally accepted that in peace as well as in war the Armed Forces of any nation is entrusted with the sacred duty of protecting the people’s freedom. This duty includes the defense of ideals and principles that are the fountainhead of that freedom.

As your Commander-in-Chief, I wish to make it clear once again that this duty entrusted to you is to the sovereign people and to no one else.

I accept therefore the renewal of your pledge of loyalty as President of our Republic in behalf of the 23 million Filipinos. In accepting this pledge of loyalty, I want to make it emphatically clear that it is your pledge of loyalty to our people that I accept. I also accept this pledge of loyalty in behalf of our people, convinced that such a pledge is spontaneous and without any taint of compulsion. Officers and men of the Armed Forces, I want you to know that if I had any doubt at all about the nature and spontaneity of your pledge of loyalty, I would have outright rejected it. This is my concept of loyalty for the Armed Forces.

Against the backdrop of this renewal of your pledge of loyalty, I shall discuss with you very briefly and frankly one of the most delicate tasks you are presently being asked to perform—the task of assisting the Commission on Elections in ensuring a peaceful, orderly, and clean elections. At the very outset, I wish to underscore the fact that you are merely called upon to assist the proper civilian government entity, the Commission on Elections, in the discharge of its duty of conducting and supervising the national elections. As such, your actuations must be within the framework laid down by the Commission.

You are being asked specifically to ensure a free movement of the nation’s qualified voters, in the exercise of their right of suffrage on election day. Remember that you are to insure a free movement of all qualified voters regardless of party affiliation. It becomes clear, therefore, that the greatest crime you can commit is to show partiality to one group over another.

The other equally important task you have been asked to perform is to provide security of the various installations designated by the Commission on Elections, and this includes security of the people’s precious treasure—their ballots inside the ballot boxes. This is indeed a sacred task and its importance cannot be over-emphasized. I expect you to guard it with your life if needs be. As your Commander-in-Chief, I urge you to do no less.

In the discharge of this kind of duty, it would be normal for you to expect roadblocks in variegated forms as you proceed with your assigned mission. You will be wooed, intimidated, and subjected to the normal pressures attendant in any electoral contest. I urge you to resist any pressure or influence which may be exerted on you by any one. I want to assure you my support for any action you have to take in furtherance of your mission. This assurance includes my support to you regardless of party affiliation. Do not waver in what you think and judge to be a correct action just because the offender is a member of the Nacionalista Party to which I belong. I want you to discharge your duties fairly, justly, and fearlessly.

The eyes of our people and, if I may add, the rest of the world, will surely watch your performance with keen interest in this your peacetime mission. The successful and effective accomplishment of your mission will certainly increase our stature as a young and growing Republic. It will surely increase the faith of our own people and those of our friends abroad in the efficacy of our Philippine democracy. It will also serve as a warning to the Communists in this country and their comrades abroad that our free institutions have become the bulwark of freedom and shall not be shaken even by the subtlety of Communist blandishments.

Should you fail or even fall short of the expectations of our people, you will have weakened not only our governmental structure but our way of life. Freedom as we know it today will become meaningless. We shall be held suspect by our friends abroad while the enemies of our Republic shall rejoice, as your failure will be exploited to the maximum for their own evil purposes.

Indeed, your task is sacred. You cannot afford to fail I am confident you will not fail. Remember you have a glorious past to uphold. Let not those who have come before you point an accusing finger at you for having failed.

In passing, may I take this opportunity of announcing to you my approval of the recommendation of your Chief of Staff and the Secretary of National Defense to implement Republic Act No. 1831, providing for the payment of salary differential to the enlisted personnel. I want you to know that I shall continue to look with favor any proposal for the welfare of the personnel of the Armed Forces, particularly the enlisted personnel who constitute the backbone of our Armed Forces.

Finally, my friends, as a parting message and in response to your pledge of loyalty to our people, may I ask you to do your utmost in the various tasks we as a young nation must do. Have faith in your leaders; have faith in our people; have faith in our free institutions; have faith in your own ability to contribute your just share in the healthy growth of our national life.

Mrs. Garcia joins me in thanking you all for your kind felicitations on my birthday anniversary. You have made me much happier.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). The President’s speech at Camp Murphy during a ‘Pass in Review’ held by the Armed Forces in honor of their Commander-in-Chief on the occasion of his 63rd birthday anniversary, November 4, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(45) , 9424-9426.