Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before a symposium on Communism

[Delivered at the Session Hall of the House of Representatives on June 2, 1960]

I am deeply gratified to note that there are many far-sighted and dedicated men in the community, such as you of the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement, who have involved themselves zealously in the struggle against the forces of tyranny. This symposium you sponsored once more focuses the nation’s attention on one of the most vexing of our contemporary problems—the fight against Communism. The preservation of our way of life depends on how well we all accept ourselves in this crucial struggle.

I am further gratified by the organization of an anti-Communist movement in Asia, in which you perform a role. This joint Asian Anti-Communist effort is an answer to the shift of Communist expansionist attention to this area by exploiting the Asian aspirations for freedom, dignity, and national identity.

Communist encroachments in Asian countries assume frightening proportions when taken in context with the overall Red drive now feverishly in progress in all parts of the world. The collapse of the recent Summit talks was but one of the preconceived designs in the overall Soviet blueprint to divide the free world. As indicated by latest world developments, the Communist block will continue to make the most out of the Summit fiasco to keep the Western powers off-balance and the small nations confused.

The situation evidently demands an equally massive defense on the part of the free world; it demands for this region the forging to maximum strength of the political, economic, and sociological bonds of international cooperation. Our efforts must find a base of strength, which lies in no less than a common purpose and a collective effort of all Asian peoples. There is hardly any alternative to this, for to survive this ideological conflict we must ardently safeguard the growth of our nationhood within the framework of cooperation and trust among like-minded nations. The effectivity of the defense of free nations must be derived mainly from their united strength. It behooves, therefore, the free peoples of Asia to contribute fully to this end.

It would like at this point to call attention to the inspiring example of Nationalist Chine, our steadfast ally in the North, which I had the good fortune to visit last month. Perhaps no nations in the world has undergone anything comparable to the travails and vicissitudes of China in her search for unity, peace, and freedom; yet the most impressive reality which struck me during my visit to that country is the overwhelming passion of the Chinese people on Taiwan, under President Chiang Kai-shek’s masterful leadership, to restore the regime of freedom and democracy on the Chinese mainland. Every effort and every activity on the part of the Nationalist Chinese government and her people has been geared to attain that one grand objective.

The stirring example of Nationalist China is indeed a source of inspiration to fighters against Communism everywhere.

For our part, we must not allow ourselves, in our search for the well-being and happiness of our people, to be distracted by Communist efforts at subdivision and conspiracy to threaten our national security. Our country must not relax its campaign against local or international Communism.

The record of the Administration in the Anti-Communist struggle humbly speaks for itself. I need not burden you with an account of achievements on this matter. I must, however, reaffirm that in both our domestic and foreign policies—as indicated by the intensified anti-subversion campaign and the strengthening of our alliances with Asian and Western countries through the SEATO and bilateral partnerships—our democratic orientation has ever remained stoutly unyielding. We have formulated and implemented on our own initiative and with the cooperation of friendly countries, measures for our security from internal and external threats; we have tapped our intellectual, physical, and moral resources, as befitting an independent and sovereign nation, towards creating an atmosphere of peace and normalcy which our people now enjoy.

Needless to say, the strongest argument against the Communist movement lies in the vigor and wholesomeness of the democratic way of life. So long as general contentment and prosperity prevail in the land, the success of any subversion effort remains remote. It is consequently a major objective of the present Administration of our country. In this connection it should be understood that the requirements of Philippine progress demand emancipation of our national economy. This is a simple, incontrovertible aspiration of our people or any people for that matter. We have therefore made nationalism the starting point of our approach to our country’s problems, because it is a basic political verity that a nation cannot progress without nationalism and unity.

We have to forge unity at the roots because we need a firm national foundation on which may grow in stature and respectability the edifice of our friendship with other countries. Such is our motive in adopting nationalism as a fundamental policy of my administration.

That the local Communist activity has ridden on the crest of our nationalist movement does not nullify the wisdom of our policy. The Communist, organization has merely recognized the expediency of nationalism as a handy propaganda line. In reality, the so-called “internationalism” preached by the Reds is a purely opportunistic undertaking, a deceitful facade designated to undermine the very foundations of our national stability. A careful scrutiny of a recently captured Communist document reveals their real objectives. This document overworks the same old line of bitterly assailing the actuations of “imperialists” as represented by the United States and other Western powers, while highly extolling the “progressivism” of the Soviet Union. This document further shows that while the Communists in the country profess “nationalism,” they actually aim not to reform but to disturb and topple over the existing order.

My friends, the task you of the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement have voluntary and selflessly assumes, is not easy. As anti-Communist crusaders, you will often be beset by a terrifying sense of loneliness in a wide sea of public complacency and skepticism. More often than not your motives will be distorted to suit cynical purposes; and your activities may be misunderstood by the very people whom you seek to defend.

In the face of these odds, you have to steadfastly forge ahead, unmindful of criticism and other temporary deterrents. A weakening on your part might serve as the long-awaited signal for the sinister forces of totalitarianism to close for the kill.

The country needs you as a motive force. Fired by your determination and enthusiasm, and your government serving as a rallying point, the Filipino people will reimbibe the strength and indomitable spirit which have always sustained them in times of stress and danger. For the sake of our children, our whole nation, in concert with the other free nations of the world, must unite in fighting this atheistic ideology.

It is my earnest hope that this symposium would help remove the doubts of our people regarding the stark reality of the Communist threat that imperils our very existence today, and rekindle in their breast the militant spirit that bound us together and saved us in our days of adversity in the past. The inherent strength of the Filipino people, which has sustained them in their darkest hour, is perhaps best described by General Douglas MacArthur, who, in reply to an intelligence report I transmitted to him from Bohol in May 1943 stated . . . “It is cause for immense personal satisfaction for me to observe the indomitable spirit manifested by so many of her people that is guiding the Philippines through her present tragic hour that this spirit of unswerving devotion to the principles of human liberty, in defense of which our service is jointly dedicated, is responsive in no small degree to exemplary leadership and inspiring example at a time never more needed than now.

It is the same indomitable spirit to which MacArthur referred that we need at the moment. It is the same leadership and example that you of the Philippine Anti-Communist Movement should provide to carry us over victoriously in our fight against Communism. Devoted as you are in the task before you, and God willing, I know that you cannot and must not fail.

I thank you.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library