THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH ON THE LAUNCHING OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL RED CROSS FUND CAMPAIGN, AT MALACAÑANG, FEBRUARY 14, 1958

FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

WE ARE launching this years’ Red Cross appeal for funds against a background of austerity through which we are confident we can tide over our country to prosperity.

Be this at it may, I am confident that austerity or no austerity, our people will gladly respond to the call of the Red Cross, for everybody knows that there is no austerity in human suffering. As a matter of fact, suffering never takes a “day off” and the work of mercy never ends.

Hence, the Red Cross must be constantly sustained in its task of mitigating suffering, and the difficulties which the country undergoes today should not in any manner adversely affect the success of this year’s PNRC appeal. The present conditions are precisely the conditions which demand unremitting prosecution of welfare services. At no other times has Red Cross work meant more to so many of our people than now.

I call upon all to lend unqualified support to the Red Cross appeal, knowing as we do that if the welfare needs of the less privileged are successfully met, there emerges a stronger nation, better equipped to contribute to the productive effort.

I invoke the magnanimity of all citizens and residents of this country and all civic associations and charitable organizations to help actively in this campaign by giving generously of their time and effort to have the objectives of the Red Cross realized.

I hereby authorized all national, provincial, city, and municipal officials and school authorities to accept fund-raising responsibilities for the Red Cross and I appeal to them to take the initiative and participate in active leadership in their respective communities.

In this Red Cross fund campaign I find a new challenge to which we all are equal—a challenge to our individual capacities, a challenge to our ability as a nation to provide for community needs occasioned by inevitable calamities which scourge wide areas and afflict so many of us daily.

Let us all arise as one to meet this challenge, each one shouldering bravely the share of the burden that befalls him yet sharing the fulfillment of a responsibility, we owe to God, our country, and our people. It is my great privilege to declare open the 1958 Red Cross National Fund Campaign by presenting to the Honorary Chairman of the drive (my First Lady) a humble token of my sharing with you this campaign, the sum of one thousand pesos.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library