PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE JOINT BUSINESS GROUPS OF NEW YORK CITY DELIVERED AT 8:00 P.M., TUESDAY, JUNE 24, NEW YORK TIME (9:00 A.M., JUNE 25, MANILA TIME)

MY FRIENDS:

I COME to your great city of New York to convey to you warm greetings from your 23 million Filipino friends. On their behalf, let me express deep appreciation for the honor you have accorded me on this occasion where the leaders in business, industry, and finance of the capital of the world in business are gathered.

While I am overwhelmed by your hospitality and overawed by the grandeur of your city, I feel at home here for I see around me familiar faces of friends of the Philippines who have identified themselves with our country and are interested in our future.

Now, why must the United States be interested in Asia and particularly in the Philippines? Because the United States is the leader of the Free World and the events in Asia will decide whether American leadership wins or loses. Because the Philippines has chosen to cast its lot with the United States and our success is vital to America’s prestige in that section of the world.

What are America’s stakes in Asia? American investment in Asia doubled in seven years from $400 million in 1951 to $800 million today—your own department of commerce estimates. This constitutes only about 4 per cent of the total American investment abroad. Set against the backdrop of the dynamic changes taking place in the Far East with the rebuilding of war-ravaged economies, the emergence of new nations and the race for industrialization and economic development, this investment is meager in­deed. It is clear that opportunities are not being availed of to develop the long run relationship which would be mutually profitable to both Asians and Americans.

I need not tell you that Asia supplies two-thirds of your tin, almost all of your crude rubber, copra, and jute, and a large part of your sugar, tea, silk, and spices. Asia is also potentially a huge market for your trucks, tractors, machinery, electrical equipment, and fertilizers. Your trade with Asia has trebled in 10 years from $1 billion in 1948 to over $3 billion today. Your economic growth brings with it expanding need for raw materials which cannot be met without increases in productivity everywhere, including Asia, for the continued economic expansion of America. She must export capital and develop international trade.

These basic truths are fundamental to world progress. Politically, America as the leader of the Free world cannot afford to be indifferent to the political destiny of one billion Asians, particularly her friends and allies who have chosen the side of democracy visavis communism.

I need not remind you of the special ties and relation between our two countries—not only economic and cultural bonds but ideological as well. In 1956 we were the United States’ second largest trading partner in Asia and the 12th largest in the world. American investments in my country are estimated to be approximately $250 million. American cultural and political legacies to the Philippines are incalculable and imperishable. The Philippines is blessed with an abundance of natural resources. Spread out over a tropical archipelago of more than 7,000 islands are lush forests, valuable minerals, like gold, copper, silver, chromite, and some of the world’s richest iron and nickel deposits. There is an almost inexhaustible power potential possible from the harnessing of our many rivers and waterfalls. Our agricultural products of copra, sugar, and hemp are known and used far and wide.

Our people have a democratic way of life and have rejected and outlawed communism. Our labor force is the most highly educated in southeast Asia. Yet, in spite of our latent wealth we import a large portion of our essential needs. Our export earnings largely depend on four agricultural products which make us extremely vulnerable to inflation or recession whenever either affects our principal trading partners. Almost 40 per cent of our national income comes from agriculture yet we suffer from insufficient food production.

In addition, a growing population which now stands at 23 million as compared to 16 million shortly before the war makes it imperative to raise levels of production through industrialization and, consequently, to accelerate capital formation. However, like any underdeveloped country, we find ourselves in what economists describe as the vicious circle of poverty. This means that we cannot amass. enough capital because of low income to generate higher levels of income which in turn would enable us to amass more capital to generate still higher levels of income. Indeed as population increased without compensating growth in the economic system that sustained it, we could expect incomes to become more and more depressed and capital formation more and more difficult. In other words we would be faced not merely with economic immobility but even with economic retrogression.

To break out of the vicious circle might take more than present capital resources available within the economy. This is why external financing is an urgent need to the underdeveloped countries in their struggle for economic progress. Furthermore, any development program undertaken by an underdeveloped economy requires large initial expenditures of foreign exchange for the purchase of industrial machinery and certain raw materials. Thus the country’s earnings and holdings of foreign exchange would set an effective limit to any scheme of economic expansion.

It is an almost universal fact that an underdeveloped country’s exchange earnings through exports fall short of import requirements when economic development is pursued, resulting in balance of payments crises. Often the only antidote to prevent such ills from becoming chronic is the injunction of large doses of foreign capital in the form of loans, credits, and investments. One of the main objectives sought during my trip here is to secure external financing in the form of loans and credits for Philippine economic development, particularly for projects that will produce a favorable climate for the private industries. I would also like to interest private businessmen and industrialists in the possibilities of investment in my country not only to assist us in our development but also to share with us the benefits that accrue from such development.

Since 1949 the Philippines has pursued an industrialization program designed to mobilize our resources with all possible speed towards the formation of a balanced agro-industrial society which would be capable of absorbing the growing labor force and furnishing the people with a rising level of income and better standards of living. A measure of success has been achieved in that overall production has expanded by 63 per cent in contrast to a 16 per cent increase in population. Paid-in private capital investment rose during the same period from $172 million to $750 million. More than 13,000 manufacturing firms were established to turn out a wider variety of products. Public expenditures grew from $225 million to $600 million as the government built dams, hydroelectric power plants, irrigation and flood control systems, and hundreds of miles of highway and feeder roads.

We have thus far depended on our own resources for the bulk of our development projects and have attained a rate of economic growth which is one of the highest in Asia today. However, financing of this growth has now reached ‘proportions which exceed our present readily available resources; hence, we must temporarily resort to external credits. We cannot afford to slacken the pace of economic development, and the momentum we have achieved must be maintained else we would be courting social unrest and nullifying all past gains. Moreover, there now exists in the country an eagerness to invest and to industrialize which was absent a few years ago. It would be tragic not to take advantage of this situation; it would also be tragic to retard the exploitation of our rich natural resources for lack of capital and foreign exchange.

Many undeveloped countries have large populations but are poor in natural resources. The Philippines, however, is altogether different like some countries which are now industrialized. We possess within our borders basic resources which are the raw materials of industry. Left to ourselves we realize that we do not have the capacity to mobilize enough domestic capital to sustain the rate of development and industrialization necessary for progress towards eventual self-sufficiency. We have, therefore, made it our policy to welcome bona fide foreign investors who are willing to stake their capital in the development of our country in anticipation of fair and reasonable returns.

Today, we find foreign investments in the Philippines spread through a cross-section of the economy in basic industries such as mining, logging, agriculture, fishing, and manufacturing, as well as transportation, trade, building construction, and the professional services. They have been substantial during the past few years, totalling nearly $2.5 billion from 1950 to 1956. However, they have not been as great as we would have wanted. Some of your more familiar industrial names have large investments in my country; among them, we may mention the multimillion dollars petroleum refinery of Caltex in the province of Batangas, Proctor and Gamble’s Philippine Manufacturing Company, Lever Brother’s Philippine Refining Company in Manila, the Goodrich International Rubber Company, Firestone Tire and Rubber Company, and the Reynolds Aluminum Company in the suburbs.

Even in public utilities we find the Manila Electric Company and the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company with majority foreign participation. Plans of the Standard Vacuum Oil Company to set up a huge refinery in historic Bataan province have been approved by our National Economic Council with 1960 as the target date for completion of the project. Oil exploration is also being carried out by foreign capital.

All these attest to the confidence of the investors in my country’s future and I venture to say that this confidence has not been misplaced. I believe that conditions in the Philippines today are generally favorable for foreign investment. We adhere to the principle of private free enterprise; our people and government are not obsessed by the fear of colonial exploitation at every turn. Our political atmosphere is orderly and stable in contrast to so many other countries in our part of the world. Peace and order is not a problem. Neither has there been a serious labor dispute that has not been amicably resolved through arbitration under the law. On the contrary our country has a pool of untapped labor resources which is wanting of employment.

We are by nature a friendly people with a long Christian tradition behind us and our staunch anti-communism has been tested on the field of battle and of social action. What foreign investors probably are most apprehensive of in committing funds abroad is the risk of nationalization and expropriation of property by the government. As far as the Philippines is concerned, such fears are groundless.

We believe in love of country and the right to chart our destiny under a democratic form of government, but we also believe in upholding our dignity as a nation by living up to any commitments that we might freely enter into. While foreign investment brings with it its own foreign exchange requirements and its technical and administrative know-how, we in the Philippines realize that any foreign capital we accept also commits us to provide for the periodic remittance of profits to the investors abroad and the eventual repayment of the principal. Existing regulations allow the foreign investor to remit abroad from 25 to 100 per cent of his net profits annually. The actual percentage applied depends on the priority level of his business which is based on its contribution to the national income and employment, to the strengthening of the country’s balance of payments position, and to the supply of essential commodities for the economy. Remittable profits in one year may run to as high as 60 per cent of the total foreign investment. Compare this with the 10 to 20 per cent ranges of profit remittance set by other underdeveloped countries. Furthermore, our laws guarantee that the investor may repatriate his capital back to his home country after five years of operation at the rate of 20 per cent a year.

In this regard, American investments are afforded great advantage under the investment guaranty program of the ICA which ensures currency convertibility of their profits and capital and protects them from loss through expropriation, confiscation of war. Under the Laurel-Langley agreement, American investments are accorded the same treatment as purely Filipino capital. Regarding investments by other nationals, our laws place limitations only on ownership of land and extractive industries, on those that directly exploit natural resources, and on establishments engaged in the retail trade.

There is larger scope in the Philippines, therefore, for foreign investment than in other parts of Asia. As to American nationals, they are given under the so-called parity amendment to our Constitution exactly the same rights as Filipinos in the ownership of land, utilization of natural resources, and the establishment of public utilities.

It is not possible at present to meet all the demands for foreign exchange made upon our international reserve. Because of this, the controls governing remittances of profits are a temporary necessity and will be done away with as soon as the Philippine balance of payments position permits. We may not be rich in foreign exchange. If foreign exchange is measured in terms of marketable and varied resources awaiting development, we are blessed with abundance.

Other factors which favor the investors are the extensive social overhead projects which the government has undertaken, such as networks of roads, bridges, port, and air terminal facilities and hydroelectric plants to supply power for industry at low cost. Several basic industrial projects have been launched by the public authority to bridge the gap between heavy primary industries and secondary industries into which private capital hesitates to venture at present, such as the several steel mills and smelting plants which form important link in the chain of an integrated steel industry and which enable the country to process its own native ores instead of exporting them unrefined. All these provide a base of which private capital can build its factories in reasonable security.

I also wish to mention that Philippine corporate taxes are still among the lowest in the world and tax relief is even available under the law to new and necessary industries. It is only right that the investor should seek to make reasonable profit but he should also make a sincere effort to understand our people and the manifold problems facing us in our struggle for economic progress. He must try to accomplish tangible good for the country by channeling his capital into productive enterprises which fill a real need in our economic framework.

As an incentive to this, our government has established the priority system I mentioned earlier, which allows the foreign investor in essential economic sectors to remit abroad a larger portion of his profits than would be permitted less essential enterprises. We shall certainly review our laws governing investments and revise them where improvement is possible with the objective of liberalizing, rather than restricting, economic activity.

I would like to draw your attention to the possibilities to be found in the entry of foreign capital on a joint-venture basis with local capital. International teamwork can prove very worthwhile to the partners in enterprise, not only materially but psychologically as well. It would involve not merely the transfer of wealth from one part of the world to another but the creation of new wealth itself through a merger of capital, foreign and native entrepreneurial skill, and the country’s natural resources.

It has been observed that some foreign corporations, while decrying and fearing nationalism on the one hand, seek to reserve for themselves complete ownership and administration of their overseas firm on the other. Perhaps without realizing it, these corporations themselves practice an insidious kind of nationalism. If, in spite of their immense investment in plant and technology, these corporations should decide to offer part ownership of the overseas firms to local residents, the cause of international friendship and understanding would indeed be far advanced.

I reaffirm the readiness of my government to do everything reasonable to assure a congenial atmosphere in which foreign and native capital can work effectively together in our economic development. In this we shall be guided by what is best in the spirit of both nationalism and internationalism, and I pledge my administration to maintain a consistent and constant economic policy, one which will be applied without fear or favor, with an eye single to the best interests of the people.

Our immediate need is for economic expansion. Being businessmen, you can well understand how growing enterprises need external financing, whether they be individual firms, great corporations, or even nations. In seeking loans, credits or new investments, the logical thing would be to approach one’s friends first. This what my country is doing today.

Our progress in economic development is crucial not only to the 22 million people who would directly benefit from it but to your country as well. Our strengthening could mean the strengthening of the economic power of the free world, particularly in restless and troubled Asia.

We must recognize that, today, there exists an imperative need to show that the methods, techniques, and resources of free nations are better and more abundant than those of the communist world. Only by acting with boldness and decision will the free world assure underdeveloped lands that the path to true progress does not lie within the economic orbit of communism. We know that communism builds its economic gains upon the misery and suffering of millions denied the dignity of men.

Free enterprise and democracy offer the best solution and they make for a way of life that alone can give happiness and security that is abiding. This, we know, we can prove with your encouragement and your help.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library