Address of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the 10th anniversary dinner of the Philippine Chamber of Industries

Gentlemen:

I CONSIDER it an excellent opportunity to be able to address this body on the occasion of its 10th anniversary. We have just concluded an orderly national election. The fever of prejudice that sweeps the nation during an election campaign has begun to subside. Now that the excitement has abated and the heated emotions of narrow partisanship have cooled, it is time for us to assess the present situation and take stock of the future.

Immediately after my return from the Visayas on November 8, I addressed the nation and laid down five major tasks which I believe are essential for national survival. These are:

First. To complete our economic independence through the adoption of the Filipino First policy and similar measures;

Second. To establish our dignity as a free people by dealing with the foreign powers on terms of sovereign equality;

Third. To achieve a balanced economy by providing equal impetus to agriculture and industry;

Fourth. To promote social justice and the general welfare of the masses;

Fifth. To minimize and, if possible, to eradicate graft and corruption in the public service.

These five tasks really constitute a single package for national progress. They are all interrelated. The common denominator is nationalism and the result of the elections is, in my opinion, a triump of nationalism and a vindication of the dynamic policies of the Nacionalista administration. I therefore appeal to all elements in our country to cast aside partisan feelings in the unrelenting prosecution of these tasks. I believe that all Filipinos, irrespective of their party affiliation, should realize that the basic instrument in the attainment of our dignity and our economic emancipation is nationalism.

Nationalism should no longer be an issue in this country. In most Asian nations, in all European countries, and certainly in the United States, nationalism is no longer a matter for argument. It is a subject seldom discussed, not because it is no longer believed in, but precisely because belief in it, adherence to it, has become so much a part of the fabric of their lives that, automatically, people and government behave in a nationalistic manner. I am now confident, in the light of the people’s verdict, that the airing of this issue, the discussion of its meaning which the Nacionalista candidates conducted throughout the land, has made our people firmly nationalistic. This being the case, the vacillation between nationalism and anti-nationalism is a thing of the past. The leaders of this country have only one thing to discuss; namely, the best means of implementing the nationalistic program.

The Philippine Chamber of Industries, by the very nature of its membership, should be one of the most active groups engaged in the task of evolving the best policies for the realization of our nationalist goals. The members of the Chamber of Industries, if they seek permanent, long-term benefits, will find it only in our economic emancipation. In turn, only nationalism can secure this economic independence. Let me elaborate on this point.

The ferment in Asia and Africa is caused by the resurgence of nationalism which in effect is the expression of the desire of the people in these areas to control and direct their political and economic life. For centuries, they have been under the domination of foreign powers. But with the end of the 19th century colonialism and with the attainment of a nuclear stalemate, they have realized that their one basic goal is to attune themselves to modern progress, to catch up with the modern world as fast as possible. The only force that can do this is nationalism because the retarding influence in the economic life of their nations is the vestige of colonialism. What is true for Asia and Africa in general also holds true for us. As J. said in my November 8 speech—”Colonialism is a pervasive fact. It is evident in the continued domination of our economy by aliens and equally evident in our failure, until the recent past, to assert fully our sovereign lights in our relations with foreign powers. Now, colonialism is the source of our gravest problems. Because of the colonial nature of our economy, our full economic development is retarded. In turn, this tends to perpetuate the unequal distribution of income so that the all-important objective of closing the gap between the poor and the rich continues to be beyond our grasp.” We must recognize the fast-changing character of the world community. The nuclear stalemate gives us no “alternative to peace.” One of the implications of the thawing of the cold war is that underdeveloped nations should now speed up their economic development so as not to be left behind in economic progress by the more advanced nations.

On various occasions in the past, I have said that we would like to attain for our country independence not only in name but also in fact. This has been the underlying policy of my administration. Throughout the years since the attainment of our political independence, we have found ourselves tied down by the ancient ills of stagnancy, disease, and ignorance, our entire life still under the depressing domination of colonialism. The propulsive force of nationalism was given a concrete translation during my administration in the Filipino First policy which, essentially, is both a recognition and an answer to alien domination in our economic life. It is not unknown to you that the bulk of our foreign and domestic trade are in the hands of aliens. This alien domination of our commerce has been largely responsible for the general lack of initiative on the part of our own businessmen and entrepreneurs.

Many elements have accused my administration of upsetting the status quo and causing great unrest and apprehension in the alien business community. But I repeat that I would rather have the alien business community upset than my own people doomed forever to humiliation and poverty in their own country. But this accusation is without foundation because the Filipino First policy merely seeks to give the Filipinos full political and economic responsibility for their future without dictation or undue influence from foreign elements. We seek no more than the same measures of control of our economy that citizens of these foreign countries have in their own land. We seek a new pattern of relation with the aliens not because we want to embark on a chauvinistic adventure and deny them basic human rights, but rather, because we want merely to recover those normal privileges of our citizenship which we lost in colonial times. We desire to replace gradually the lingering dominance of non-Filipinos with a greater participation by our countrymen in the economic development of their own land.

The Filipino First policy is, really, only a remedial measure needed to give the Filipinos protection and encouragement so that they may at last also enjoy the fruits of their patrimony. Of course, in England there is no need for an Englishman First policy nor do Americans need in the United States an American First policy. In both countries, control of the enemy is firmly in the hands of its own citizens and the underlying nationalism of both people and government keep it so. Neither would there be any need for a Filipino First policy if the situation were the same here. Unfortunately, it is not. It is, therefore, the duty of the government to foster by its policies a change in the economy so that the Philippines shall be primarily for the Filipinos. Of course, I can understand the attitude of aliens towards this policy. I ask them to understand that it is the solemn obligation of the Philippine Government to provide by means of its policies an economic environment under which the Filipinos may recover the place which is rightfully theirs in their own land.

Nationalism has unleashed many forces in our national life which are impossible to stem and to stop. We want to be independent. We want to check the crippling legacies of our colonial past. We want to liberate our masses from poverty and ignorance. The only way to do all this is by nationalism.

The Philippine Chamber of Industries is the one body that can fully appreciate the economic basis of the Filipino First policy. I am grateful for the service it has done in the economic development of the country. Industrialization is the answer to our ills. The Filipino entrepreneur must be given the necessary support. I believe it is the duty of the government to create the necessary conditions for industrial progress.

Unfortunately, there has been a lot of criticism lately of government economic policies. Some advocate a return to laissez faire. This is unrealistic. Government regulatory functions are necessary in our present stage of development precisely because these regulatory mechanisms exist to encourage and help Filipino businessmen to the point when they can hold their own against foreign competition. As I have said before, “To allow the operation of a completely free enterprise today will also mean in effect the preservation of the very conditions which we wish to correct; namely, alien domination. Because of their larger capital resources, alien business interests in the Philippines would have an unfair headstart in the race for economic supremacy. It would be naive to suppose that we, who have only just started, could expect to overhaul that lead in the foreseeable future under conditions of free enterprise.” So firmly do I believe in this need for protecting our businessmen and entrepreneurs that I can tell you now that in the future I would not hesitate to use our tariff powers to protect the Filipino entrepreneur and industrialist should this prove necessary.

But the attainment of the goals of the Filipino First policy is just the beginning. Our other goal is social justice. The triump of the Filipino business and entrepreneurial class is the first benefit of Filipino First. Social justice is the true end. This can be achieved only by industrialization which will eradicate the blight of poverty and and ignorance, and by social reform which will narrow the gap between the privilege and the poor. Social justice can be further enhanced by strengthening the popular basis of our liberal democracy, by making the democratic tenets of individual freedom, freedom of thought and of speech, truly meaningful and real to the least powerful and least rich of our citizens.

I am glad to report to you the accomplishments of the Administration in the furtherance of the five goals I outlined at the beginning of my talk. Let me say, quite unequivocably, that I regard these accomplishments as largely due to our nationalistic orientation.

Our gross national product rose from ₱8 billion in 1953 to ₱10.5 billion in 1958, and the national income increased by 13.5 per cent between 1956 and 1958.

Agricultural production increased by 35.1 per cent since 1954; mining by 50.2 per cent; and manufacturing by 73.7 per cent.

As a result of the implementation of the Filipino First policy, Filipinos for the first time since the institution of controls have gained the upper hand in the allocation of foreign exchange. In the first half of 1959, their share of foreign exchange amounted to 51 per cent of total allocations.

We achieved self-sufficiency in basic cereals, rice and corn, for the first time in our history.

We have also achieved the long-sought objective of a favorable balance of trade in the amount of ₱95.2 million in the first half of the current year.

Filipino participation in the establishment of business enterprises has mounted at a steadily increasing tempo. Capital investment by Filipinos amounted to 72 per cent in 1953; during this year, it jumped to 81 per cent. I would like to see even greater improvement in this regard.

The Nacionalista administration has initiated basic reforms to raise the living standards of the barrio population through the land reform program, resettlement, and establishment of cooperative marketing associations. The program for dispersal of industry is another way by which we may provide economic opportunities for our people in many parts of the country. Such industrialization will have the added advantage of enabling us to utilize our agricultural products and our present under-employed manpower.

Graft and corruption are the consequence of colonialism. Because of instabilities in our economic system and because of lack of opportunities for productive employment, graft, and corruption still persist. This is by no means an apology. On the contrary, the Administration has vigorously started a campaign against these ills, while at the same time it is putting into operation nationalistic policies which alone can provide a permanent solution for graft and corruption.

The five tasks I laid down require not only the leadership of sincere and dedicated nationalists but also sacrifices from our people. To accomplish these tasks, we need a superhuman source of spiritual strength, a national resource of dedication and will. Ahead of us lie sacrifices, abnegations, thrift, austerity, and hard work.

This dynamic power, this source of strength and virtue, is nationalism. If the nationalism of 1896 ennobled a whole generation of plebeians, intellectuals, and the Filipino middle class to forsake their comforts, expend their fortunes, and shed their blood for the country’s sake, nationalism today asks each of us to live and to work with the rest for our country’s good.

The Administration is certain that its nationalistic program is the only one that can give dignity and prestige for the nation, and peace and prosperity for its people. I therefore appeal to all of you to rally behind the banner of nationalism in order to win emancipation for our people.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s address read by Jose C. Locsin, NEC Chairman at the tenth anniversary dinner of the Philippine Chamber of Industries held Tuesday evening at the Manila Hotel’s Winter Garden. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(49) , 10240-10245.