PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE LAUNCHING CEREMONIES OF THE 1960 RED CROSS FUND CAMPAIGN, AT MALACAÑANG SOCIAL HALL, AT 5:30 P.M., FEBRUARY 16, 1960

Friends, ladies and gentlemen, my fellow countrymen:

WE PAUSE from the urgent toils of the day to dedicate ourselves to another task as urgent as any, but probably more far-reaching than most because it touches upon the lives of thousands of our fellowmen.

We are today witnesses to the struggle of the Filipino nation to identify itself in the global scheme. Every mind and heart in our country is being mustered to generate the national potential into productive patterns. Natural consequences of this vast effort are temporary imbalances in our economic system, creating sociological problems which in turn have become the problems of agencies like the Philippine National Red Cross.

The role of the Red Cross in our national life is clear and well defined. The Red Cross is on the job at all times, filling in needs in the community which, if left unfilled, would leave us lesser and poorer. Our task, therefore, is to guarantee through our generous support that the Red Cross stays on the job. It might bear repeating that the jobs to which the Red Cross applies itself are many and varied, each one a vital part of the social welfare pattern of the country.

The work of the Red Cross in the amelioration of suffering caused by natural disaster is legend; the importance of the blood program to health groups gains recognition as medical science makes new discoveries in the treatment of disease. The work of the Red Cross in public health and safety, in youth welfare, for the military and for family welfare, are as well-known and as deeply appreciated. I repeat that, if these functions are left unaccomplished, the nation will be the lesser and the poorer.

Our campaign, therefore, must make certain that gifts from business organizations, from employees groups, and from individuals are truly commensurate with what the Red Cross means to all of us. I have complete faith that the nation will readily respond to our appeal with the same vigor and warmth that has always met Red Cross appeals in the past.

With these in mind, I urge all citizens and residents of this country, as well as all associations and organizations, to help actively in the fund campaign which we declare open today, by giving generously of their means, time, and efforts to realize the lofty aims and purposes of the Philippine National Red Cross.

Further, I authorize all national, provincial, city, and municipal government officials and school authorities to accept for the Philippine National Red Cross, fund raising responsibilities, and more important still, I urge them to take the initiative and active leadership in their respective communities.

For my part, I wish to present my humble contribution to the 1960 Red Cross fund campaign, in the amount of ₱1,000.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library