Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the CAWP

[Delivered at the Malacañang Social Hall, July 3, 1959]

OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE CIVIC ASSEMBLY OF WOMEN, MY FRIENDS:

I CONSIDER this annual invitation to speak before the leaders of Filipino women on the eve of the glorious 4th of July, a pleasant duty and a privilege. Mrs. Garcia and I are very glad to welcome you here.

First of all, I would like to commend the Civic Assembly of Women which integrates the womanhood of the land for the rising tide of young women who have collegiate and professional courses to prepare themselves for a bigger and better role in the development of the country. I have noted in commencement exercises this year the preponderance of women graduates in such professions as teaching, pharmacy, dentistry, art, secretarial, and other allied courses. They are now even invading the professional preserves of men; like law, engineering, agriculture, surveying, and other allied courses. This significant development is an achievement of Filipino womanhood and at the same time a rainbow of promise for the future of the Republic.

I also commend the women-sponsored awards for distinction in the different fields of human endeavors, in art, science, social service, invention, etc. This is a potent stimulant for citizens to exert their best and their utmost in their chosen field of activity. I fully concur with the awards given to different awardees this year. One of them has invented a mill that will be of tremendous social and economic value to our people. Another is a genius and leader in art—music. The others are equally important in their respective tasks to contribute to the nation’s reservoir of happiness.

In the preparation of this speech, I have devoted some time in going over your Summary Report on your program of action for 1959 and also your major concerns. I wish, therefore, to take this opportunity to thank you for your commendation and your assurances of cooperation through individual and collective action in our:

1. Filipino-First policy;

2. Program of bringing about closer ties between the Philippines and Asia;

3. Bipartisan membership in important representations abroad;

4. Interest in, and financial support given to, cultural projects; and

5. Interest in, and financial support given to, the National Family Life and Workshop, the First Asian Seminar on Mental Health and Family Life.

I would like to take this occasion to reemphasize that our Filipino-First policy simply means that Filipinos should be given greater participation in the economic and industrial development of our country. In the past, our political, economic, and even our social life had been subject to foreign dictation. Now that we are a free and sovereign country, it is but a natural development that we assert our long-felt desire to steer our affairs toward a direction we believe would best serve our people. We will, however, carry on with a companion policy of friendship with other countries. Aware as we are of our limitations, we will continue to welcome foreign capital and technical know-how to help us expedite the development our country.

I have always been personally in favor of bringing about closer ties between the Philippines and our Asian neighbors. When I was Vice-President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs, I had occasions to visit several friendly nations in Southeast Asia, and when subsequently I became President, I made state visits to Japan and South Vietnam in reciprocation of previous state visits made to this country by the heads of those states. The result of my visits has been encouraging and I intend to make more such visits to other countries as my time will permit. I was gratified to learn that our neighbors are as eager as we are to establish and maintain closer economic and cultural ties with one another for our mutual advantage.

Likewise, I have always believed that representations abroad should not be the concern of one party alone. Such representations more often affect the welfare of Filipinos not only of this generation but of many generations to come. It is for this reason that in the formation of important delegations for abroad, I have always made it a point to consult or invite leaders of the opposition so that the country might also benefit from their wisdom arid experience. I believe that such matters should not be the responsibility of a group of politicians or of a group of statesmen, alone, but the collective responsibility of all the politicians and of all the statesmen we have available in this country in this clime and age.

I noted with gratitude that you have also decided to commend me for the support my administration has been giving cultural projects, like the National Family Life and Work-shop and the First Asian Seminar on Mental and Family Life. Whenever I could, I have extended all possible assistance to some such projects because of their uplifting effect upon us as a people. I think, as all of you here do, that efforts in the promotion of these aspects of our national life should go hand in hand with our struggles for economic advancement.

I cannot close my speech before you this afternoon without assuring you that it is also my personal concern as well as that of the administration to insure a high moral integrity of those in public office. As you all know, public morality has always been a problem of past administrations, both in this country as well as in other democracies of the world. This problem must be a concommitant of a democratic form of government. But we may take pride in the fact that, more than any other administrations in the past, this administration has taken steps to minimize this evil in this country because we believe in the moral and spiritual values that transcend all other values.

To be sure, certain factors do contribute to the decay of the people’s moral fiber. The women are, therefore, called upon to start the early training and discipline of our children to insure the wholesome growth of a good citizenry. It is a truism that men in the country are as strong as the women make them. Conscious of this great responsibility, we believe in stepping up the promotion of cultural activities and the ever vigilant observance and enforcement of legislations that affect the morality of our people.

I am certain that you will take it upon yourselves to know and make something of these concerns which you have so well prepared in your paper. I shall watch your progress with keen interest. You can be sure I shall quietly cheer you as you journey successfully to achieve greater honors for our women.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia before the CAWP at the Malacañang Social Hall 5 p.m., Friday, July 3, 1959 . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (27) , 5003-5005.