MY FRIENDS:

IT IS a pleasure to be here with you the alumni, students, faculty members, and well-wishers on this day which marks the College of Agriculture’s 50 years of service to our country and people. I share with you the joys of a home-coming, the reunion and meeting with old friends being always a cause for rejoicing. Fifty years may not be such a long time in terms of the life of a nation. But half a century of dedicated public service by this institution has contributed much to the growth and improvement in our ways and techniques in the field of agriculture.

Ours is prevalently an agricultural country, about 70 per cent of our people being engaged in that pursuit. Hence, from the very outset it is apparent that your work here commands the attention and the respect of the entire country. When you succeed here, our people succeed with you. But in your failings, let the trust and confidence of Filipinos spur you to greater efforts.

The objectives of this college throughout the 50 years of its existence has not changed. The students and faculty members may come and go, but this institution’s noble aims remain as a beacon for others to follow.

As we look back through the half century we find that the history of the College of Agriculture is one that our country and people can be proud of. As a training institution for agricultural manpower and as a center for the search for new knowledge in scientific agriculture, this College has faithfully and satisfactorily worked towards the ideals set up by its founders. The alumni of this College now occupy key positions in the various bureaus of the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources as well as in other government offices and in private firms engaged in agriculture and allied fields. They are found in the agricultural schools and colleges, in sugar centrals, in farms and ranches throughout the country. It is indeed a source of pride that 4,000 alumni have made their influence felt not only in this country but in neighboring countries as well.

An example in particular is that of Filipino graduates of Los Baños who are helping Thailand officials run the Ministry of Agriculture and the College of Agriculture of Thailand.

The research findings from your laboratories and experimental fields have helped our farmers in no small measure. Through the judicious application of basic research in this institution we now have improved varieties of rice, corn, vegetables, fruits, and other crops as well as better breeds of poultry and livestock. More productive methods of field cultivation and animal management have also been worked out. Fertilizer and irrigation needs of different crops under varying conditions have been determined by our scientists, and more efficient feeds for livestock and poultry devised and agricultural products and by-products have been better utilized mainly as a result of your studies.

All these have been accomplished through 50 years, in spite of the difficulties brought about by limited financial resources and in spite of the last world war. That the college of Agriculture has succeeded is a tribute to the dogged determination of its alumni, faculty members, and student body. I share with you the disappointment that your founder and first dean, Dr. Edwin B. Copeland, could not come to join us in this auspicious celebration. But, he and those of your leaders who have passed on, such as Dean Charles F. Baker, President Bienvenido M. Gonzalez, and Dr. Manuel L. Roxas, are as much with us in spirit today.

The College of Agriculture is fortunate in its partnership with Cornell University in the cooperative undertaking of postwar rehabilitation. This partnership has proved mutually satisfactory and has helped establish a new bond between these two great institutions and consequently the two nations they represent.

Anniversaries are a time for assessment and for mapping out the course that lies ahead. It is, therefore, this institution’s responsibility as a public service agency to scrutinize its record and ascertain where it has failed to reach the desired mark or where its goals and objectives need to be reviewed to keep up with changing national and world condition and demands.

I have set the goals for self-sufficiency in food, clothing, and shelter—the basic needs of Filipinos. We have achieved—and for the first time—self-sufficiency in rice. The bumper crop in rice has virtually solved overnight the perennial problem of shortage of this staple cereal. This should be a cause for rejoicing among you because part of the credit properly belongs to this institution. However, this significant milestone in the agricultural life of our country should not lead us all to a sense of false security but rather it should inspire us on to exert greater efforts in other fields.

The other day, on a trip to Quezon province, I noticed a branched coconut tree. I was told the tree was a freak of nature, but perhaps it would be worthwhile if our scientists could find out a way to reproduce a hundred fold such branched coconut trees. Imagine what this would do to our coconut industry. Our production could very well double in the same given areas.

Few will dispute the statement that the progress of our nation rests on the progress of agriculture. The major share of that progress is unquestionably linked with the farmers and rural homemakers that make up the greater bulk of our population. In the final analysis, anything that advances their material and social welfare logically advances agriculture and thereby sets the base for further progress of the entire economy.

This College is one of the principal units of the University of the Philippines which train the most dumber of students from Southeast Asian countries. The International House, a new landmark on the campus, is in recognition of the important role that the College of Agriculture plays in training agricultural leaders, teachers, and researchers for our neighboring countries. The administration has set the pace for closer ties with our Asian neighbors. And it is my expectation that this policy will continue to be implemented by this College.

My friends, the program of training our youth to uncover new agricultural knowledge and to share this knowledge with our farmers should be complimentary, each phase as vital as the other. This approach involves tremendous responsibilities; it also requires a broad grasp of the national economy in which no sector may be developed at the sacrifice of the other.

My friends, in concluding I would like to congratulate the alumni, faculty members, and the student body of the College of Agriculture for their successful completion of 50 years of service to our people and country. I have every reason to be confident that the men who administer the affairs of this institution will ably carry on with their avowed principles of public service.

My faith in the future of this institution is fully justified by the achievements of its fifty-year past. My faith in the future of this institution is as great as my faith in the future of our country, whose bounties we shall reap only through the hard work and perseverance of a people determined to win their rightful place under the sun.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the Golden Jubilee Celebration of the U.P. College of Agriculture at Los Baños, Laguna, Tuesday morning, June 9, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (24) , 4426-4429.