PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE TRADITIONAL “PRESIDENT’S NIGHT” SPONSORED ANNUALLY BY THE MANILA OVERSEAS PRESS CLUB IN HONOR OF THE PRESIDENT AND THE FIRST LADY AT THE MOPC BUILDING, THURSDAY EVENING, DECEMBER 18, 1958

My friends:

I HAVE come to look forward to this annual event for two reasons. First, it affords me an opportunity to meet and chat in a relaxed and informal atmosphere with friends I see otherwise only in their professional news-gathering activities. My second reason derives from a tradition which has grown up in connection with these annual festivities. My predecessors as well as myself have taken advantage of the cosmopolitan and world-minded group which usually assembles here to discuss, report, and clarify administration foreign policy and the general subject of our external affairs. I propose to continue the tradition this evening.

I would hesitate to introduce this note of sobriety into an otherwise gay atmosphere if I were not aware of the fact that the conscientious reporter—sometimes to my chagrin—considers no time or place inappropriate for seeking news. However, I do not intend to let business usurp too much of the time we have set aside tonight for relaxation and the friendly exchange of views.

I have been asked recently if our increased emphasis upon Asian relations—notably my visit to Japan—was indicative of any significant shift in foreign policy. My answer, of course, was in the negative. On the contrary, I pointed out, the forging of closer ties with our free Asian neighbors is a specific of the Administration’s foreign policy, a traditional plank of the Nacionalista platform, and in fact one of the policies endorsed by all shades of domestic political opinion. The late President Magsaysay not only stated it as a major element of his political outlook but gave it further expression in his sympathetic encouragement of the now intenationally-lauded Operations Brotherhood which has brought us so much closer to our sister Republic of Vietnam. Unfortunately, however, we have been so preoccupied with our many and vexing domestic problems that we have not been able to do as much as we might have wished to established more such neighborly ties.

Racially and geographically we are an Asian people. If for no other reason we should be making this effort to reach out for closer cooperation, for better understanding, for the cultural exchange which is the very essence of man’s constantly broadening spiritual and intellectual horizons. But today there is added reason for us to make this effort, a reason which lends significance and urgency to the task we have assumed.

There is a growing awareness in Asia that the relentless drive of communism for world domination is something that cannot be ignored by any free Asian. Appropriately— or perhaps ironically—the most sobering warning comes from the mainland of Asia itself. There the Chinese Communists proudly announce their communes, a preview of Marxist Utopia as they themselves describe it to a shocked world; it is the most monstrous and gruesome degradation of a people in modern history. The very bedrock of the Asian way of life—the family—has been shattered by decree. In its place has been imposed a fantastic militarized social system in which men and women, husbands and wives, live in separate barracks and eat in segregated mess halls, while their children are raised in state institutions. Marched off to work and marched back again, their every waking hour is under rigid direction and discipline. No feudal despot, no imperialist conqueror has ever dared attempt as complete an enslavement of a people.

to work and marced back again, their every waking hour no imperialist conqueror has even dared attempt an enslavement of a people.

If the impact of this development were only upon our conscience as fellow humans, it would be bad enough. But beyond our compassion for its victims, comes the realization of the purpose of this social nightmare. Where ancient despots employed slave labor to build monuments to their egos, these slaves of our time are being employed to build a powerful, aggressive, state machine intended to subjugate its neighbors who, indeed, already are wincing under its destructive pressure.

Only recently the Malayan minister of commerce attacked Chinese Communist dumping practices in South Asia as naked use of slave labor for economic warfare. It was pointed out that products were being sold for only a fraction of their cost of manufacture and 300 per cent below the mainland selling price. Soviet dumping of tin below its own purchased price to capture traditional markets has also been protested.

Elsewhere other of our free Asian neighbors are rising to protest veiled economic and political aggressions by the Red Bloc. Indonesia’s chief delegate to the Afro-Asian conference has challeged the right of the Soviets to speak for the subjugated Moslems of Central Asia. Thailand found it necessary to expel two Soviet diplomats for espionage and subversion. In Burma new regulations are being applied to check the economic subversion activities of Communist-controlled banks. Japan just recently experienced a Chinese Communist effort to use trade agreements as a weapon to influence internal Japanese politics.

More and more free Asians are coming to realize that the Communist invitation to peaceful coexistence was an empty propaganda gesture. Each day there is mounting evidence in this part of the world that the Communists’ pious endorsement of “pancha sila” does not inhibit them from cynically violating these principles any more than they have hesitated to violate the universally accepted cannons of international law.

In Europe a distressed airman who happened to land in Red-controlled territory is shamelessly held hostage for political bargaining. In this hemisphere, even now, we are witnessing the incredibly callous tactic of deadly artillery barrages—with their attendant human suffering—launched on alternate days, not for military conquest, mind you, but merely to advance a propaganda line. However reluctantly, therefore, hitherto hopeful Asians have come to accept the grim fact that the Communists have not relaxed their aggressive pressures, that Moscow and Peking leaders meant it when they vowed continued adherence to Leninism —which means the objective of a totally Communist world by fair means or foul—and that they have merely changed their weapons of warfare.

How this change came about is pertinent to our present Asian policy line. It will be recalled that the SEATO came into being as the free world’s response in this area to the challenge of naked military Red aggression against Asian peoples and states. There has been some argument as to the actual strength of the SEATO collective security system. While the Chinese Communist have called it a “paper tiger,” their ceaseless propaganda efforts to destroy it suggest that it is no small source of concern. Certainly, whatever the fire-power of SEATO may be, its deterrent effectiveness is beyond dispute. The inescapable fact is that Red military aggressions ceased when the SEATO was born, and, in keeping with Leninist doctrine, the Communist shifted to a policy of attraction, cloaking the tactic of deceit prescribed likewise by Lenin as an orthodox element of Red polity.

Thus, the war goes on. Only the weapons—at least temporarily—have changed. How are we to respond to this challenge? Collective puropse, collective actions, and a pooling of resources was effective in the military phase. Why should it not be effective in the current situation? We believe that it can be.

It is difficult to say at this time exactly what form collective Asian defense against Communist economic and political aggression should take. An essential pre-condition of such effort, however, is obvious. Among the members of the free Asian community there must develop a broad and sympathetic understanding of each others’ thinking, problems, and national objectives. Only with such understanding can we explore the common ground upon which a common economic, political, and spiritual defense may be based and collective action undertaken. To achieve this understanding for ourselves and to encourage our neighbors to seek it is what motivates the current emphasis of our foreign policy.

In pursuing this path we feel that we are fulfilling our own concept of the role of each member of the free world community in its defense. Having reached the conviction that the Communist drive toward world domination is not a conventional big power struggle from which we can stand aloof, it becomes an obligation involving national self-respect not to leave the waging of the battle to others. Our sovereign dignity demands that we make every contribution within our competence to the arsenal of freedom. This is a contribution we can make and one which, modest though it may be, could mark a turning point in the adverse tide.

We approach our self-imposed task with humility, seeking no role of leadership, offering only the wholesome Filipino concept of the barangay. If we can thereby serve as catalysts of free Asian unity and cooperation for the preservation of our hard won freedoms, our share of the victory will be more than ample justification.

But there are other facets, other by-products, to this. calculated expansion of our foreign relations. If I have stressed its security aspects, its relations to the massive global contest for man’s freedom, it is because survival, after all, must be the prime concern of the nations as well as individuals. The individual may survive, after a fashion, as a slave, but the vital organs of a nation are its institutions and the nation ceases to exist once those institutions are destroyed.

In our concern for security from external destruction, therefore, we have not ignored the domestic requirements for survival—economic expansion and development to meet the expanding needs and expanding expectations of an expanding population. A characteristic of the modern world is the growing interdependence of all its parts. We have seen the enemy’s application of a total war strategy in which the assault takes place on all fronts of human activity—military, economic, political, and even spiritual. Our response to the challenge must be comparably total. In brief, every element of our domestic society must be strengthened, every member of the free world community must be strengthened, if the community as a whole is to prevail over its foes.

New channels of trade and commerce, the exchange of ideas, the absorption of new experience—all these nutrients of national growth are part of our Asian quest. Confident of the stability and durability of our traditional foreign relationships, we are now prepared to broaden our horizons, to explore additional areas of friendship and cooperation. If this is to be called a shift of policy, it must not be misconstrued as a shift of indecision. On the contrary, it should be recognized as a shift to a higher plane of national maturity and national self-confidence.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library