Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Traditional President’s Night sponsored annually by the Manila Overseas Press Club

[Delivered on February 23, 1961]

THIS annual meeting of the Chief Executive of the nation with the officers, members, and guests of the Manila Overseas Press Club is by now a well established tradition. I have welcomed your invitations in the past because they afford me an excellent opportunity to reach what is perhaps our best informed and most responsive audience on world affairs, the correspondents of the foreign press as well as those members of the local press most concerned with the preparation and dissemination of foreign news. This evening’s opportunity is of particular interest for a number of reasons, among them the present state of world tensions and my recent return from a visit with our neighbors and racial kin in Malaya.

Many of you will recall that a little over two years ago, speaking in this very room, I broached the idea of bringing about in this region an association of states which, mostly in the cultural and economic sectors, might explore common areas of interest, common problems, and perhaps avanues of cooperative action for a common good. Shortly afterward we had the pleasure of welcoming among us the Premier of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman, who likewise saw merit in the concept and became one of its most vigorous advocates.

This month a beginning was made, a limited one to be sure, but one holding great promise. In the agreement between the Governments of Thailand, Malaya, and the Philippines to confer on the mechanics of such regional association is the beginning of the kind of understanding and cooperation so essential to the free world in this time of trial.

Before discussing this development more fully, however, it might be useful to sketch briefly the background against which elements of our foreign policy should be viewed.

First, let us examine the current international situation and the nature of the tensions which constitute the crisis of our day.

A great scholar and observer of world affairs makes the significant observation that it is inaccurate to speak of the conflict between the Free World and Communism as a contest of two similar power blocks. He points out that whereas the Communist bloc is a monolithic organism held together by violence and intimidation, such as the Russian tanks in Hungary, the Free World bloc is a voluntary association impelled toward pooling its resources in the interests of collective security only by the threatening pressures of the Communist bloc itself. I think it is also useful to define more sharply the nature of the conflict.

It is a matter of communist doctrine for all to read that the communist revolution will not, indeed cannot, stop short of an all communist world. No communist of any stature has as yet repudiated this basic doctrine of international communism. In fact, careful study of their most recent literature establishes conclusively that even the concept of peaceful coexistence is seen by top communists as a temporary lull in armed hostilities during which they may consolidate their gains and prepare for the next violent phase of communist expansion. The present world crisis therefore derives from the Communist Party’s continuing attack, by whatever means possible, on all non-communist countries, since the continued existence of free societies, of free men, cannot be tolerated within the concept of an all-communist world. Thus, unless we consider surrender to intimidation, the initiative for ending the cold war and averting a hot war rests with the communists— and only the communist.

I think it is also high time that we demolish the distortion heard from some quarters that small nations committed to the Free World bloc are merely pawns fighting the war of the United States in a big power contest with the Soviet Union.

The question has been asked in some quarters, for example, why the Philippines, a small nation, has chosen to take an active part in this decisive world struggle. Our reasons in terms of political and religious belief, of morality and justice, already have been adequately stated. For the benefit of those who claim to be practical realists, however, I think it might be wise to add this further “practical and realistic” reason. The Free World is fighting for a world community ruled by law, the communists, for rule imposed by force. As one of the small nations, a world of laws is our sole hope of stature and dignity. Under a world rule of force we can expect nothing better than national extinction and racial absorption.

There is little need to labor the obvious as to why we accept American leadership in this struggle. The American record for supporting freedom for all peoples is ample endorsement of their motivation and intent. In material resource and tenacity no other nation or combination of nations can claim the contribution already made to the fight, or match the strength and potential of America to sustain it. (In this connection, it is interesting to note that while some commentators go so far as to claim Soviet superiority over the United States, Mr. Khrushchev himself promises his people only that they will catch up with the United States in seven to ten years.)

To summarize up to this point, we may say that until the communist bloc decides to abandon the world revolution, international tensions and conflict, regardless of temporary lulls of peaceful coexistence or peaceful competition, will continue. Further, by the Communist own doctrine, every free society, committed or otherwise, will continue to be a target of whatever weapon is considered appropriate, whether armed aggression, assistance to internal rebellion, economic sabotage, or any of the many forms of subversion. It may also be assumed that America will continue to exercise the leadership and shoulder the major material burden of Free World defense, while her allies gain the strength necessary to tip the balance so decisively that the communists will be discouraged from further pursuing their aggressive expansion.

This brings us to the question of what may now be forecast as to the American posture of Free World leadership under a new administration.

From President Kennedy’s pronouncements to date, from those of his major appointees, and from the writings of those known to influence the thinking of the new administration, it is possible to derive at least a preliminary assessment. It now appears likely that there will be no alteration of basic policy and fundamental objectives. In executing policy and pursuing these objectives, however, it may be expected that full advantage will be taken of the opportunity afforded by change to secure a broader area of tactical maneuver, grater flexibility, and variety in the instruments of policy brought to bear. Although for years the United States, almost alone, has carried the burden of military and economic assistance to the recovering and developing nations of the Free World, and today is suffering in some measure from the economic consequences, it appears likely that neither of these programs will be abandoned or dras­tically reduced. There appears to be some inclination to lean more toward acceleration of economic growth, and it is predictable that, because of economic pressures, both military and economic foreign aid programs will be more sharply scrutinized and more carefully weighed, so that each dollar of investment in Free World strength delivers its maximum yield.

In his Inaugural Address President Kennedy said: “My fellow citizens of the world: Ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.”

What can we do together for the freedom of Man? What can a small nation such as ours do now?

It seems immediately obvious that maximum acceleration of economic growth and technical development serve not only the individual national interest, but also the objective of strengthening the Free World alliance. It is toward this end that we are taking steps toward stimulating both foreign and domestic private investment, expanding and diversifying our pattern of trade and commerce, and developing new credit lines with appropriate nations of the Free World.

Another contribution we can make to the Free World effort, one wholly compatible with the national interest and aspiration, is in the political sector—not alone in terms of maintaining our own domestic stability but even more in terms of the posture and initiative we take in our regional and global international relationships. For example, the consultative conferences held recently in Manila, I believe, established firmly for the information of all concerned the fact that the peoples and governments of this region see the situation in Laos not as a big power contest but as a serious threat to their own peace and security and a manifestation of renewed communist expansionism.

Aside, from the special and significant features of the Free World bloc already mentioned, it should not be forgotten that the Free World, precisely defined, includes the so-called uncommitted nations which nevertheless are as dedicated to the preservation of their own free societies and individual freedom as ours. With these integrity, we have much in common in terms of other problems and aspirations wherein mutual understanding and cooperation can be mutually beneficial.

For the most part, these common problems are characteristic of the developing new nations: Security against external aggressions, internal defense and protection of free institutions, and the acceleration of economic growth and technological development. It is no coincidence certainly that each of these areas is today included in the broadened front of communist attack. As the arms race reaches a point of stalemate, the political and economic sectors grow in importance, and whatever can be done to increase the strength of these sectors in every free nation, regardless of military commitment, is a net gain in terms of Free World security.

This has been the underlying purpose of our determination to broaden the base of our relationship, first with neighboring free societies, and later with those geographically more remote. It would be Utopian to think that in the free association I have described there could be complete agreement in all matters, but it is a characteristic of a democratic community such as the Free World comprises that the individual and the community may seek benefits wherever agreement and cooperation can be achieved.

While on the subject of the small nation—committed, uncommitted, or neutral—we might stop to consider a particular phenomenon of our times—a phenomenon, incidentally, which underscores my earlier emphasis on the fact that it is the small nation that has the greatest stake in realizing a world community accepting the rule of law.

Recently the General Assembly of the United Nations has been augmented by the admission of many new small nations. Small though each may be in resource and limited in experience, each enjoys numerical equality with the oldest and largest in that assembly of nations. The magnitude of the influence these nations acting in concert can wield has been demonstrated and commented upon. Some view the phenomenon with elation, others, with concern. We of the Philippines, ourselves a small nation, experience both reactions. We are elated to have this confirmation of our most fundamental foreign policy outlook, but we are concerned that this power of small states, unique in mankind’s history, not be lost or destroyed by abuse.

We must never lose sight of the fact that the power exists only by virtue of the organization in which it is exercised, the United Nations. This organization itself will exist only so long as it honestly and impartially reflects the intent of its charter, only so long as each member feels that its decisions and judgments are the result of sober and honest deliberation. The intrusion of petty or sordid motives, of ancient grudges or racial bias, could bring about the destruction of what the world has so painfully tried to restore since the tragic collapse of the League of Nations.

Before concluding, there is one other aspect of the Administration’s foreign policy I should like to clarify. Our determination to withhold recognition from nations of the Communist bloc has been questioned as being more rigid than that of the United States. “More Popish than the Pope”—is one of the flippant criticisms.

In the first place, it should be pointed out that the Free World alliance by its very nature does not impose rigid conformity of policy upon each of its members. For its own reasons, the United States recognizes the Soviet Union and sits with its representatives in the United Nations. We have avoided such diplomatic relations without impairing our UN participation. Should Red China shoot its way into the United Nations, or even negotiate formal relations with the United States, we see no reason why either development need influence our own policy which is based upon considerations of practical self-interest. In terms of trade, we certainly have not so thoroughly exhausted the markets of the Free World as to turn in desperation to those of the Communist bloc As for diplomatic convenience, we as “Whose?” All too vivid is the experience of many of our neighbors warning us of the tremendous burden that would be placed upon our security services should we permit an influx of hordes of spies, propagandists, and professional saboteurs, working from the protection of a diplomatic sanctuary in our very midst.

This then, in summary, is our position. The clash between world communism and free societies is not of our choosing and not subject to our evasion. We believe that the only way to avert war, or win it if it is forced upon us, is by a pooling of all Free World strength in every sector; that weakness or disunity can serve only to invite aggression or piecemeal capture. For ourselves we choose active participation. In the case of those of our Free World neighbors and friends who choose otherwise we are prepared to respect their freedom of choice, developing our relations with them in any or all of other constructive categories of democratic activity mutually acceptable.

Contrary to Marxist dogma, we hold that tyranny—not the free society—carries within it the needs of its own destruction. We believe, too, that the urge toward freedom is one of the strongest instincts, a divine endowment of all living things—including the people of Russia and Communist China. Therefore, the longer the Free World can maintain and widen the margin of deterence, the closer we come to peace with justice and freedom for all mankind.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the Traditional President’s Night sponsored annually by the Manila Overseas Press Club, Thursday, February 23, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(12) , 2117-2123.