PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE ARIZONA STATE COLLEGE AT 5:00 P.M., WEDNESDAY, JUNE 25, PHOENIX TIME (7:00 P.M., THURSDAY, JUNE 26, MANILA TIME)

I AM grateful to you, Sir, for the undeserved citation. Since we arrived in this country a week ago, we have been the recipient of honors and courtesies that we deeply appreciate. But this honorary degree has a special meaning. It is the first one conferred on me by a University of the West, and the Western United States and the Philippines are lapped by the same ocean that today is the vortex of world developments that can affect the future of mankind.

When I was a delegate to the United Nations conference in San Francisco in 1945, the site for the United Nations headquarters was under discussion. The Philippine delegation exerted its utmost to have it located in San Francisco. We had nothing against New York. In fact, we admire the greatness and the grandeur of that city of wonders. But we firmly believed then, as we still believe now, that out here in the West, the United Nations would have found an ideal window through which to watch the unfolding of a new era in the volution of humanity to freedom. And the cause of peace to which the United Nations is committed, is better served if the world’s peace control tower is located where it is nearest the most sensitive danger spots in Asia.

Five years after San Francisco, the cold war exploded in Korea. Soon after followed Indo-China. The Chinese mainland has been the scene of developments that have altered the face of Asia. Even as I speak to you this afternoon, Indonesia finds itself in the midst of a struggle that has far-reaching significance to all of us in that section of the globe.

In the present ideological warfare between East and West, Asia holds the balance of power that is decisive. The countries of Asia are fertile ground for the spread of Communism not only because in Asia live more than one half of the peoples of the world, not only because in Asia are found an abundance of the worlds essential war materials, but also because of the strategic importance of the countries situated in Asia, and because of the history of colonialism.

It is for these reasons that the forces on totalitarianism have been concentrating on Asia, using all the devices of guile and blandishment, of intimidation and infiltration, of subversion and aggression to win adherents or to enslave these peoples that fall under their power. The unfolding strategy of Communism after the second world war was clear and unmistakable—it was to conquer Asia and gain control of the Mediterranean. To achieve this, a three-pronged attack was undertaken almost simultaneously. First: make Greece a puppet state and gain an outlet into the Mediterranean and thus cut the Western worlds lifeline. Second: conquer China and then Korea. Third: and lastly, destroy the cornerstone of Free South East Asia in the Philippines by using the usual Communist subversive pattern of fomenting civil war and strife. With American assistance, the attempt to make Greece a puppet state failed. China was conquered but aggression was stalled in Korea. The huk rebellion in the Philippines failed, thanks to the dynamic leadership of my predecessor, Ramon Magsaysay.

I cite these developments of recent occurrence and which are fresh in our minds only to drive home the important fact that in the context of the present global struggle, Asia has assumed such an importance in American life that it is essential for Americans to turn their eyes toward my fellow Asians, to study our problems, and to know and understand us better. The main purpose of my state visit to the United States is to foster closer friendship between your people and mine, and to seek such assistance as would help to strengthen our economic sinews, thus insuring the welfare of our masses and the stability of our democratic institutions. However, it will, I hope, also serve the purpose of focusing the attention of the American people toward Asia.

Modern technology has developed new values that we are compelled to face, to meet frontally, and to which we must adapt our mental attitudes. The Pacific Ocean, for example, no longer affords to you the protection that it gave you you even ten years ago. Distances have been annihilated, and it terms of modern warfare, Asia today is your next door neighbor like Tucson is to Phoenix. It is your national security that is involved, and when I say your national security, I also mean the national security of my country because ours is intertwined with yours.

It is in the spirit of mutuality of interests and of ideals, of mutuality of our defense and security, of our mutual determination to uphold freedom and the democratic way of life, Sir, that I accept this honorary degree that Arizona State College at temple has conferred on me this afternoon.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library