Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Manila Overseas Press Club

[Delivered on January 16, 1960]

I AM particularly pleased to be with you tonight. It has been a whole year since I last had the pleasant task of clarifying certain aspects of the Administration’s policies before you. In that brief year, many significant events transpired, among them the recent elections in which the people elected 5 NP’s out of 8 senators, 35 NP’s out of 54 provincial governors, and 23 NP’s out of 28 city mayors and 2/3 of the town mayors. I realize that from one point of view, the last elections were a mild disappointment to you. In contrast to the record of past elections, the harvest of political murders and terrorism was exceptionally meager, a fact in which we take just pride but which unfortunately does not provide a good copy for sensationalistic journalism.

Be that as it may, I hope you will agree with me that the essential significance of the last elections lay in the fact that for the first time since the Philippines became independent, nationalism became a burning issue at the polls. Through the ballot, the people had given their unmistakable indorsement to the nationalistic policies of my Administration.

I do not say this out of a mean and misplaced sense of vanity, but merely to stress my conviction, freely expressed before and after the elections, that no more important or valid issue could have been put before the Filipino electorate for decision than that of nationalism, specifically with respect to the question of economic independence. We have reached stage in the evolution of our national life where to temporize further with our present problems would result in the perpetuation of conditions which make for economic vassalage. Unless we moved decisively today, it would well mean compromising the future of our Republic. The ugly but incontrovertible fact about our economy today is its dominance by aliens. In some respects, this situation is unique, for there is perhaps no other independent country in the world where alien control of the economic life is as wide and pervasive as in ours. Reduced to stark realities, such a condition makes a mockery of our independence and robs it of substance and meaning.

As long as this condition persists, we shall remain in many ways a colonial country. Our most intractable problems do in truth derive from this fact. Full economic development is retarded and stagnation stubbornly holds sway over significant areas of our national life. As a consequence, great masses of our people are deprived of their just participation and commensurate rewards in the economic growth of the nation. Unless corrected in time and decisively, such a condition could pose an ever-present threat to the stability of our social order.

It is therefore the imperative of this epoch of our national life that the Filipinos acquire a major and dominant participation in the national economy of the Philippines. We propose to do this and we shall do this with malice towards none and with fairness to all. We will do this with full understanding of our international obligations to all our friends of the Free World with whom we have treaties of friendship. We will do this within the framework of our treaties with the U. S. to whose citizens we have granted until 1974 by constitutional provision equal rights as Filipinos in the exploitation of our lands, mines, forest, and other natural resources and public utilities to whom we also granted by the provision of the Laurel-Langley treaty parity with Filipinos in Philippine trade.

In this light therefore I can give full assurance that the Philippine economic nationalism as a national policy is not anti-alien, much less anti-American. It is simply an honest-to-goodness effort of the Filipino people to be the master of their own economic household for exactly the same natural reason that Americans would be masters of the U. S. national economy, the British in England, the Japanese in Japan, etc. It is my hope that our friends abroad will understand this nationalistic policy in the light of its impelling high motives and in the light of its background of 400 years of alien economic dominance in the Philippines and with this understanding cooperate realistically with the Filipino people in attaining their objective in this regard.

In this country there is still room for foreign capital especially in fields where Filipino capital is still deficient or timid. Such friendly foreign capital as are willing to help us realize our economic objective under the announced policy and are willing to collaborate with Philippine capital in joint venture to utilize the vast natural resources of the country are welcome to the Philippines under my administration.

In connection with our economic development I take pleasure in adverting your attention to some significant highlights in 1959 which are indexes of our rapid advancement. These are: (1) For the first time since the war the Philippines achieved a favorable balance of trade. (2) The REDECO, a Philippine mining corporation struck two oil wells at Toledo, Cebu, the first one producing 72 barrels of oil a day and the second, 130 barrels of oil a day. This definitely established the fact that the Philippines is floating oil. (3) We launched the first ship built by Filipino naval engineers and architects at Mariveles last June 10, 1959 thus establishing the Filipino capacity in this field. The NASSCO will go in extensive ship-building to replenish our inter-island beats. (4) We increased our dollar reserve to $170 million in 1959 and indications are that it is in steady upswing. (5) The 1959 surpluses of rice, corn, and Virginia tobacco exceed by far the surpluses of 1958 crops. (6) The number of industries organized in 1959 topped all previous years’ record. Since 1953, a total of 35,520 business firms were organized and registered for operation, about 4 000 of them in the first six months of 1959 alone.

All of these augur well for 1960.

In conclusion, the Republic of the Philippines looks at 1960 with justified optimism. Great forces are at work in the whole world with increasing momentum to attain universal peace. The disarmament talks seem headed towards a happy conclusion. President Eisenhower visited 11 nations on the great mission of peace. Krushchev visited the U. S. avowedly also for peace and all his pronunciamentos thereafter were for disarmament. Eisenhower will resume his peace mission to Russia and some Asian countries next spring. The Pax Romana peace conferences have been going on in Manila for the last three or four weeks. All of these are significant advances of the cause of world peace. We in the Philippines have always contributed by all means and in all international conferences for world peace. It is my hope and prayer and the hope and prayer of humanity that in the year of Our Lord 1960 world peace shall finally be attained.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). President Garcia’s speech at the Manila Overseas Press Club at 8 p.m., January 16, 1960. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(3) , 503-505.