PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE TESTIMONIAL PARADE GIVEN BY THE AFP IN HIS HONOR AT CAMP MURPHY, SATURDAY MORNING, MAY 11, 1957

MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES:

IN my capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, I accept with deep appreciation, nay, with boundless gratitude, your manifestation of loyalty. This is more than an individual—insignificant as he is in the universal scheme—could ask of his fellowmen. I would rather that, in this demonstration of fealty, you find added fervor in consecrating the ideals and principles upon which the nation’s armed forces stand. For principles can withstand, in fact, ignore, the destructive forces of time and events, the latter is easily shorn of its fotthold by the first high wind that blows. It is to principles that ultimate loyalty should be accorded. It is ideals that move history: men are but its instrument.

I am fully aware that you are endowed with this larger sense of loyalty for I have watched with keen admiration your past and present performance. In a very real and positive sense, you have been the vigilant guardians of our way of life and freedom. Whether it be in Bataan, in Korea, or the Sierra Madres, it was you in the Armed Forces who bore the brunt of the struggle against the dark and corrupting forces of the enemies of freedom. It was particularly in the anti-dissident campaign where you have grown in the esteem of your countrymen. For you have amply demonstrated to all and sundry that you are not merely soldiers with deadly weapons of combat but equally soldiers endowed with a social conscience. My illustrious predecessor, Ramon Magsaysay, has articulated your two-dimensional approach to the dissident problem in his now internationally famous policy of “All-out-Force and All out Friendship.” I pledge to carry on with this time-tested and effective policy.

1951 and 1953 are milestones in your growth towards political maturity and responsible citizenry. In those memorable years, you won incalculable victories for democracy. You kept faith with our people in insuring the free and untrammeled expression of their choice.

Once again we are embroiled in the heat and passion of a national election. Should you be called upon again by our people to stand vigil, I enjoin each and every one of you to see to it that the sanctity of the ballot is held inviolate.

I am equally aware of your participation in various international undertakings designed to strengthen the defense of the free world. Your exploits in Korea are veritable sagas of heroism; across conference tables, the vigor, the enthusiasm, the freshness and novelty of your approach to vital security problems have evoked recognition and acclaim. This I can say with authority, for in most of these conferences it was a source of endless pride to me that I have worked with you in formulating the Philippine position

It is but fitting and proper, therefore, that with such splendid achievements, you deserve the gratitude of our people. It, is fortunate, perhaps, that in my present position, I can translate this gratitude into a more tangible and appreciable form. At present there is a bill in Congress which proposes to increase the pay of enlisted ranks of the Armed Forces. Should it pass both Houses—as I have high hopes it will—I assure you that I will immediately stamp my official approval to make it into a law. I shall also look with favor on future measures designed to improve your welfare.

Gentlemen of the Armed Forces, to me this parade is but an emphatic symbolism. Your performance here and abroad, the tenacious professionalism you have demonstrated in preparing yourselves and your organization to enhance effective Guardianship of our way of life—all of which point to your unreserved willingness to lay down your lives in defense of our ideals, are the greater and more intrinsic testimonials of loyalty to your leader and the country he must only represent. For all these, allow me, even as your Commander-in-Chief, to salute you!

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library