PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE MANILA LIONS CLUB, MONDAY NIGHT, AUGUST 19, 1957, AT THE MANILA HOTEL

FELLOW LIONS, MY FRIENDS:

WE ARE honoring tonight the memory of the late President Manuel L. Quezon—a man beloved by the masses of our people because he loved them truly and well.

The memory of Quezon permeates us all. It is in the very air of freedom which we breathe, Quezon having been fondly called the chief architect of our independence. We shall remember Quezon for the many beneficial things he bequeathed to us. But tonight I would like to reminisce on Quezon as the father of our Social Justice program.

I shall not delineate in detail how Quezon dedicated his life, from his early manhood to his dying day, to the service of his people.

I shall not dramatize before you his ardent love of freedom for his country—how at the age of 20 he joined the revolutionary forces that fought the American Occupation troops, and later, carried on the fight for Philippine independence through a peaceful but determined and valiant struggle.

Neither shall I recall the many illuminating incidents in his life indicating his indomitable spirit and brilliant mind which, with the hand of a master, he utilized—as a provincial fiscal, as a governor as a majority floor leader of the First Philippine Assembly, as a resident commissioner to the United States, as President of the Philippine Senate, and as President of the Philippine Commonwealth—to the service of his country and people.

Many are the tales and legends woven about the many-faceted greatness of Quezon as a man and as a leader. Imbued with a burning passion for freedom and love for his fellowmen, and endowed with a great personality and adroit statesmanship, he welded together his people and led them in their long and arduous struggle for independence.

So convincingly did de prove his qualities for leadership, that his people acknowledged him as their political emancipator and idolized him in song, canvas, and marble.

It is no wonder that General Douglas MacArthur said of Quezon: “Of all men, of all time, none more truly merited the appellation of patriot-statesman.”

Quezon is commonly known as the architect of Philippine independence. It is indeed ironic, if not tragic, that Quezon died when the dawn of our day of freedom, for which he had labored all his life, was just breaking, and that he did not live to witness the birth of our young Republic But he must be happy to know that he had not labored and died in vain.

Viewed in the light of the present circumstances, we who are heir to this, our political independence, look up gratefully to Quezon, not only as the architect of our independence but as the far-seeing statesman who wanted to prepare his people for their greater responsibilities as free men. Quezon lived during an era when the preoccupation of the government and the governed was to secure immediate, complete, and absolute independence at any cost. Be that as it may, he also took steps that his people would be worthy of their freedom, when he launched his program of social justice.

Now that we are politically free, our main concern is how to make our people worthy of their independence. For, what value is it to be free in name but still economically shackled: to be a peon to economic czars, to be a man without a home and a piece of land, to be without education, to be subject to the ravages of diseases, or to be without a job?

My friends, I wish to point out on this occasion that a grateful government and people have kept faith with Quezon by picking up from where he left off. Inspired by Quezon’s social justice program, our late beloved President Magsaysay carried the torch and started in earnest to bring Quezon’s dreams to reality. Magsaysay blueprinted the long range program of social amelioration starting at the grass roots level.

Thus, the Government has taken measures to improve the living conditions of our people, especially the farmers in the once forsaken barrios and the once neglected laborers in our mushrooming factories.

The Government has constructed more irrigation systems, highways and barrio roads, waterworks and artesian wells, and pre-fabricated schoolhouses. It has purchased and expropriated big landed estates, subdivided and sold them to the tenants at cost. It has opened up new resettlement areas for landless farmers and constructed low-cost housing projects for the poor and the middle class. It has organized farmers’ cooperatives to help farmers financially in their production and in the storage and distribution of their products, free at last from the clutches of usurious manipulators. It has built more hospitals and organized rural health units in almost all the barrios in order to safeguard the people’s health. It has passed labor laws that give additional benefits to our working class.

The Government has seen to it that the oppressed and the downtrodden are given justice as guaranteed by the Constitution and thus the people’s faith in their government has been restored and strengthened. It is doing its best to promote further the well-being of our people through increased production in our farms and in our new industries.

My friends, all these are being done by our administration. All these are being implemented and accomplished as scheduled in our Five-Year Fiscal Plan. All these have sprung from the seed of social justice which was first sown by Quezon in his lifetime. All these are being done so that every man, woman, and child in our country will have his just share of social justice and will become better prepared citizens of an independent Republic.

We can build no statelier monument to Quezon than when, with the cooperation of all citizens, we can see the fruits of his labors enjoyed by all—when every free citizen enjoys the blessings of social justice.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library