Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines During the induction of officers of the Philippine Contractors Association

[Delivered at the Wack Wack Golf and Country Club, March 10, 1961]

THIS opportunity given me to express my views before a segment of the private sector which plays a vital role in the Administration’s efforts towards socioeconomic development and stability comes as a timely privilege.

The administration has proposed public investment in the amount of ₱400 million in the field of public works, excluding those earmarked for the construction of 350 kilometers of concrete roads which will cost an additional ₱35 million. These should be sufficient reason for the Philippine Contractors Association to infuse more revitalized interest in its cooperative efforts with government agencies charged with public works undertakings.

This new capital requirement embodied in the proposed “Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1961” and a companion measure for “Rural Development, Social Overhead, and Tourist Promotion Projects,” is aimed at supporting an aggressive socio-economic development plan and carrying effectively an accelerated rural development program which can adequately answer the growing needs of our increasing population.

The Administration implemented a retrenchment policy in government investment in public works in the past years, consistent with its goal to attain monetary stability and economic growth which will ward off any possible inflationary trends. The measure implemented to strengthen our monetary stability and economic firmness have resulted in positive gains in our economy. The administration is now justified to consider new capital requirements in its public works investment evaluated within prudent limits of its fiscal resources.

The heartening opportunities for the construction industry laid down in our program of public works construction this year clearly indicates the concern my administration has for the construction industry, its growth, its welfare and progress. Our retrenchment policy in public works investment in the past has slightly slanted downwards the rise of the statistical curve in the graph of private construction participation in government construction jobs. But the descending slope was merely a natural and passing effect of the austerity program which has imposed “belt-tightening” in the different sectors of our economy.

My administration has always been mindful of the cause of the construction business, cognizant as it is of the significant role that it plays in the big task of nation-building. I have anticipated with optimism that the success of the cure-measures for a revitalized economy will spur new trends and bigger undertakings in our government public works construction, and that counts for the opportunities it will offer to the construction business.

What will be the preponderance of undertakings which will highlight government construction?

In my message to Congress last January, I emphasized the urgency of prosecuting major public works jobs imperatively needed to conserve our resources and protect human lives and property from the ravages wrought by destructive floods. I stressed the need for regional basin development in order to tap our vast water resources to meet the increasing power needs of an accelerated industrial dispersal program, utilize the same for industrial-municipal and domestic water supply, and use a commensurate portion for irrigation to give more substance to our increased production efforts.

I have endorsed a judicious concrete paving of our main thoroughfares and highways in order to serve our people with easy, safe, convenient, and permanent means of transport for goods and services and support our transportation services with the kind of roads which would reduce to the bare minimum the wear and tear of vehicular units which would otherwise eat-up a sizeable portion of the income of the transportation business for maintenance and repair. This is also aimed at promoting our tourist trade. This in turn would minimize dollar needs for spare parts of the transportation business, thereby helping conserve our dollar reserves.

This program of development which I broadly outlined in my state-of-the-nation address, finds ideal support from the twin public works measures which have been publicized as the “Moreno version” of this year’s public works act.

These acts carry unmistakable emphasis on flood control and have prudently recommended ₱29.5 million of our general revenue expense and ₱30.5 million from bond funds for the various works involved in flood control. Another ₱7.2 million has been earmarked for the flood control and joint works of the Marikina project while the Angat multipurpose project is also being re-examined to assist in the flood diminution to the Pampanga basin.

To insure adequate and dependable supply of water for irrigation purposes and to increase the acreage of irrigated land for sustained and increased production, fund support for irrigation projects amounting to ₱43.3 million has been set aside. Notable in this portion of the appropriation is the outlay for the irrigation phase of the Angat multipurpose project amounting to ₱25.3 million, and for the irrigation phase of the Marikina multi-purpose project in the amount of ₱4 million.

The sum of ₱35 million is being set aside for the paving of highways proportionately apportioned at an estimated program of 150 kilometers in Luzon, 100 kilometers in Mindanao, and 100 kilometers in the Visayas. For the prosecution of building programs for national offices, general revenue fund amounting to ₱23 million has been sought. An outlay of ₱5 million from bond fund for the continuation of work at the National Capital at Constitution Hill in Quezon City has been recommended. For hospitals and sanitarium buildings ₱5 million is being sought.

The efforts to provide potable water supply for our people have been given ₱5 million allotment for nationwide waterworks projects, while the improvement of Manila and suburbs waterworks systems has been recommended an appropriation of ₱6.8 million.

Communications expansion, a project supported by loan will be provided peso support of ₱1 million this year and a program for the construction of post-telecom buildings with ₱1.4 million from the postal savings bank savings has been scheduled.

Portworks expansion and improvement will tap the port-works special fund of ₱18.8 million in order to cope with the needs of our water-borne transportation and our expanding ocean-going commerce. Another ₱5.5 million is also being asked of Congress to continue the vigorous construction of the Manila International Airport and terminal buildings.

A commensurate portion of the appropriations sought will go to utility projects, social overheads, tourist promotion projects, nationwide selected projects, community development undertakings considered vital to the integrated program of socio-economic, and rural development.

The magnitude of the task of public works construction gives you an insight into the opportunities made available to the construction industry. The limitations to our prosecution of such task lie on the fiscal resources and requirements and an enduring and stable economy which the administration has by far succeeded in restoring to safe level.

There will be a re-activation of projects which have been partly suspended because of austerity measures. There will be big jobs of long range scale which will tap the resources of the nation and the skill and potentialities of the Filipino engineer and technologist.

From the nature of the task of nation-building, I take cognizance of the role played by the construction industry and by the rank and file of engineers and technologists. In fact, if by popular mandate my services to our country and people should be sustained in the polls together with the services of one or two from the rank and file of the potent and recognized leaders of engineering and technology who can initiate more aggressively well-rounded and sound programs of government construction supportive of a well-balanced socio-economic and rural development in the upper chamber of Congress, I would be most happy to find such an ideal set-up.

But the opportunities that my administration can offer to the construction industry, in relation to other well-considered factors in an integrated and coordinated program of economic development, do not merely lie on the outlay for government construction jobs. The economic gains that the administration has attained would further enable it to provide the proper atmosphere and climate conducive to more support in the acquisition of necessary tools and instruments paramount in the construction business. Within prudent limits, our fiscal and monetary agencies will assess your needs and fit them well into the overall pattern of our integrated development programs that would require additional dollar capital investments.

I wish to anticipate more active participation by the private construction sector in government jobs. Basically, such participation should be founded on the ethical relationship between client and contractor because the peculiar nature of government undertaking places at stake not only public welfare but the interest of the people, the ultimate source of sovereign authority.

On this score, I urge the contractors to observe more fidelity to contractual obligations with the government agencies so as not to delay or upset the timetable of government programs and cause the government additional expense or embarrassment for failure to meet on time its commitment for certain services.

We would like to see removed all possible irritants which would impair in any manner the mutual cooperative efforts of contractors and government agencies charged with construction jobs. If some agencies have to take measures to the side of the contractor appears inimical to the industry, it so occurs only when the government agencies have to safeguard the interest of the government and the people from being jeopardized by smart if not unscrupulous operators.

On the basis of a more ethical relationship with representatives of the construction industry, and on the premises of more confidence and showing of responsibility in performance of contractors and their adherence to contractual obligations, we look forward to bigger participation of private contractors in government construction undertakings.

Nation-building is so big and tremendous a task that we justly rely on the contributions of the construction industry in speeding up our socioeconomic and rural development efforts and provide facilities and services healthy for our economy and to the satisfaction of our people.

It is with mutual understanding of the needs and problems of the industry and the government agencies, and with more constructive cooperation between both that we would like to see you carry on with the task of helping the government accelerate the completion of vital instruments for progress and prosperity.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia during the induction of officers of the Philippine Contractors Association held at the Wack Wack Golf and Country Club, Friday evening, March 10, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(13) , 2300-2304.