THE PRESIDENT’S SPEECH AT THE OPENING OF THE FOUR-DAY SIXTH NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE CATHOLIC EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES WEDNESDAY MORNING (AUGUST 13) AT THE U.S.T. GYMNASIUM

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM profoundly grateful to the organizers of this convention for giving me this opportunity to meet with representatives of Catholic schools throughout the Philippines. I have always considered education one of the most important activities of man. In the hands of educators lies the future not only of individuals but of nations and of the entire world. Educators are the true architects of civilization. Upon their labor of faith and love depend not only the temporal but also the eternal destinies of men.

I say labor of love and faith, for the work of an educator is inspired not by the hope of material gain but, in the final analysis, by a disinterested love of truth. It is therefore a labor which calls for great faith in the Author of all Truth, and for a great love of one’s fellowmen who were made to know, and live by, the truth.

As educators, yours is therefore a vocation which requires what can only be described as a missionary zeal; indeed, every teacher worth the name is in some sense an apostle, a missionary of truth. A religious missionary, such as those who were responsible for bringing Christianity to our country and for founding the first schools in our land, is nothing but a teacher of truths which he considers to be of supreme importance to all men, and for which he personally has forsaken home and family and all worldly possessions. I believe it is true to say that every man and woman who has sincerely embraced teaching as a vocation, and not merely as a means of livelihood, pursues his profession in the same spirit as that of a religious missionary. You know better than anyone else what you have had to give up when you chose to teach rather than to enter one of the more lucrative professions.

But, as in the’ story of Mary and Martha in the Gospel, you have chosen the better part. I am only the President, but you are the maker of Presidents. You mold the citizens from whose rank the leaders of our country are taken; you train the citizens without whom the leaders would have no followers. In this sense, you hold the destiny of our country in your hands.

I believe it was Daniel Webster who said: “If we work upon marble, it will perish. If we work upon brass, time will efface it. If we rear temples, they will crumble to dust. But if we work upon men’s immortal mind, if we imbue them with high principles, with the just fear of God and love of their fellowmen, we engrave on those tablets something which no time can efface, and which will brighten and brighten to all eternity.” And as St. Chrysostom has said, “What greater work is there than training the mind and forming the habits of the young?”

I am glad to note that you have chosen as the theme of your convention, “Catholic Education and the Philippine Constitution.” I believe the choice is very apt, for our Constitution is your guarantee that the private schools which you represent have a right to exist and be recognized by our government.

On the other hand, the type of education which your schools impart, in which spiritual and moral value and the training of character are given prime importance, is a real contribution to the formation of citizens who are bound to respect not only the Constitution but all the laws of our land which are intended to implement its mandates.

Our Constitution guarantees “the free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and worship” (Art. III, Sec. 1, par. 7), which includes the freedom to teach any religious doctrine, provided such doctrine does not militate against the well-being of the state. It further recognizes that the rearing of youth for civic efficiency is the natural right and duty of parents” (Art. II, Sec. 4).

The right to worship freely and the right of parents in the education of their children, my friends, are denied in totalitarian countries; but not in this country as long as our Constitution remains in force. The existence of private schools and private educational associations such as yours, is our proof that education in this country is not regimented. With regard to private schools, the government’s role is merely supervisory and regulatory (Constitution, Art. XIV, Sec. 5); but there is no idea here of regimentation or absolute control.

Our Constitution furthermore guarantees freedom of worship and so religious schools will always have a place in our educational system where they can make their contribution to the building of an upright, competent, and intelligent citizenry.

You will find in our Constitution, therefore, the guaranties whereby private citizens may set up their own schools if they wish, provided they meet the minimum requirements laid down by the government; and whereby the right to teach religion in those schools is respected and protected against undue intervention.

But if the Constitution protects the private religious schools which you represent, I believe that the religious and moral training which you impart to your students, coupled of course with the academic and vocational preparation which you give them, implements an important mandate of that same Constitution.

Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution stages: “All schools shall aim to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship.”

The names of the famous Catholic schools in this country which have achieved eminence along these lines, are so well-known that I need not enumerate them here. This venerable University in which we are gathered today, for instance, has given our country some of its most outstanding leaders in various fields.

I should like to dwell a little, however, on this important aspect of education; namely, the development of moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and the teaching of the duties of citizenship. We tend to take these qualities for granted, but the difficulties in which our country finds itself today underscore the pressing need for developing them in our younger generation.

You are aware that our country is passing through one of the most trying periods in its history. We are beset by economic problem, for instance.These problems are not beyond solution but they can be solved only if our people have the moral courage, the personal discipline, and the civic conscience sufficiently alive to our country’s needs, to meet the challenge that confronts our nation. These are qualities which our Constitution enjoins all our schools to develop in our youth, and our present experience shows that the survival of our Republic depends in in large measure on the extent to which our people possess them.

For example, some months ago, when our dollar reserves were dangerously low, I felt it my duty to call upon our people to practice austerity, which I described to be not merely an economic policy but a way of life. This was the only way we could conserve dollars which were badly needed by our new industries. It was an appeal to the patriotism of our people to forego unnecessary imports in order that our new industries which we have been trying to build up so painfully through the years, and which our country needs if it is ever to gain economic stability, would not colapse.

This is an example of an economic problem vitally affecting our country, whose solution requires of our people strong moral character and personal discipline. For these are involved in austerity. Austerity is nothing more than self-denial for the sake of a greater good, the welfare of the nation. Self-denial requires strength of character and personal discipline.

I am now instituting a determined campaign against graft and corruption in the government. Here is another problem whose root cause is the lack of moral training, a lack of respect for law, a lack of moral and civic conscience, in those responsible for venalities in the government. Because of them the country loses millions of pesos which could be better spent for the needs of the people. Because of them, much time and effort has to be spent in probes and investigations, because it is still our duty to protect the innocent. These people constitute a drain and a drag to the smooth functioning of our government, and I am determined to weed them out.

Again, I have announced that one of the policies of this administration is to intensify production. This is the only way our country can achieve a measure of self-sufficiency consonant with our status as an independent nation. This is an economic problem, but again for its solution we must draw on the moral reserves of our people. For increased production means improved methods, it is true; but it also means that we must work harder. And hard work calls for discipline; it calls for character, for the moral strength to resist the natural tendency towards ease and comfort.

More than once I have spoken of the need for developing science in this country. We are living in an age of unparalleled progress in the field of science. Those who seek to build civilization and those who seek to destroy it are so far advanced in the field of scientific research that mankind is terrified with the fury of the secrets unlocked by the scientists. It has come to a point when the struggle for supremacy in scientific research between the peoples of the free world and those who seek to destroy our freedom, could mean a struggle for survival. We cannot afford to close our eyes to this race in the science field; we must keep abreast of the scientific progress in other countries and contribute our share to the preservation of freedom. But more important than this, we need the fruits of scientific research in order to make the maximum use of our own natural resources that we may raise our people’s standard of living.

But again, science requires dedication; it requires infinite patience and great discipline, moral as well as intellectual, in those who would pursue it.

Finally, in the great struggle between atheistic communism and the freedom-loving peoples of the world, our country, as I have not hesitated to tell the press in the United States, is definitely committed to the side of freedom. I have been criticized by some quarters here as “talking big” for saying this. But gentlemen, of one thing I am certain, and that is, that the vast majority of our people are opposed to communism as a matter of principle.

And the reason is not hard to seek. We are fundamentally a religious people. We can have no share in an ideology that denies the existence of God and the natural rights of man.

To think clearly on these issues, to be able to take a stand where others prefer to affect neutrality, we need firm principles and a positive faith. The religious and moral principles which you inculcate in your students, provide them with a strong anchor in the midst of the present struggle for the hearts and minds of men.

Your schools are therefore making a distinct contribution to the building of our nation by their emphasis on moral, training, on the formation of character, on the spiritual realities upon which, after all, the whole structure of our civilization is founded.

I congratulate you for the growth of your association which is making great strides in the various fields of educational endeavor. Allow me before closing to reiterate our pressing need for cultivating vocational efficiency and in developing scientific research, without sacrificing the cultivation of character and morality without which a nation may be a nation of highly technical and mechanized masses but not truly educated and cultured. These aspects of education should be given more emphasis and geared to the national program of moral and spiritual uplift.

Let me now close with the parting words of the late President Magsaysay, in one of the last speeches he delivered at the University of San Carlos before the fatal plane crash that took him away from us: “Ladies and gentlemen, teachers and students—keep your faith, and your faith will keep you.”

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library