Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Armed Force Day celebration

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, December 21, 1957]

TODAY marks a most significant milestone of your organization. You celebrate your twenty-second anniversary at a time when the nation is undergoing one of the trying phases in our national life. You will again be called upon to give your share in the tasks ahead. You will be asked to do more, very much more than what you have done in the past.

Our people know that you have done much. They also know that you did your share of government in a most efficient and devoted manner. But greater problems are ahead, for, indeed, the problems of a young republic like ours, become greater and graver as we grow in stature as an independent and sovereign country.

As your commander in chief, I feel it is my duty to keep you informed of the other aspects of our national life that you may better appreciate the tasks that may be assigned to you from time to time. I feel it is also my duty to consult with you on the problems confronting the country as a whole, I consider it, therefore, appropriate that as you rejoice, for certainly you have reasons to rejoice on this your 22nd anniversary as the armed forces of a grateful nation, to apprise you of some of the great tasks ahead. It was only very recently that I personally informed our people of the state of our economic life today. In my last talk to the nation I presented to our people the candid details of the latest program of government which I felt must be launched at this time. All of you know by now that this program of government is the austerity program.

It is not for me here to restate the compelling reasons that led to this program or its implementing details. Suffice it for me to say that it was a most difficult decision to make. I assure you I did weigh heavily its implications. I am aware that it is a program that is as bold as it is exacting. On the part of our national planners, it will call for courage of the highest order and the missionary zeal of the true public servant. On the part of our people, it will call for a temporary denial of some of the things that we really don’t need—things that can very well be dispensed with without impairing their welfare. It shall also require from our people a more dedicated effort for greater production of basic necessities that we really need.

The austerity program as envisioned is designed precisely to insure a healthy and steady growth of our economic life. Primarily, the objective of this program is to arrest a deteriorating economic condition; ultimately, to assure the stability of our economy and the well-being of our people. Whatever adverse effects it may engender are definitely temporary in character. This adverse situation, if it had already been reflected on the national scene is to my mind more artificial than real. I assure you that adequate controls will soon be instituted to safeguard the welfare of our people.

I would like to assure you also that in arriving at this decision the greater interest of this and future generations was paramount in my heart. I know that with the minimum of self-restraint now—the well-being and happiness of future generations of our people will be better enhanched.

It is in the light of this austerity program that as Commander-in-Chief I ask you, particularly the defense planners, to reconcile the requirements of national security with this new and bold concept of government. While I leave the formulation of requirements for national security in your hands, I shall insist that the plans and estimates that are drawn be realistic. It can only be realistic if such plans and estimates are consistent with our national capabilities.

It is well, therefore, that you and I reexamine and reasses the effectiveness of our national defense structure. We are agreed that our security forces must be kept in a state of sustained preparedness. We must however ask ourselves this simple question—for a small country like ours, what is really the ideal of defense preparedness? To you and I, who witnessed the deficiencies of our defense establishment as dramatized during the last war, our answer would readily be a modernized airforce, navy, and army equal or nearly equal to the best in the world.

But, you and I know that this would be wishful thinking. We are left, therefore, with no other alternative but to design our defense structure in a more realistic manner even if we have to accept the fact that our defense preparations are geared to serve as a deterrent to any potential aggressor. I shall, therefore, ask you to reexamine and reassess our existing defense preparations whether such preparations can best satisfy our security needs.

As your Commander-in-Chief, I would like also to discuss with you what I consider might be an improvement of our armed forces participation in the rural development program. I shall single out only one substantial effort of our armed forces. I refer to the participation of the corps of engineers in the public works program. While it is true that the corps of engineers has done a magnificent job of assisting in the overall public works program, yet, I feel that the effort was considerably dissipated. It was dissipated in the sense that the corps of engineers undertook simultaneously a countrywide effort extending from Aparri to Jolo. It is my wish that our defense planners look into the possibility of employing the corps of engineers, in collaboration with other departments and agencies of the government, in a manner that its inherent effectiveness as a corps could be exploited to the maximum. Of necessity, priorities will have to be established, but again, I have to leave the details to you.

Similarly, I expect you to reexamine certain other efforts which the Armed Forces is currently undertaking to support the rural development program.

I know that you can contribute even more than you had in the past. You have the ingenuity, the dedication, and a sense of mission to undertake all these tasks.

Finally, it is my wish that you devote your time not only in the military preparedness program but also in your added tasks of assisting other departments of the government in their primary function of securing the economic stability of our country.

The requirements of free world defense are great. As a member of this free world collective effort, it is incumbent on us to share our burden of that effort. We can only share this if we are economically stable. Having thus satisfied this posture, we can then meet with balance the extreme requirements of national defense and assume fully and with confidence and dignity our obligation and responsibility to our allies in the free world.

I know that you can take this challenge. You have responded well before. Your reward can only be the eternal gratitude of a grateful people.

May I extend to you—the officers, enlisted personnel, and civilian personnel—my very best wishes. Mrs. Garcia joins me in wishing you all the happiest of holidays.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech at Camp Murphy during the Armed Forces Day celebration on December 21, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(24) , 8822-8825.