Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Read by Foreign Affairs Secretary Felixberto Serrano before the 7th Asian Peoples Anticommunist League Conference

[Held at the U.S.T. College of Medicine, May 3, 1961]

TO BE FREE, to resist restraint, to avoid capture—this is one of the most deeply rooted instincts of every living creature. Man throughout his history has yearned for freedom, worked for it, and fought for it. The noblest pages of man’s chronicle record the blood and lives he has paid for it. Yet, today hundreds of millions have been stripped of freedom—in some instances only newly won—and subjected to rule which turns back the clock to serfdom. Under Communist rulers, they enjoy no more human rights, no more human dignity than the slaves of ancient Rome—however much the bars of their cells may be gilded.

To free men everywhere this fact is a matter of gravest concern. How did it happen? How can it be kept from happening to other free men, to other free societies? No other question of our times clamor more urgently for answers and action. I welcome this opportunity to submit some suggestions.

It is my belief that we have little to fear from Communism, but that we have much to fear from Communists. In this seeming paradox I see Communism as an idea, as a way of life, as prophecy and performance so riddled with fallacy, contradiction, and failure as to be rejected by any informed and matured mind. Let us note just a few examples.

According to Karl Marx, the lot of the worker in capitalist free societies inevitably would deteriorate and his misery, intensify. Yet, today it is in these countries where capitalism is most firmly established that the worker enjoys unprecedented high standards of living, where he is free to organize and bargin collectively, where his unions have grown so powerful and wealthy as to furnish financial assistance to capitalists who have suffered reverses. Where Communism has ruled for almost half a century and resources are richly abundant, the worker still receives little more than essentials for his labor, has no choice in his employment, can belong only to a government-controlled union, and is denied even the right to strike when over-time is exacted as a ”patriotic donation.”

According to Marx, only the total victory of Communism could abolish imperialism and colonialism. Today the liquidation of old empires is almost complete, the transition in many cases having been orderly and attended by goodwill and continued friendship between the newly independent and the former sovereign. The world’s concern today is with the new imperialism of international Communism, which by force of arms and police coercion has clamped its iron rule upon such diverse peoples as the Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, and Balts of Europe; to the Chinese, Koreans, and Vietnamese of Asia; and which now seeks to add the Congo, Laos, and Cuba to its conquests.

According to Marx, the free nations were doomed to annihilate each other in series of competitive wars for markets. Yet, out of the last war came the unique demonstration of victor helping vanquished to speed reconstruction and resume useful cooperation with the rest of the free world community. And it has been these free nations which in the United Nations organization have taken the initiative in working toward a world rule of law, rather than force. The threat to world peace today comes solely from the aggressive expansionist policies of the Communist block and its obstruction of all efforts to achieve peaceful solutions of world crises.

Illustrations of the bankrupted of Communism as an idea could be multiplied a hundred-fold, were there time and need. As for some of the more spectacular accomplishments of the Communist world, I would say that the building of the pyramids of Egypt were equally wondrous for their time and equally costly in the blood, sweat, and lives of slave labor And a parallel of military power may be drawn from Caesar’s legion’s, likewise easy to deploy as long as captive peoples could be made to feed land equip them

At this point however, it is important to emphasize that we have no reason to draw comfort from the failure and inadequacies of Communism. On the contrary, it might be argued that the inability of Communism to compete for the mind of mankind in the free open market of ideas has spurred them to sharpen the techniques of subversive conspiracy which today threaten the survival of free men and a free world. The Communist today gives little thought to socialistic Utopias or to preaching his political doctrine. To the uninformed he directs the big lie and the promise never intended to be kept. To the more sophisticated, he becomes invisible, skillfully manipulating free men against each other to accomplish his ends.

It is significant to note that no Communist government has ever been voluntarily chosen or willingly accepted by those governed. Invariably it has developed out of crises involving other protagonists, the Communist minority taking advantage of an instable situation to seize power. Invariably, Communist rule has required extreme police state coercion to keep it in power. And invariably, a study of the crises which facilitated Communist take-over reveals their agents as prime instigators and provocateurs.

How do we recognize the Communist? How do we detect his destructive activity? That is the crux of our problem. There might be a dozen seated in this very audience. The Communist might look like—or even be—a merchant or a clerk, a doctor or a teacher, a housewife or a student. He might be motivated by ill-informed idealism or crass ambition, by neurotic hatred or cynical opportunism, by blackmail for some personal indiscretion or threat to a loved one. No device to the underworld is alien to Communist discipline. You probably would not immediately recognize the Communist if he sat next to you. He would not openly espouse Communism os even suggest the violent overthrow of our system. But he would miss no opportunity to chip away at the foundations of our way of life, systematically working to bring about that situation of unrest or friction or fear or hatred which he and his fellow conspirators consider the proper working climate for their take-over program. Such is the harshness of party discipline that he considers himself on duty every waking hour of the day—at home, at his place of work, in his social contacts. No opportunity is missed to advance “the cause.” No assignment—not even treason to his own nation—is too dirty for his faithful execution. A homely analogy of the Communist method might be the team of pick-pockets. One provokes your anger or excitement while the other offers help and solicitude. Between the two you lose your wallet. But where the law might apprehend the pickpocket and restore your wallet, when the Communist crime is consummated he becomes the law.

This brings us to discussion of counter-measures, of how a free world of laws can protect itself from the subversive conspiracy which recognizes no law but takes advantage of every law to protect and disguise its sinister operations. We must no longer lull ourselves into a sense of false security by saying that freedom and democracy can compete with the socialist ideology in competition for men’s minds, because this is not the nature of the competition. Nor can we say that social and economic betterment will, of themselves, afford us security, because a prime objective of the enemy is to delay or obstruct such betterment, and because the efficacy of his methods have been demonstrated even where living standards and political maturity are high. What we must face up to is that we are at war, an unconventional form of war, it is true, but a form no less productive of human misery and enslavement. The current agonies of the Congo and Cuba, of Laos and Vietnam and Korea, testify to that.

It may be argued that some of the devices of subversion are not new and that sound societies have withstood them in the past. Lies, distortion, hate and fear-mongering, disruptive rumors—all have been experienced by man since the first organized community. But never before in man’s experience have they been developed and disseminated with such scientific subtlety and precision, and on a coordinated global scale. It is as though a human body had gradually built resistance to a virus, only to be suddenly attacked by an infinitely more virulent and deadly strain. To delay medication while waiting for the body to develop natural resistance would be fatal.

The Communist party is outlawed in this country, the law prescribing punishment for membership and for the performance of the usual revolutionary acts. But the enemy has lost no time in developing methods of evasion, with tactics of even greater potency. Those to whom the law might apply now remain concealed and avoid direct action. They operate through tools whose names appear on no membership rosters, whose acts—taken singly—stay just within the pale of the law, attaining their destructive force only in cumulative form. Thus, however much our security agencies may be aware of what is happening to take legal action becomes almost impossible without impairing some of the human rights and civil liberties which are a cherished part of our free and democratic social and political system.

This is our dilemma, and we are informed that it is common to the rest of the free world in varying degrees. It is generally agreed that remedial action must not destroy the very freedom we seek to protect from the Communists. But it is also generally agreed that survival demands a solution.

In our legislature the Committee on Anti-Filipino Activities is pursuing an inquiry into subversion in the educational sector. I am told that other lines of inquiry into other sectors are contemplated. These investigations I am sure will be conducted with objectively .and with a high sense of responsibility commensurate with the gravity of the problem All those involved, as well as the general public, will likewise contribute the fullest measure of their patience and sober judgment. The stakes are too high to expect less. While waiting for the subject to be thoroughly explored and specific recommendations offered, however, we must not delay or neglect those counter-measures already available to us. Public information and vigilance is one such. It is important that every one of us understands the enemy’s objectives and his methods.

His strategy at the domestic level is to bring about the Elapse of our social, political, and economic institutions taking advantage of the ensuing confusion to seize control and impose the rule of international communism. His global strategy is to isolate us from defensive alliances facilitating our conquest and commensurately weakening the Free World’s collective security system. Whatever we read or hear contributing to these strategic goals, along with its source, must therefore be scrutinized with utmost care to determine whether it is enemy tactic or an honest expression of criticism or bias. To label every criticism or controversial opinion Communist-inspired is no less irresponsible than shouting “witch-hunt”, and “McCarthyism” whenever free men undertake to review their defenses. Both are damaging to the cause of freedom.

Another approach which seems warranted by the circumstances is a careful redefinition of our rights as free men in a free world under crisis. We should not lose sight of the tradition that, when so dictated by the common good, free men have not hesitated to assume voluntarily such limitations upon their freedom as may be required. It would appear to be no violation of any basic right, for example, to require that in vital strategic sectors known to be enemy targets of infiltration, key posts be held only by those whose rejection and opposition to the Communist system and its objectives is complete, unequivocal, and supported by the record. This would seem a minimum security precaution.

Out of this, conference I am sure that other short range expedients and longer range remedies will be evolved. What is immediately heartening is the growing international understanding that this is a global threat calling for global counter-action as firm and resolute as any military action.

If the tone of my remarks has been rather grim, I hope you will understand that I do not speak in a spirit of despair. That final victory will not be enjoyed by the Communists I am confident. The gift of freedom having been bestowed upon us by God, it is inconceivable that He would permit it to be wrested from us those who deny Him—except perhaps as a test of our fitness to protect it. There is still time for us to meet and to pass such test successfully, provided we act swiftly, with intelligence and with enduring dedication.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia read by Foreign Affairs Secretary Felixberto Serrano before the 7th Asian Peoples Anticommunist League Conference. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(20) , 3706-3710.