Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen:

ONE of the priceless blessings of democracy is that it makes provisions for the free and voluntary participation of private citizens in public affairs. An outstanding example is the nationwide observance of Medicine Week, which reaches its climax today. As you very well know, the observance of Medicine Week in the Philippines was initiated by the Philippine Medical Association a few years ago and has now become a tradition.

In the observance of Medicine Week, the government has generously lent its support and approval, but the major portion of the work has been achieved under the leadership and with the active participation of the Philippine Medical Association and the various medical and allied societies.

In the name of the Republic, therefore, I wish to express our sincere appreciation of the dynamic leadership of the medical societies in the observance of Medicine Week. It is such support from private citizens and organizations that contributes immensely to the strength of our democracy.

Last Thursday noon, at a regular meeting of the Rotary Club of Manila, our new Secretary of Health, Dr. Valencia, made a masterful analysis of the major health problems confronting the Philippines today and made public a revitalized program which the Department of Health proposes to undertake, as well as certain suggestions requiring action on the part of other government agencies.

In his analysis, Secretary Valencia stated that our main health problems he in three areas; namely, sanitation, disease control, and nutrition.

On this occasion, I wish to make public my wholehearted support of the revitalized program proposed by the Department of Health. It is my hope that said program will get underway immediately. The Office of the President is duly prepared to extend whatever assistance may be necessary to get this, program into high gear.

The revitalization program proposed by Secretary Valencia, therefore, may be considered as the basic health program of this Administration. Briefly, it involves the adoption and strict enforcement of improved policies governing Department of Health operations, the strengthening of our health department to expedite services to the people, the widening of the program of service of the department at all levels, the raising of the standards of efficiency through the minimizing of politics and through intensified training programs, the expansion of health facilities through the construction of additional hospitals, pavilions, and laboratories, and the streamlining of the methods and procedures prescribed in all departments of the Department of Health aimed at the reduction of red tape. The Office of the President gives official approval to this basic outline of revitalized health program for the government, and I am confident that with the implementation of these commendable plans, we shall be able to achieve a higher standard of health for our people.

But, as all of us realize, responsibility for health lies not only in the hands of the Department of Health. It also involves action on the part of other government agencies and the people.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the Philippine Medical Association Grand Ball at the Manila Hotel, September 28, 1958, at 8:30 p.m. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(26) , 6584-6585.