Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the annual rites in commemoration of the late President Quezon’s 81st birthday

[Delivered in Quezon City, August 19, 1959]

MAYOR AMORANTO, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, MY COUNTRYMEN:

MANUEL Luis Quezon, whom we remember and honor today on the 81st anniversary of his birth, was a man of towering virtues. He was personally fearless and politically courageous. He had a firm command of statecraft, imaginative in planning and even bolder in execution. He was a master of the art of politics. He possessed a magnetic personality and a rare gift of eloquence which charmed his friends and disarmed his enemies. He was a tireless, dedicated public servant, steadfast of purpose and clear of vision. He was magnanimous in victory, and a superb sense of showmanship never failed him in any situation. Quezon was all these and more, a man among men, a giant among leaders, now standing ten feet tall in our Valhalla of heroes, fully worthy of the tribute and veneration that his people pour out to his memory today.

But even over and above all these virtues, the one quality of Quezon which has earned for him the deathless affection and respect of his people was his intense patriotism and his noble pride as a Filipino. It is this quality which has deepest meaning and significance to us in our present-day situation. It is the quality that throws the brightest flood of guiding light on the road that we as a nation are traveling today.

Quezon loved his country with a burning passion that fired him to work indefatigably for its freedom and progress, until its flames literally consumed his frail, stubborn body. From the time he acquired awareness of the sufferings of his people under the heels of an alien master, Quezon was seized with the restless obsession to make them free. He took up arms against both Spain and the United States, fighting with reckless daring. When the violent struggle had failed and peaceful agitation replaced armed revolution, he placed himself in the vanguard of the movement for immediate, complete, and absolute independence. With that other immortal of the Philippine campaign for independence, Sergio Osmeña, Sr., Quezon founded, organized, guided, and ultimately led the Nacionalista Party, which became the chief vehicle for the realization of the Filipino people’s aspiration for freedom. Quezon’s personal career was rewarded with the presidency of the Philippine Commonwealth, which was the final transitory stage towards independence, and only death robbed him of the presidency of the independent Republic of the Philippines, which was erected on the ashes and debris of a destructive war.

“Love your country,” Quezon once urged his people, “because it is the only country that God has given you, the only country you will ever have.” He was a man who fully practised what he preached.

As part of his intense love of country, to Quezon it was an article of faith that the Filipino was as good as any other man on earth. In many storied incidents, his thunderous wrath fell with a shattering roar on those who forgot or challenged this creed. He was as contemptuous of Filipinos who deprecated their own race and nationality, as he was ruthlessly harsh on foreigners who looked down upon his countrymen. His sharp tongue and violent temper were at their wickedest when he chastised such foreigners.

The late President Quezon was born on August 19, 1878, from humble parents who taught school in Baler, Tayabas. The name of Quezon is synonymous with love of country and independence. In his early life he joined in the war and bitter struggle for the freedom and independence of our country. He was barely 20 years old when he enlisted in the ranks of General Emilio Aguinaldo’s army to repel the invading American forces. Serving as a young officer, his record was one of courage and dedication. His deeds and exploits could very well serve as a model to present day officers in our armed forces. He surrendered to General MacArthur, father of Gen. Douglas MacArthur, in Malacañang Palace only to confirm a report that the Americans had captured General Aguinaldo. Having confirmed this, he decided then and there to return to civilian life and pursue further his driving ambition to help attain the independence of his country.

In 1907, Manuel L. Quezon was elected member of the First Philippine Assembly. Together with former President Osmeña, Sr., he helped organize the Nacionalista Party which forthwith announced to the people its platform of “immediate, complete, and absolute independence.” At that time certain Philippine leaders headed by Pardo de Tavera launched a movement favoring the annexation of the Philippines as one of the states of the American Union. In sharp reply, Quezon and Osmeña campaigned for immediate independence. History now proudly recounts that the Filipino people rallied around these two stalwarts. From 1907, both Osmeña and Quezon laid the groundwork which bore fruits with the approval of the Jones Act and the Tydings-McDuffe Independence Law.

With his election as President of the Commonwealth Manuel L. Quezon plunged with renewed vigor and dedication in preparing our country for her day of independence. By word and deed, he showed and taught the men around him that the Philippines had to be prepared to stand on her own feet, free and sovereign, when the mantle of independence would finally descend on her shoulders. True to the ideals of .his people, Quezon stood firmly to resist a Governor-General who threatened to cut down on the self-government-of the Filipinos. Rising to the occasion, he firmly emphasized that “better a government run like hell by Filipinos than a government run like heaven by Americans.” By deed, he proved to his countrymen that there is dignity in labor; and by word, he preached to them his principles of love of country. In his code for good citizenship, Quezon emphasized, among other things, love and respect for our parents; veneration of the memory of our heroes and living up to the noble traditions of our people; safeguarding of the purity of suffrage and abiding by the decision of the majority; and finally, respect for the Constitution.

I have recalled these traits of Manuel Luis Quezon, my countrymen, because as. I have said they have deep meaning and significance to our people in our situation today. The most precious and valuable legacy that Quezon bequeathed to us was our independence. He labored a lifetime to lead us to freedom. I am proud to say that your government today is jealously guarding that freedom. It is continually striving to make our independence a living, vibrant, and throbbing reality.

Our people cannot be called truly free until the economy of the country is substantially in their hands. The present economic orientation is towards wider participation of Filipinos in the national economy. The Filipino first policy is therefore an integral part of the nation’s aspiration to be truly independent politically and economically, a sacrosanct national aspiration for which Quezon, and before him Lapu-Lapu and Dagohoy, Rizal and Bonifacio, Mabini and Del Pilar, fought so nobly and heroically.

In doing this we know we count with the sympathy and understanding of our friends in the Free World who believe in freedom and democracy and in the sovereign equality of nations. And it is precisely because of this that we implacably oppose, an ideology that cancels the fundamental rights of man enthroned in our democratic Constitution, an ideology that would establish a totalitarian state.

In connection with this task of carrying on the noble traditions of our race which was the passion of Quezon’s life, let me remind you of what he said in the American Congress during his incumbency as Philippine Resident Commissioner. He said, talking about the Filipino cause of freedom: “If to be free we have to keep the Philippines undeveloped; if to be free we will have to be poor and remain poor, we will unanimously and unhesitatingly prefer to be poor but free than to be rich but subjects.”

Thus in Quezon’s time, when the supreme and primordial aim of our people was to win immediate, complete, and absolute independence, we were indivisibly united behind this objective. No political party dared come on the scene armed with a lesser purpose, and the few foolhardy ones that did venture to preach departure from the glorious ideal of independence suffered prompt and complete political extinction, as the Federalists for example. Thus, while we never lacked political parties that fought each other furiously on an infinite variety of other issues, they were fully in accord on the issue of independence, political and economic. On that question we were one united people, leaving no doubts in the mind of anyone as to our senti­ments. Because of such unity, we achieved our political independence. With that same unity we shall achieve economic independence.

I would therefore conclude by saying that the most fitting way to perpetuate the memory of Manuel L. Quezon is to keep alive by our thoughts and our deeds and our practices the deathless nationalistic ideals of that great Leader. About the momentous matter of nationalism he said these , immortal words that continue to reverberate in the heart of the Filipino nation: “Rightly conceived, felt, and practised, nationalism is a tremendous force for good. It strengthens and solidifies a nation. Community interest is made active. It preserves the best traditions of the past and adds zest to the ambition of enlarging the inheritance of the people. It is, therefore, a dynamic urge for continuous self-improvement. In fine, it enriches the sum total of mankind’s cultural, moral, and material possessions through the individual and characteristic contribution of each people.” Let these vibrant thoughts guide and inspire the Filipinos of this generation and those to come.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s Speech at the annual rites held in Quezon City Wednesday afternoon, August 19, 1959, in commemoration of the late President Quezon’s 81st birthday. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (34) , 6996-6999.