Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Commencement Exercises of the National University and the conferring of the degree of Doctor of Humanities (Honoris Causa)

[Delivered at the Jose Rizal Memorial Stadium, March 21, 1961]

I WELCOME the opportunity to address the faculty and the student Body of this great institution of learning on this momentous occasion. At the outset, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations to the earnest and ambitious young men and women who have reached their goals and have just been awarded their diplomas as symbols of academic success. I need not tell you what difficulties and obstacles you had to overcome. Suffice it to say that this is your hour of triumph, of fruition, of fulfillment. It is, indeed, one of the happiest moments of your lives. And so I am glad to be with you and to join you in your rejoicing. I wish you Godspeed as you leave the familiar halls of your alma mater and go out into the cold, calculating world to face the future, with its challenges, its promises, and its stark realities.

For ray part, I deeply appreciate the distinction that has been accorded me by the authorities of the National University in conferring upon me the degree of Doctor of Humanities, honoris causa. I consider this gesture as a token of recognition by the National University of whatever I have done for the promotion of the welfare and happiness of our people. Such recognition will spur me to still greater endeavors in their behalf. In acknowledging this signal honor, I pledge myself to dedicate the remaining years of my life to the service of humanity and our people and to furtherance of better understanding and closer relations between our people and the other nations of the world.

As we look at ourselves in self-examination, we cannot fail to see the unmistakable signs of a growing trend toward materialism. Stealthily, like a thief in the dead of night, its influence seems to be creeping into the minds of our people, blurring their sense of social values and otherwise affecting their outlook on life. And so today we find a man’s worth being frequently gauged, not on the basis of the kind of life he leads nor on the contribution he makes to social well-being and progress, but on the basis of the size of his holdings or the number of digits in the credit balance column of his bank book. Coupled with this trend is the pragmatic way of thinking which, more often than not, leads to opportunism and expediency in one’s decisions and actions.

The impact of this trend upon the impressionable minds of the youth is almost certain to lead to the whetting of their desire for the material things of life—money, possessions, and the power that goes with wealth and social position. Kept within proper limits, such desire and ambition are legitimate and may even be socially beneficial. But if it is allowed to develop into an obsession, it may become so strong that the end may be made to justify the means, with the result that the individual may be tempted to go beyond the bounds of morality and even to break the law in order to get what he wants. This is one of the sources of anomalies, graft, and corruption—evils that today are afflicting our social organism like a malignant cancer.

This condition must not be allowed to continue. We must revise our concept and appreciation of moral values. In casting about for principles to live by and to guide and sustain our actions, we have to understand deeper the eternal cosmic laws of life; for instance, the inevitability of retribution for every wrong one does, known or unknown; the certainty of reward for every good or righteous action, known or unknown; the infallibility of the law of cause and effect and the like. We need to go back to the old concepts of honesty, family solidarity, clean and righteous living, respect for authority, and the other traits which have been the objects of encomium by the chroniclers of the early days of our history. It is unfortunate that the ravages of time appear to have weakened these traits. Therefore, something should be done to strengthen them and to return them to their pristine state. In the process of interaction between our native culture and the culture of other people, we must be careful not to give up what is ours and embrace what is foreign merely because the latter bears the label of modernity. We should keep in mind the advice of St. Paul to the Thessalonians: “Test all things; hold fast that which is good.”

Extending our view to the world outside, we find that prejudices of one kind or another still color and warp the thinking of many people in different parts of the globe. Then, too, misunderstandings, mistrust, and suspicions still exist and impair the friendly relations that should prevail among nations. Two opposing ideologies, each one espoused by the strongest nations of the world, are engaged in a titanic struggle to win the minds of men. As a result of these conditions, tensions prevail among peoples. Even today, in faraway Africa, as well as in Southeast Asia, there are powder kegs which are capable of exploding any day; and of throwing the whole world into a mighty conflagration, the like of which has not been witnessed in the long history of mankind.

It is true that man has made giant strides in the fields of science and technology. We stand in wonderment as we ponder how man has been able to harness the forces of nature to his higher purposes. We admire the strong bridges he has constructed to span rivers and even seas and, the sturdy ships he has built for crossing the wide expanse of oceans. We marvel at the powerful locomotives that have made land travel rapid and easy. We are fascinated by the airplane, and by inventions which will soon bring to reality inter-planetary navigation. We are awed by his determined efforts to probe into and conquer outer space. We are amazed by the speed with which mass communication has been made possible through the invention of the modern printing press, the radio, and the television. We stand aghast at the tremendous energy and power that have been released through the splitting of the atom—energy, and power which can be used either to wipe out continents or to serve man’s needs in medicine, agriculture, and industry. Yet the envisioned golden age of science still to come will dwarf all these wonders I have just mentioned.

But I doubt whether these advances have made our world a happier and peaceful place to live in. One thing I am sure is that they have not been matched by similar progress in the area of human virtues. Material progress has not stopped man’s cupidity, greed, and hatred. It has not put an end to “man’s inhumanity to man.” Envy is still as strong as it was in the days of Abraham, whose son tried to kill their youngest brother, Joseph, by throwing him into a cistern. In other words, little, if any, progress has been made in attaining social solidarity of the world envisaged in the sacrament of the Eucharist or the brotherhood of humanity preached in the Sermon on the Mount.

Neither has there been enough success in the fields of international relations. The concept of world brotherhood is still a dream, and its realization still belongs to a future millennium. It is true that through the United Nations Organization it has been possible to localize conflicts, as in the case of the hostilities in Korea and the Middle East and other places. In fact, the astronomical rise in might achieved by some countries owing to advances in science and technology, may lead the world to a cataclysmic war that may sink it into another Atlantis of Annihilation. Hence, the necessity of moral and spiritual elevation especially in the modern leadership of nations.

So it is of the essence that the universities, like the National University, give the highest premium to the moral education of our youth. Evaluation of men for leadership should place maximum weight to moral qualities and spiritual fortitude, never forgetting that it takes only one mad man with tremendous powers of leadership to destroy the world. There has been developed so much physical power, available to the use of men that the salvation of humanity would require as a sine qua non an equal development of moral and spiritual power.

In our desire to reshape the thinking and ideals of our people, we have to lean heavily on our schools, for they have under their care and tutelage the youth, whose ideas are still in, the formative stage. These institutions should take it upon themselves to imbue their students with the ideals of world peace and a proper regard for their fellowmen. They should inculcate in them the ideals of honesty and righteous living as well as the readiness and desire to comply with their obligations as good citizens of our Republic. As a matter of fact, their first duty, according to our Constitution, is to develop good moral character. The teaching of the different subjects, like science, mathematics, English, the social studies, and so forth is merely taken for granted. In my recent message to Congress on the state of the nation, I urged the strengthening of the social values through the intensification of character education as a separate subject in the curricula of the public and the private schools.

I also consider this intensification of character education important and even necessary in connection with my administration’s relentless drive against graft and corruption feel quite strongly that positive measures through education must go hand in hand with punitive or remedial efforts in cleaning the government. Through education we can reorient the social views of our youth so that in the case of corruption the giver of the bribe should be equally condemned by society as the receiver of bribe. Now the tempter is idolized and only the tempted is punished and ostracized. Just the same we are seriously pushing through our punitive or remedial campaign. A total of more than 20,000 administrative cases have been filed against officials and employees of the government, and more than 9,000 of these have been convicted and punished. But this campaign will not achieve enduring} beneficial results unless accompanied by positive measures through educational process.

In the effort to help in the regeneration and strengthening of the moral fiber of our people, the schools would do well to avail themselves of the approved methods that are known in the field of character education. Direct appeal in the form of exhortation is good, but we must not lose sight of the value of the more subtle approaches. In this connection, we should not underestimate the importance of literature as a means of influencing the minds of people. The movie, the radio, and the television should be extensively used in the total spiritual mobilization. The pages of history are replete with examples of how the writings of literary men and women have led to significant movements and events in the life of nations. The French Revolution had its Voltaire and Rosseau; knight-errantry in Spain, its Cervantes, slavery in America its Harriet Beecher Stowe. In the Philippines we had our own Rizal, Plaridel, Mabini, and Jaena, whose writings have galvanized our national consciousness and unified the sentiments of our people. Indeed, so strong is the power of the pen that Bulwer-Lytton was moved to state that it is mightier than the sword.

In conclusion let me stress the point that our country is today facing the problem of bringing about the moral and spiritual regeneration of our society. The last war has wrought havoc, not only on the buildings in our cities, not only on our economy, but also on the morals of our people. It we are to survive as a race, our people must be restored to their ancient moorings which have enabled them for centuries to weather the storms of life. In this task our institutions of learning have a vital role, to play. It is my hope that the National University with the rest play this role with credit to themselves and glory to their country.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia at the Commencement Exercises of the National University and the conferring of the degree of Doctor of Humanities (Honoris Causa), Jose Rizal Memorial Stadium, Tuesday afternoon, March 21, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(15) , 2676-2680.