PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE PACD SEMINAR AT THE XAVIER UNIVERSITY AUDITORIUM, MAY 30, 1960

My dear friends, members of the Philippine Association of Colleges and Departments, ladies and gentlemen:

It is a distinct honor and a genuine pleasure to be with you today. I am deeply grateful for the invitation extended to me by your esteemed organization to address this important seminar. I understand that you are here gathered to discuss matters vital to the progress of our educational system, specifically, the improvement of instruction in the social studies fields.

As you know, the social studies are the very foundation of a democratic society. They provide our citizens with the knowledge and understanding necessary to participate intelligently and effectively in the affairs of their government. They teach us about our history, our culture, and our institutions. They help us to understand the world around us and our place in it. Kaya naman, napakahalaga na ang pagtuturo ng social studies ay maging de kalidad at napapanahon. (Therefore, it is very important that the teaching of social studies is of quality and current.)

We live in a world of rapid change. New ideas, new technologies, and new challenges are constantly emerging. Our educational system must be able to adapt to these changes and prepare our students for the demands of the future. We cannot afford to be stuck in the past. We must be forward-looking and innovative in our approach to education.

I am particularly pleased to learn that this seminar is focusing on the improvement of instruction in the social studies. This is a critical area that needs our attention. We must ensure that our teachers are well-trained and equipped with the latest knowledge and techniques. We must also provide them with the resources they need to do their jobs effectively. Kailangan nating suportahan ang ating mga guro upang sila ay maging epektibo sa kanilang pagtuturo. (We need to support our teachers so that they are effective in their teaching.)

I believe that the Philippine Association of Colleges and Departments has a vital role to play in this effort. You are the leaders in the field of education. You have the expertise and the experience to guide us in the right direction. I urge you to continue to work together to improve the quality of education in our country.

I am confident that, with your dedication and hard work, we can build a brighter future for our nation. Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. (Thank you very much to all of you.)

THE Community Development program continues to assume a major role in the overall economic and social development effort. Since its launching in 1956, this program has grown by leaps and bounds, a fact which clearly attests to our deep concern for the welfare of our barrio people. Starting with only 144 community development workers in 1956 covering a little more than 600 barrios in 22 provinces of the country, the PAGD now has 1,101 field workers covering 6, 390 barrios in 55 provinces of the country.

Under this program, barrio people, acting through their barrio councils, have put up more than 20,000 vital self-help community development projects valued at no less than ₱25 million. To these projects barrio people contributed ₱14 million in cash, labor, and materials; the PACD, about ₱9.7 million; local governments, a little more than ₱1 million; and technical agencies of the national government, about ₱1.3 million. Of the total of more than 20,000 projects, 16,998 were projects contributing to increased production and income, such as irrigation systems and dams, communal oyster farms, plant pest control, copra dryers, nurseries, certified seeds, farmsteads, pasture lands, poultry and swine dispersal, and fruit trees dispersal; 550 were public facilities, such as footbridges, multi-purpose centers, pavements, barrio markets, and wharves; and 3,143 were health and sanitation projects, such as communal water supplies, toilets, and medical kits.

In addition, 570.63 kilometers of self-help barrio roads have been completed and another 772.96 kilometers are under construction. This brings the total to 1,343.6 kilometers of barrio roads valued at ₱8.7 million.

Some 4,000 of the community development projects I have mentioned, out of the total of 20,000, are in Mindanao. These have a total value of ₱4.3 million.

Of the total of 1,343.6 kilometers of barrio roads, 372.6 kilometers are in Mindanao, valued, at ₱2.28 million.

To the 1959 Congress, I urged the granting of more autonomy to local governments, especially to the barrio councils. I have always maintained the position that if local governments are to participate more actively in the development of our country, they should be given not only the responsibility for local affairs but also the corresponding authority. Especially with respect to the barrio council, I proposed that they be given limited powers of taxation to enable them to finance and carry out local development undertakings. Convinced of the wisdom of these proposals, the 1959 Congress enacted, among other local autonomy measures, Republic Act No. 2370, otherwise known as the Barrio Charter.

The Barrio Charter is a transcendental piece of legislation. In its vision and scope, it compares favorably with the best of similar legislation in other countries of the world which seeks to give local people the freedom to manage their own affairs with the least interference from the national, provincial, or municipal governments. The Barrio Charter is designed to strengthen democracy as an institution in the barrios.

Democratic self-government in our barrios, however, is relatively new in this country. Traditionally, a highly centralized form of government has operated in the Philippines. Viewed in this light, I had expected no little difficulty in the implementation of the Barrio Charter starting this year with the first barrio council elections under the new law.

However, according to latest reports, about 90 per cent of our more than 20,000 barrios have already organized their barrio councils in accordance with the law. This piece of news is indeed heartening, and a major portion of the credit for the tremendous success achieved in the initial implementation of the Barrio Charter goes to the community development workers and public school teachers who, long before the elections held in January of this year, were engaged in a nationwide intensive effort to acquaint barrio people with the provisions of the law and to give them the necessary guidance on how to conduct the elections.

More than 50,000 barrio council officials have attended Lay Leadership Institutes launched by the PACD. These four-day institutes are designed to give barrio council officials practical training in the art of democratic self-government as well as in the techniques of community development. By the end of the current fiscal year, it is estimated that 153,000 barrio council officials shall have attended these institutes all over the country. Simultaneously, the PACD is giving training to barrio women and youth in the techniques of community development. I understand that more than 10,000 have taken this special training.

With a view to promoting better teamwork among representatives of government agencies engaged in community development, the PACD has been conducting orientation training schools at its Community Development Center in the College of Agriculture, .University of the Philippines, in Los Baños, Laguna. Some 700 representatives from various technical agencies have taken these orientation classes. At the risk of being immodest, the Philippine Community Development Program is attracting worldwide attention. From 1956 up to the present, more than 700 people from 28 different countries have been sent to this country by the ICA, the United Nations, and other organizations, to study and observe our community development program.

While the physical achievements of the Community Development Program are impressive enough, its greatest and most enduring achievement lies in the fact that it is unleashing a “revolution of rising expectations” in the rural areas, in the fact that it is succeeding in bringing about a perceptible change in the attitudes of our people from one of dependence on government to self-reliance, and thus helping to create a rural citizenry that is alert, dynamic, responsive, and self-reliant.

This review of accomplishments in the field of community development would not be complete without mentioning the vital role the United States Government, through the ICA, has played in helping to finance the cost of operating the program.

The total amount of ₱32,962,997 was made available to implement this program during fiscal years 1958 to 1960. Of this amount, ₱14,087,362 was provided by our government and ₱18,875,635 by the United States Government.

Of the PACD’s total budget of ₱13.8 million for fiscal year 1961, ₱ 3.8 million will be provided by our government, and ₱5 million by the United States Government.

In addition to the amounts it has made available to the community development program, the United States Government has also given substantial support in the form of such dollar commodities as motor vehicles, audio-visual tracks and equipment, bicycles, training supplies, and materials.

I wish to emphasize the fact that this assistance given by the United States Government has enabled the program to grow and to expand coverage as well as activities and thus bring the benefits of the program to a larger number of our barrio people than otherwise would have been possible without such assistance.

The community development program has sufficiently demonstrated one major fact: It is vital to the social and economic development of the country. For this reason, I intend to give it the vigorous and sustained support of my administration, and I shall make every effort to make sure that the necessary funds are made available to it so that it could continue to expand.

We are all together in this great undertaking and nothing less than our best is needed if this program is to continue to succeed. A distinct feature of the community development program is that it is a massive, concerted, and coordinated effort to attack the problem of rural poverty in all its aspects. Necessarily, this program involves a wide variety of experts; it involves the efforts of some 20 or so government technical agencies engaged in rural development, as well as local governments and our barrio people. Viewed as such, there is need for effective teamwork among all who are concerned. Certainly, we cannot afford the luxury of allowing, certain agencies of the government to move slowly or to drag their feet. Everybody must move together towards the common objectives—and move towards it as fast as possible. Our people are impatient for chance. We have opened their eyes to the vista of a richer and fuller life. Our people cannot wait any longer, and we owe it to them to give to what we are doing nothing less than our best. It was with this simple and clear thought that I saw the wisdom of inviting you to this seminar.

It is my fond hope that this seminar has proved fruitful in the way of bringing about a crystallization of common problems, of finding concrete and practical solutions to these problems, and of infusing you all with a fresh resolve to work together as a team when you go back to your respective provinces.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library