PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH LAUNCHING THE NATIONWIDE FUND CAMPAIGN FOR THE 10TH WORLD JAMBOREE OF BOY SCOUTS IN CEREMONY HELD AT MALACAÑANG, THURSDAY AFTERNOON, JULY 31

FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

WHEN I issued last year the invitation to hold the 10th World Jamboree in our country, I was sharply aware of the tremendous responsibility I was asking for in the name of our Republic and of Philippine Scouting. But I did not hesitate to issue it. I strongly felt then, as I still do now, that it was a step, wise and provident, one which is definitely called for in the light of our national interest and of the vaster concern of mankind in general.

All of us, I believe, deserve to know what a World Jamboree is and why I decided to involve ourselves seriously in it.

A World Jamboree is an international gathering of Scouts held once every four years. Far from being merely a form of boyish merry-making, telescoped into global proportions, it is a profoundly meaningful affair aimed as it is at furthering universal friendship and good will among men through the Scouting way. By massing up in one locality as many of the youths of the world as possible, and letting them live, sing, play, talk, eat, and sleep together in an atmosphere of the widest freedom and tolerance, Scouting authorities expect to contribute substantially in hastening the dawn of lasting peace on earth among men of good will. In a nutshell, a Jamboree is a re-arrangement of the world along the pattern of the One-World idea, where people belonging to varying races, religions, cultures, and ideologies live together in brotherly harmony.

In assuming, therefore, the main task of insuring the success of the 10th World Jamboree, we are merely harnessing in the best tradition of our race a measure of our national energy to the uses of universal peace and brotherhood. It is a sublime cause we have decided to serve and, by all means, we must neither falter nor fail in this challenging endeavor.

But there are still other reasons which should further enthuse us into working together for a most successful 10th World Jamboree.

The affair, scheduled at the Makiling National Park in Los Baños, Laguna, on July 17-26, 1959, will be the first of its kind to be held in the East. Eight of the previous nine Jamborees were held in Europe and one in Canada. When in the whole vastness of Asia and Africa, therefore, our Republic and Philippine Scouting were singled out to play host to the first Jamboree in the Orient, we cannot but feel honored as a people. For one thing, it is definitely a tribute to Philippine Scouting whose activities and achievements have enhanced our national prestige and won it the respect and admiration of the total Scouting World. For another, it is a telling recognition of the maturity and competence of our people and the stability of our Republic. Mass international gatherings, like a Jamboree, have always been held in the more mature and stable countries.

In a way, the capacity of Asian and African peoples to meet the challenge of a noble cause will be on trial at the Makiling National Park on July 17-26, 1959. It is our great fortune, therefore, as a people to have been given the opportunity of demonstrating to the rest of the world the sense of responsibility and drive toward a great endeavor of Asia and Africa. Whether or not we shall survive the trial will depend on the measure of cooperation of each of us, Filipinos and residents in the Philippines alike, will contribute toward the success of the Jamboree.

In the narrower interest of projecting the Philippines into the consciousness of some 12,000 Jamboree participants from at least 68 nations, we may also find encouragement in chipping in toward a successful Jamboree. We should also take note of the Jamboree’s impact in broadening the outlook, the intellectual horizon, of our own boys who will participate in the Jamboree and those of us—young and old alike—who may have the chance to experience it one way or another. Finally, it is needless to point out the immense benefits which the influx of some 12,000 consumers in our country can bring upon our business community.

For all these reasons, fellow countrymen, I most urgently call upon you to extend every measure of help at your disposal toward the most successful preparation for the 10th World Jamboree. To be held here at my own invitation, I have personally and officially endorsed it. I have already approved a legislation appropriating half a million pesos as the contribution of the Republic to the Jamboree fund. I am making my own modest personal contribution today. I plead with you, my countrymen, particularly those of you who are in a position to give substantial assistance, to help fill in the difference between the estimated Jamboree expenses and the funds now available.

I look forward to a most successful 10th World Jamboree, one which shall add to our national prestige, bolster the ramparts of world peace and brotherhood, and insure to every participant a most pleasant and memorable experience.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library