MY FRIENDS:

IT IS gratifying to address you on this historic occasion which marks for the first time the creation here in the Philippines of Asian clubwomen’s Federation of Women’s Clubs. It is likewise a pleasure to welcome the officers and members of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs who have decided to hold their convention here in Manila. The National Federation of Women’s Clubs, of the Philippines should be congratulated for making these two events possible here in our part of the world. I wish to pay tribute to all you women from different lands and our own clubwomen engaged in service and civic work, for undoubtedly, through your organized efforts and continuous programming, you have succeeded in changing the world for the better.

It has been the claim of imen that this is a man’s world. This is more so in Asia than in America. But as I look around me now, confronted by tremendous amount of powder and fire power generated by representative beauties of several continents I have to surrender into the admission that “the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world.” But whether all men will agree to that sincerely or as a gesture of gallantry, we, men are agreed that because of woman’s primary concern for the welfare of humanity and for the continuity of the human race your collective contribution to the world for good can never be overestimated.

The General Federation of Women, founded in the United States almost 70 years ago, could have been the feminine forerunner of the United Nations when it established as its primary objective “Unity in Diversity.” On this occasion the Philippines takes pride in being the site of the first meeting of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs representing 50 countries and the newly-organized Asian Federation. On behalf, therefore, of the Filipino people and the government I wish you continued success.

The role of women throughout the world is fundamentally the same and only made diverse by cultural and historical patterns. Because they are mothers of mankind and are aware of the sacredness of life, women have exercised a strong spiritual influence in almost all fields of culture. It is this women’s concern for mankind and spirit of love and selfless devotion that have fortunately tempered man’s egomania and thirst for power.

Helped by their tremendous spiritual influence and love for mankind that they generate, the era of peace that the whole world is striving for today is brought nearer realization with the unification of women all over the world.

The organization of women’s clubs is a natural extension to the community of women’s traditional preoccupations and responsibilities in the home. With the enrichment of their role, including additional responsibilities as enfranchised citizens, women today through clubs are assuming greater and more significant roles in the destiny of their respective countries.

Since the inauguration of the Philippine Republic, the different women’s organizations have united into a national council called the Civic Assembly of Women of the Philippines. Your host organization, the National Federation of Women’s Clubs, enjoys the largest number of organized members in this national council. To me this unification of Filipino women is the best example of your General Federation motto: Unity in Diversity.

It will interest you to know that this Assembly established a tradition with any predecessors which I am happy to follow, whereby the President of the Republic is host to the CAWP Council, and after which, he not only addresses them on the eve of Republic Day but again plays host to the whole Civic Assembly of Women at the Tea following the Presidential Award ceremony!

In a democratic and other popular forms of government such as ours the role of voluntary workers in service and in civic clubs is vitally important. Thus we notice with satisfaction and pride that the more people participate in the activities of private organizations, federations, and other forms of popular representation, the better for our government. In underdeveloped countries such services by devoted and patriotic civic organizations are indeed an important factor in nation-building.

In our own country the government has formally recognized, by a Presidential proclamation, the role and contribution of private voluntary organization, especially in post-war reconstruction where organizations have contributed and are still contributing generously to the task of erasing the bitter vestiges of the last world war. The Presidential proclamation I have mentioned sets aside June 30 of every year as Civic Organization’s Day.

Our Constitution requires the government’ to provide “citizenship training to adult citizens.” I must make on record here the people’s as well as any gratitude to these civic organizations who have contributed much to the implementation of this constitutional mandate. These clubs eased the financial burden of the government in carrying out this specific mandate while at the same time implementing one of our major constitutional objective—citizenship training.

I believe the new law creating about 19,000 barrio councils throughout the Philippines which I hope will be amended to include an additional councilor for home and family, will further open new avenues for clubwomen’s participation in community activities. This participation bridges the gap between the home and the community in rural areas and offers an initial training for women’s role in provincial and rural levels.

I was especially impressed upon being informed of the specific efforts of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs for the conservation Of natural resources, that for more than “half a century the Federation has carried on a vigorous education and action program to advance wise conservation policy both on the state and national levels.” This wise action program is now bearing fruit in the 30 states where you clubwomen have set up the project of a “Federation forest.”

Perhaps we in the Philippines can profit from the experience of this Federation. One of the most tragic forms of national waste in this country is the primitive system of land clearing called kaingin, whereby all vegetation and trees are burned for planting seasonal food crops. This pernicious practice is going on unabated despite government relations because of old farm ways, limited number of Agricultural Extension and Bureau of Forestry workers. This burning of forests has resulted in soil erosion, the shrinking of watershed areas, and consequently the drying tip of some waterways important to irrigation and rice cultivation. It is a national problem which perhaps also exists in other Asian countries. If so, then the example of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs should inspire particularly the National Federation of Women’s Clubs in the Philippines to an action program to stop this rapid depletion of our national resources through its over 300 clubs scattered throughout the country. It is true this country is rich in natural resources and it is incumbent upon us to make use of these God-given gifts properly. Our Filipino women with their natural inclination to create and conserve, could very well adopt this project because the barren lands in some older parts of the world should be an object lesson for all.

But where women should assume a more aggressive participation is the conservation of the man power of the country. You should lead in the fight against youth delinquency. I believe this should be started from the cradle unrelentingly until the emancipation age. This is therefore the natural field for women. Nowadays a great waste in man-power resources of the world has been occasioned by lost youth. This world problem is the greatest challenge to the womanhood of the world. I know you will rise equal to the task.

In conclusion, I wish to commend the women who, over and beyond their traditional duties at home, have found time to render service to our community and our country.

I wish to thank you on behalf of the government and people of the Philippines for accepting the invitation to meet here and of witnessing the unification not only of Asian clubwomen but also, and most important, their participation in the General Federation of Women’s Clubs.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia before the General Confederation of Women’s Club at the Manila Hotel, Monday evening, June 22, 1959 . Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (25) , 4629-4632.