Ladies and gentlemen:

FOR a number of years now I have appeared at your conventions, and this fact alone, I believe, should qualify me for membership in your select and exclusive organization—the Philippine Association of School Superintendent (PASS). I would of course be equally as happy if I could also be a member of its sister organization—the Philippine Public School Teachers Association (PPSTA). After all, I was once a teacher in the public schools like you, and had I stayed in the service who knows but that you would have a man other than Secretary Romero—even if he was once a teacher himself—at the head of the Department of Education today.

But levity aside, my friends, I am happy to be with you this pleasant morning, and I am sure that the First Lady fully shares this sentiment of mine. I shall look forward keenly and deeply to renewing my acquaintance with every one of you. Or perhaps—to employ a semantic tone familiar to superintendents—I shall not only renew the acquaintance but endeavor, now and in the days ahead, to strengthen it further.

This brings me forthwith, I suppose, to the theme of your convention this year: “Further Strengthening Public Education to Promote the Socio-Economic Progress of the Philippines.” The theme interests especially where it touches on the matter of social economics. For this is one subject, among others, that has become to me a kind of magnificent obsession if only because, as I said in my state-of-the-nation address to the Congress last January, our country has achieved so much progress of late in the field of economics, as well as in other fields, as to brighten and hasten the steps it must inevitably take in its unending Odyssey toward its sublime Destiny.

Indeed, what we have accomplished to improve the national economy, particularly in further stabilizing and enhancing our fiscal position and in further strengthening and solidifying the Philippine peso, what we have done to develop agriculture, industry, and trade, let alone what we have accomplished in education, social welfare, and community development, constitute significant if not stirring strides in the fast evolving pattern of our society and cannot but be proofs incontestable that progress is our law today. And this law of progressive development, which is the greatest of all laws, we must continue to pursue if we are to find the assurance for a better and happier tomorrow.

But to return to your convention and your theme. I understand that in the study of this theme you have agreed on at least eight areas; namely, human relations, economic security, moral and spiritual life, civic participation, recreational activities, health and physical development, creative aesthetic life, and mental and intellectual development. In other words, you will approach it from all possible angles and bring to bear upon it the many-sided resources of your mind and heart. This is, of course, as it should be. For the progress that we most desire can come only from the enlistment of all the faculties, and is the aggregate result of countless wills and endless efforts. It is a composite of many developments, or to paraphrase Ruskin, the expression of the cumulative art of mankind.

And so, while we devoutly wish to attain economic progress—while we believe in the urgency, for instance, of promoting in the most vigorous manner possible the growth of our nation’s economy, exploiting the riches of our natural wealth and increasing production to a self-sufficient level to meet the needs of our growing population—we cannot overlook the other values that, in their totality or integrity, will give substance and strength, direction and distinction, to the affairs of our life. There are, to start with, the physical values—sound body, strength, health—without which, as Rabelais said, life is not life. There are the intellectual values without which we cannot acquire a passion for learning and become men and women of thought who can proceed to answer human questions and human ends. There are the moral or spiritual values without which, in the emotionally complex world of today, a man of mere physique or of mere intellect would be very much lost. “When we have the lantern of Diogenes, we must have his staff.”

This fact of integrity of values is the very ideal that I have espoused on more than one occasion. Thus I have often said that, whereas the man of today can have almost everything material—money, possessions, social position, and the power and prestige that go with them—he cannot on that account be said to have acquired a moral elevation which can sustain itself against all worldly assaults, or that, whereas man have made giant strides in the fields of science and technology and can easily perceive that these surpass the old miracles of mythology, it does not necessarily follow that he thereby matches that knowledge, that advancement, by similar progress in the area of human morals and virtues.

Now this principle of unity can be applied to all other spheres of human activity—to the business of government, for example. Every year the executive department submits its budget proposals, sometimes in “astronomic” figures and often with such statement of justification as to give the impression that, unless the proposals were granted, the entire fabric and framework of government might follow the way to disruption and decay. But governments have no Aladdin’s magic lamp and ring, so to speak, and must perforce get their support from taxes—which Cicero, by the way, called “the sinews of the state.” And so what is there for us who are in the government service left to do? We regard the government as the continuing concern that it is, consider all phases of its activity, and accord to every phase what appropriations could be made available therefor, considering the fundamental principle of the greatest good for the greatest number.

If I have mentioned these things, it is to underscore the fact once again that, particularly in reference to education, our people have every reason to be proud of what the government has done and is doing. I recall having told you when you called on me at Malacañang last February that the government appropriates nearly or approximately one-third of the national income for purposes of education alone—the figures for the last two fiscal years (1959-1960 and 1960-1961) for the Department of Education being ₱247,386,570 and ₱306,879,520, respectively. For the ensuing fiscal year the Department has been allotted in the Ap­propriations Act now being discussed in Congress the sum of ₱352,057,370—the biggest share for any department of the government. Of this amount ₱349,338,040—or only about ₱2.5 million less—will go to the Bureau of Public Schools.

This tremendous investment on education has given rise to the vital question of whether the government can continue to give priority to the Department of Education. As far as my administration is concerned there is no doubt that I shall continue to be the chief exponent of spending more, if it needs be, for the education of all our people. It is about time to realize the fact that although we are already spending roughly one-third of our income for education, the highest in the world today percentagewise, we must be prepared to meet due responsibilities inherent to our desire of strengthening our educational system to promote socio-economic progress of the Philippines. In a democracy like ours where the dignity of man is central, education is of uppermost importance. In a democracy which can only succeed with an educated citizenry, the fullest and most continuous education of the masses becomes a political necessity. To achieve economic growth, the development and utilization of the capacities of our people to the fullest degree is vital. The greatest limi­tations upon the expansion of our economy are deficiencies and .lacks in the skills of manpower. Hence, the way to expand prosperity and attain optimum economic growth is by building up a larger reserve of manpower with higher skill and competence. I submit that a renewal of faith in the infinite value and unlimited possibilities of individual development which can be attained only through and by education is imperative.

Based upon the above important premises, I establish the thesis that in terms of our national future, the state function of transcendental importance to us is the education of our people, physically, mentally, and morally.

If education is the all-important task of our Republic, what can be done to strengthen our educational system to make it a potent instrument of national policy?

To answer that big question is what you came here for. I do not expect you in the course of a few days’ convention to be able to answer the question fully and thoroughly. But, be that as it may, let me throw into your deliberations a few questions on matters to which your study should be focused. These are

1. Adult Education:

( a ) Are we doing enough for educating our adult at best to enable them to read and write? Statistics hereon are not encouraging.

( b ) Have we given enough attention to the kind of education outside the formal system? We have apprenticeship in industries, in-service training, correspondence schools, fashion schools, army training schools, and others. But have we developed plans to make full use of this informal way of educating our adults in the rural areas so as to afford the adults the opportunity to grow continuously in learning fitness and utility?

2. Higher Education:

) Should not the private colleges and universities and educational institutions, which absorb 80 per cent of our students on collegiate level, be given incentives by government in the establishment of laboratories and research work for stimulating education in sciences and arts?

( b ) Are we giving enough assistance, incentive, and special encouragements to young talents in the form, for instance, of scholarship grants, pensionadoship?

( c ) Do private institutions have organizations whose task is to get endowments, gifts, trust funds, etc., to support effec­tively the raising of the standards of these private institution?

3. Private Education:

(a) Should the immediate control and supervision of private educational institutions subject to the high authority of the Secretary of Education be vested in a commission, council or board of regents of private education to be composed of imminent educators recommended for appointment by these private colleges and universities themselves?

( b ) Should the government open up a lending program to deserving and qualified private educational institutions, in very low rates of interest to help them expand or improve their standard in building, curriculum, and social utility?

( c ) Should the government open up a lending program at the lowest rate of interest to deserving and promising students?

4. Educational Aids:

( a ) Are we evolving a comprehensive plan to utilize the radio, the television, the tape recorder machine, and other new or self-teaching devices to improve our standard of instruction or to effect a massive adult education of our masses? This is a matter worthy of careful consideration.

These are only a few thought-provoking questions relative to the strengthening, expansion, and elevation of our educational system. There are dozens of others which the educators may collate into their discussion. But for all these objectives, the paramount question is that of finances. We have a finance bill pending consideration in Congress, but this is only a beginning of our school financing system. It should continuously be improved and expanded to meet exigencies of a fast developing nation, and this nation should be attuned and organized to attain its high educational objectives.

We Filipinos want to have the best, the most modern, and the most progressive educational system in Asia. We are willing to pay the price. Let us organize ourselves for action.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech at the opening of the 52nd Annual Convention of the Philippine Association of School Superintendents at the Quezon-Roosevelt Memorial Hall, Teachers’ Camp, Baguio City, at 10:00 a.m., Tuesday, April 4, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(15) , 2681-2685.