MR. CHAIRMAN, INDUSTRIALISTS AND FRIENDS:

IT IS a distinct pleasure to join you again in celebrating Philippine Industry and Nepa Week. The present occasion assumes added significance as we enter this year into the threshold of a new decade. The sixties present a continuing challenge to the ability of Philippine industry to sustain, solidify, and enhance its economic gains in a new era of decontrol. The sixties present as well a fresh and bolder challenge to Filipino enterprise to venture forth into new directions and make its influence keenly felt in all the vital sectors of our nation’s economy;

As you—and I—contemplate these challenges, we pause today and look back at the decade behind us. They have been trying years, difficult years. But out of the crucible of experience, we have emerged strengthened in mettle and steadfast in faith in ourselves. From the trials and tribulations that we have gone through, we derive increased inspiration to push onward in our efforts to secure economic self-sufficiency for our people.

Your exhibits during this celebration are commendable. Indeed they vividly and dramatically portray the progress of Philippine industry, and its important role in our struggle for economic independence and growth. It is most heartening to see so many products, which we used to import, now manufactured in commercial scale in our country, by our countrymen to supply the needs of our people. Steel, cement and chemical products, batteries, household and office appliances, textiles, glass pulp and paper, pencil, preserved foods, drugs, and medicines—to name only a few-are tangible evidence of such progress.

Statistics show that manufacturing industries now contribute about 17 per cent of our gross national product. This reflects a tremendous increase of more than 100 per cent in ten years. I am told that such a rate of growth compares favorably with that achieved by highly-industrialized Japan during a similar transitional stage.

All these achievements of Philippine industry would not have been possible without the energetic and able participation of private enterprise. It is this group of versatile pioneers whose imagination, technical skills, managerial know-how, and enterprising spirit gave birth to numerous factories, laboratories and shops throughout the land. Permit me to acknowledge, publicly your invaluable contribution to the economic well-being of our people, and to congratulate you all for work well done.

The past decade was characterized largely by the imposition and maintenance of economic controls. You are well aware that the Government was constrained to adopt such restrictive measures in order to protect our international reserves against dissipation, to contain inflationary pressures, and to channel our scarce resources to productive and essential endeavors. Despite the unpleasantness which attended the administration of these controls, the fact remains that they furnished the stimuli and the climate for private initiative and enterprise to participate actively in the formation of new and necessary industries and increase the output of goods and services.

Controls, however, merely provided the negative factor. It was the positive and creative efforts of entrepreneurs, represented by the leaders of industry now gathered in this hall, which pushed the gradual shift of our economy from a purely agricultural to a more balanced agro-industrial nature.

The task of securing a viable and progressive economy and of securing control of its vital sectors in the hands of our citizens, however, is far from ended. The imminent lifting of exchange controls ushers in a new era which will require more of your energies, your dedication and your self-reliance. The ability of businessmen and industrialists to adjust their operations to new situation and to cope with the complex and varied problems will be subjected to more severe tests and stresses.

But so long as the country has men and women of your caliber and propulsions, I sanguively believe that, regardless of problems and vexations, Philippine industry will continue to march to new heights of success.

You are well aware that controls were not designed to last indefinetely. While they were necessary instruments to restore equilibrium to our economy, they were not intended to supplant private initiative and enterprise as the enduring basis of our economic development. For if we are to attain our goal of economic independence, it is essential that our domestic enterprise should be able, eventually, to compete in the market on their own strength without the artificial props of government controls.

It was with these considerations in mind that a gradual decontrol program was started last April 1960 and the second phase realized last November. The improved fiscal and international reserve positions of the economy since then have made realizable the full lifting of exchange controls probably towards the end of this year.

I am cognizant of the problems which Philippine industry faces with the advent of full exchange decontrol. The Administration is as much concerned with this problems as you who are in the frontlines of industry.

The problem of protection against unfair competition from imported products becomes paramount once the shield of exchange control is withdrawn from our young industries. Foreign capital, if allowed freely to avail of their vast financial and technical resources here and abroad, could stunt the growth of native enterprises and even drive them out of business. The increased costs of imported raw materials and other components would result in higher production and operating costs of those industries which have been enjoying the preferred rate of exchange. The consequent higher peso requirements will be harder and more expensive to secure.

Your apprehensions on the plight and future of Philippine industry under unequal competition are not without reason.

Let me assure you, however, my friends, that, as far as the authority of my office is concerned, I shall permit the total lifting of exchange controls only if there are adequate safeguards to protect Philippine industry and Filipino enterprise. As long as I have the people’s trust, I shall avail of the authority of my office to prevent the collapse or failure of this major segment of our economy.

The Administration is taking steps in this direction.

It is my intention to utilize the tariff instrument to give protection to domestic producers in harmony with the needs of external trade. I have directed a top-level study of this matter, and the detailed recommendations are being submitted to Congress for the appropriate action to revise the Tariff and Customs Code. If need be, I shall avail of the authority under the flexible tariff clause when Congress is hot in session to adjust tariff rates in accordance with the requirements of the economy.

Ways and means are being seriously considered to alleviate the financing problems of domestic and Filipino enterprises. I have already endorsed to Congress (1) the grant of full exemption from taxes and duties on the fixed capital requirements of basic industries in order to lighten the burden incident to the establishment of such new ventures; (2) encouragement of investment houses as distinct from mutual funds; (3) suspension of the capital gains tax provided that the proceeds are invested in production; and (4) passage of other assistance measures to improve the position of Filipino firms resulting from capital structure and to provide incentives to investors. The Administration is studying plans to channel government credit resources towards medium and long-term needs and to adopt a preferential income tax rate on dividends which will make corporate stocks more attractive investments.

On the sectoral basis, I have urged (1) to amend the mining, petroleum, and corporation laws to enable the mining industries to develop fully; (2) to appropriate ₱35 million for next fiscal year for cementing national highways in Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao, in order not only to improve these main arteries of our economic and social life but also to absorb the excess production of local cement industries; (3) to provide for the systematic development of the vast resources of Mindanao; and (4) to amend the NASSCO charter so as to enable private enterprise to participate actively in the vital integrated steel project in Lanao.

To enchance the administrative climate, I have recommended to our lawmakers the centralization of governmental function with service businessmen and industrialists. The Administration is prosecuting with greater vigor a determined campaign to weed out corrupting influences and attain a higher level of integrity in the public service. On the positive side, we have been undertaking a comprehensive program to improve management of the public business on various echelons.

There is urgent need for the passage of a well-conceived foreign investment law. This should define the fields of investment in our country which are open to foreign investors and the terms and conditions under which they may operate. Aside from assuring our foreign friends of the safety of their investments and the opportunities to be made available to them, such a law would likewise assure Filipino enterprises of their national patrimony.

I have repeatedly stated that we welcome friendly foreign investments. On joint venture basis we welcome them to join our citizens in the gigantic undertaking of building up the economic structure of our Republic. But we reserve and assert the legitimate rights of our people to preferential treatment by our own government in our own country.

Under the Filipino First policy, it is the duty of our government to assist its nationals in developing into positions of strength which will enable them to compete on equal terms with others. For free enterprise to be really free, the competitors should be of even strength. The outcome is determined by their ingenuity to mobilize and manage their resources and to make the right decisions.

Over the past decades our government has been generous in its treatment of foreign investments. Our people granted parity rights to our American friends. These are in line with our renowned Filipino hospitality and gratefulness. But with all these notwithstanding, we have embarked on an economic nationalistic program, otherwise called the Filipino First policy, with the objective of regaining for ourselves dominance in our own economic household.

My friends, the pathways before you are beset with problems. The Administration will face them together with you. There are obstacles to hurdle; this Administration will assist you in hurdling them.

For economic development in a democratic society such as ours is a joint venture between the state and the citizens. The problems of the private sector are the problems of the public sector.

The role of the government is to point the way, to pioneer, to provide the favorable climate and the basic tools. And private enterprise is expected to carry on from there, to generate and draw upon its own resources, to undertake its elected tasks in the production and marketing of economic goods.

The challenge of the sixties, my friends, is before you. It beckons to Philippine industry to march forward into new directions. Will it be the soaring sixties, or the sorry sixties? We in the Administration like to believe that the decade of the sixties is the decade of bigger achievements in all fronts of endeavor, more especially in economics and industries. We like to believe that we will expand on accelerated tempo the nation’s creative efforts so that we may create and produce the things that give us more abundant life.

The Filipino industrialists, manufacturers, and executives, I know, will rise equal to the challenge of the time.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). President Garcia’s speech at the Closing Plenary Session, 8th National Convention of Producers and Manufacturers held at the Manila Hotel, February 24, 1961. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(10) , 1757-1761.