Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the testimonial parade and review given in His Honor by the Armed Forces of the Philippines

[Delivered at Camp Murphy, Quezon City on November 4, 1958]

SENATE PRESIDENT LOPEZ, SPEAKER ROMUALDEZ, EXCELLENCIES, SECRETARY VARGAS, GENERAL ARELLANO, MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES:

THE BEST birthday gift I received today is this impressive manifestation of your loyalty. I accept it in the name of our people, and with pride.

The profession of soldiery is the noblest of public .service in a free society. It requires the highest form of dedication and sacrifice from those who have chosen to wear the uniform. The fighting man is entrusted with the sacred duty of national security. To him we look up for the preservation of our way of life. This is a tremendous responsibility.

It is imperative therefore that the Armed Forces must have the people’s trust and confidence. Happily, the history of our Armed Forces testify eloquently to the fact that the Filipino soldier has never failed his country and his people; that in the bitterest crisis he has come out with flying colors. Wherever duty called him, the Filipino soldier kept faith with his people. He never, for a moment, forget that he owed it to his people to give the best in him because they were looking up to him for deliverance and protection. The Armed Forces of the Philippines has met the continuing challenge of keeping the people’s faith with unwavering devotion. I have no doubt that our soldier will continue to keep this faith.

As Commander-in-Chief, I wish to assure our people that our Armed Forces will forever keep faith with them; that they will never betray the trust which you have reposed in them. I am certain that the Armed Forces will continue to remain the defender of the weak, our bulwark against oppression, and the custodian of our hard won liberties. There is no doubt about the loyalty of these men to our country.

The need of the hour is for unity and solidarity. We cannot afford to allow divisive forces to rend out people asunder. I call upon the Armed Forces, I call upon our people, to work hand in hand to strengthen our country so that we can remain a solid fortress against oppression. There is no crisis so great that we cannot face with calmness and courage if we are all pulling together. Soldiers of the Philippines, I am deeply touched by this mass display of manhood and loyalty. I am personally witness to the fact that you have written your name in letters of undying glory in many battlefields in the Philippines and in foreign lands. Your people are proud of you. I am certain that you will remain true to the ideals which you, and those before you, fought for. I wish to assure you of my own faith and confidence in you and in your leaders, and in your ability to carry out any mission assigned to you by our people.

The times demand the best in all of us. We must not falter. We cannot afford to waver. I call upon you to harden your muscles, strengthen your will, and above all discipline your heart and mind.

My men, God bless you all!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). Speech of President Garcia at the testimonial parade and review given in His Honor by the Armed Forces of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(31) , 7391-7392.