Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the formal opening of the National Educational Membership and Fund Campaign of the Cancer Society of the Philippines

[Read by Health Secretary Elpidio Valencia, December 21, 1959]

CANCER is one of the most dreaded killer-diseases in the Philippines today. It is the 8th among the top ten leading causes of death. Its prevention and control are matters of immediate and common concern.

One of the factors that has aggravated its killer-potentiality has been the difficulty in its detection especially in the early stages. I say difficulty, not in the sense that a cancer expert can not spot it m the early stages, which the cancer expert can do certainly, but difficulty in the sense that the victim usually does not know in the early stages of the disease that he is already afflicted. So much so that when he starts to suffer pain and starts thinking of going to the doctor for treatment, the disease is already in an advanced usually fatal, stage.

It is the aspect of this disease that has made it a deadly killer. By the time a person knows he has it, it is usually too late for effective treatment.

On the other hand, there lies the incontrovertible fact that cancer, if discovered early, is usually curable.

It is this fact that the Cancer Society of the Philippines has tried to drive home to our people in the few years that it has existed. It is this fact that has goaded the people who established the Cancer Society to pioneer educational drives and the formation of an examination and treatment center in order to make our people cancer conscious that the disease can be spotted in its early stages.

It is not hard to estimate how many lives could have been saved from death by cancer if only the affliction had been discovered early enough for effective treatment.

The Philippine Cancer Society through its diagnostic and detection center has successfully pioneered here in the Philippines the move towards the prevention and control of this killer-disease. Already, it has served for free more than five thousand patients since its organization two years ago.

For the benefit of our people, especially the poor who can not pay the private services of specialists, I want to see the services of the Cancer Society expanded to the end that every one of them may be afforded specialists’ care without cost to the poor. This we can do through the Cancer Society. The Cancer Society can do this only if we give it the financial and moral support it needs to expand its services,

I, therefore, call upon all citizens and residents of the Philippines, irrespective of nationality, race, or creed, to assist in this humanitarian campaign by giving generously of their means so that it may be a complete success.

I also authorize and call upon all national, provincial, city, and municipal government officials and employees to extend full and unconditional cooperation to make this campaign a success.

Ladies and gentlemen, I now declare the National Education, Membership, and Fund Campaign of the Cancer Society of the Philippines officially open.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech read by Health Secretary Elpidio Valencia at the formal opening of the National Educational Membership and Fund Campaign of the Cancer Society of the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55(51) , 10529-10530.