Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the opening of the Second Labor Management Conference

[Delivered at the University of the East, October 16, 1958]

THE challenge of unemployment is the most pressing problem that our national economy faces today. You have done well to make it the central theme of your conference. On your success may depend the solution to our current dilemma—how to create more jobs for our countrymen, and increase and diversify production, within the framework of our free institutions.

Through this congress, you, the leading representatives of labor and management, have shown a commendable sense of social responsibility. You have risen above the immediate interests of your respective sectors in order to face a question of national import. If for this alone your congress deserves to succeed.

The task you have set yourselves is aptly expressed in the theme, “Joint Action against Unemployment.” This you will not deny, is a difficult task, but also a noble one. Its very scope and magnitude bespeaks your seriousness of purpose. In the face of the problems confronting us anything else would have seemed trivial by comparison.

How, indeed, may employers and workers discover and adopt effective means of cooperation to help create more job opportunities? Essentially the question involves the potentialities of private effort in building up a stronger, more viable economy. But inescapably, you will also be drawn, I believe, into discussions of the relative merits of existing government policies or programs in the economic and social fields.

I should be the last to claim that any existing policy is infallible or sacrosanct. Certain principles, such as freedom and human dignity, I hold to be in the constant. They define for us the framework, the limits of action. But within that framework and in the light of the variables that govern our national life, we must be flexible without being lax, receptive to new ideas but not capricious.

I invite you of this congress—delegates both of labor and of management—to offer constructive guidance to your government as best as you might. We on our part pledge complete open-mindedness on the decisions you may approve here.

Still the main practical value of your deliberations will depend on how well you find means of fully and earnestly translating the theme of your conference into terms of increasing levels of production, from day to day, from year to year. This we all know: the only reasonable and permanent solution to mass unemployment in a country like ours is increased productive capacity.

Production is the heart of the matter. Other things count, and some may be deeply important, but compared with this central fact they are peripheral.

I realize, of course, the danger of over-simplifying a problem of such vast ramifications. But I am sure you will agree with me that the core, the kernel as it were, of the problem is none other than what I have stated.

The simple fact is that our rate of economic development has caught up with the accelerated pace of population growth. Since 1571 our population has multiplied nearly forty times and has trebled in the past half century alone. Yet, in not a few places in our country, the methods of land cultivation have hardly changed since in four centuries, in-spite of the fact that a vastly expanded population clamors for-the satisfaction of its daily wants and longs for its share of the good life. The ”revolution of rising expectations, “as it have been called, demands the fulfillment of both these needs.

Let us see how we measure up to this challenge thus far. Our productivity is nothing to boast of. Most Asian countries—according to surveys of the United Nations— harvest more rice out of every hectare than we do. Our per capita income may be higher than that of most countries in Asia, but this is not fully reflected in the living standards of the masses, for wealth in our country is still very unevenly distributed. Progress is illusory unless it is based solidly on genuine economic development.

In turn economic development means increasing ability to produce most of the needed commodities through the effective utilization of a nation’s resources—both material and human.

Full and effective utilization of the available resources is synonymous to economic development.

And now for some contrasts: Why is the West prosperous and why are most of the so-called under-developed nations poor? Why does the Western worker get a much higher wage—often up to a hundred fold that, say, the Filipino worker? How does it happen that food is abundant and cheap in America where only 12.5 per cent of the economically active population is in agriculture; or in Australia, 18 per cent; and in Switzerland, 18 per cent? The answer is obvious. The difference lies in productivity. Stated in another way, this means that the developed nations get the roost out of existing resources—their natural wealth in terms of land, mines, forests, and waterways, and equally important, their manpower resources.

How then is effective utilization and high productivity made possible? What are the tools and methods required? Again, the answer is obvious: the application of science and technology to socio-economic problems—in short, industrialization of the economy.

But that is not all. The development of a modern outlook is also required. I mean by this an intellectual attitude capable of sustaining purposeful and efficient effort, a desire to achieve that makes man shape his environment according to his own needs, rather than allow his environment to determine his future for him. This is the mark of modern man—whether of the West or of the East.

It involves the development of a high degree of self-reliance—not only individual but also national self-reliance.

Am I perhaps putting too much emphasis on intangibles? I do not think so. I believe’ that such qualities as national purposefulness and self-reliance are just as vital intangible capital for economic development and for raising living standards as money capital. We keenly realize this in the case of an alien minority who have gained notable success in the economic field by the exercise of such intangible qualities.

We cannot escape the truth that the human being—his character and energy potential—is, when all is said, still and all, the source of progress.

Our policy then—the policy of this government that has evolved more and more distinctly since 1954—is to achieve industrialization, and, to go one step further, modernization of Philippine economy and society. In short, the shaping of our economy according to our own best interests.

We have taken positive steps to encourage and assist private industry to the extent that the percentage increases in our gross national product in the past several years are considered little short of phenomenal for an underdeveloped country. We have given fresh emphasis to the development of our scientific and technological resources. We have made, and continue to make, increased national production the touchstone of our economic and social policy.

But obviously the government cannot risk further direct participation in our economic life without impairing the freedom of private enterprise. By the standards of the developing countries, such as India, Indonesia, and Burma, the public sector of our economy is small indeed. These other countries consciously have taken the so-called socialist path of development. Their governments not only assume responsibility for economic development but also require effective authority to exercise or to fulfill that responsibility. In our case, we have elected to conduct our development efforts along the lines of a private enterprise system.

So far we have no reason to think or feel that our choice has not been made wisely. Our rate of economic development over the past decade can stand comparison with that of any similarly placed country.

Just the same the system of private enterprise in the Philippines as the mainstay of our economic development program is, to be frank, on trial. Will it prove capable of undertaking the major share in modernizing the economy, providing adequate employment and generating increased wellbeing for all?

To ask this question is not unfair to private enterprise.

On the other hand, it is a challenge to the capacity of free labor and free management to carry out their common responsibility to the nation.

I share the view that prolonged inability on the part of private enterprise to demonstrate an effective capacity to create a viable economy will increase the already unbearable pressures for government intervention in economic development. If necessity warrants, the government should be in a position to enlarge the public sector and become more active than ever before in the economic field.

Let free labor and free management in the Philippines, who constitute this second National Labor-Management Congress, therefore, stand up to this challenge that is before them. It is a test worthy of our best minds.

Gentlemen, I wish you success in your endeavor. May your deliberations be as fruitful as your purpose is unselfish.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). President Garcia’s speech delivered Thursday morning, October 16, 1958, before the opening of the Second Labor Management Conference at the University of the East. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(29) , 7042-7045.