PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE LEAGUE OF PROVINCIAL AND CITY HEALTH OFFICERS AT THE FEU AUDITORIUM, MONDAY MORNING, APRIL 22, 1957

MY FRIENDS:

ONE of the vital elements for the stability and progress of the country is the health of its nationals. Positive health is extremely important for individual security and happiness.

The efficiency and capacity of the national man-power for productive enterprise are dependent in great measure on the state of the nation’s health. You can’t expect any sizeable production from labor coming from workers who are victims of diseases or infirmities or are wanting in vigor and endurance because of malnutrition. The success of settlement projects will continue to be severely hampared unless the settlement areas are completely rid of all existing health hazards. It is also important that commercial and industrial firms shall have adequate safeguards against accidents and exposures that may cause sickness because of the nature of employment.

Health measures should be directed to the population exposed to the greatest risk either because of situational consideration or need of services. In our country this involves the rural areas. As we continue to live in an agricultural economy, major emphasis on public health programs and activities should be in agricultural areas and among farm hands. It is of the utmost importance that the diseases which are predominant in these areas—and I am told that these are malaria, yaws, schistosomiasis or snail fever, the gastroenteric diseases, tuberculosis, and malnutrition—should be placed well under control and that there should be adequate measures to protect the people against these diseases and otherwise preserve and promote their health.

Until recently these areas were neglected from the health standpoint. People had no adequate protection and when they became sick there were no health personnel to attend them. They had no recourse to safe drinking water and to sanitary disposal of waste and sewage.

I regard, the accomplishments in health during the last few years highly instrumental in advancing the national progress. I hold the control of malaria and yaws, the prospect of doing the same with snail fever, the measures being taken against tuberculosis, the construction of artesian wells and waterworks, the campaign being waged against leprosy, the determination to improve conditions in the National Mental Hospital and promote mental health and all other health measures extremely significant for the national welfare. In spite of some differences which have arisen regarding the conduct of the rice enrichment program, we cannot minimize the impact which the program has in improving the nutritional status particularly of the masses of the people. It will be for our common good to thresh out those differences and execute the program in full force and effect.

The most outstanding development during the last four years is the program in rural health. The passage of Republic Act 1082, otherwise known as the Rural Health Law, is easily one of the most important pieces of legislation in the whole annals of our country. It is the one law that has really affected every man, woman, and child in the rural areas directly. Designed primarily to provide essential health services in the remote barrios and rural areas-—which is being done splendidly—it has gone even far. It has made the people health conscious and even health demanding. But what is significant is the fact that with the new consciousness and demand there arise a sense of responsibility among the people health-wise.

You have made it a point to stress the people’s participation in this program. This is a concept which has been overlooked because its possibilities were not fully understood. There was a time when health measures were not taken advantage by the people for whom they are meant. They had even objected to them in some instances. Because of your efforts, people now take health as their business. This is a far cry from previous paternalistic demand which has shaped or moulded government attitude. While it gave power to people in the government, it weakened the fabric and the strength at the base.

When people in the barrios pool their own resources in material and labor and build a health center that will serve local needs, this indicates maturity and new-found strength. Citizen’s participation and support to public programs at the local level will be the enduring base upon which the national structure will, rest solidly.

It is significant that our program in rural health which we pursued with vigor in 1954 has formed the pattern for similar activities in many other countries of the world. In the Annual Report of the World Health Organization for 1956 wherein 88 member and associate member states participated there was general recognition that isolated health projects are of doubtful and transient values unless they are based on a structure of decentralized integrated health services, in which curative and preventive services are organized in hospitals, laboratories, and health units, well distributed throughout the cities, towns, and villages of the country. These services must be supported by the population and guided by a competent central health authority.”

Community participation and support should not be taken by government to minimize its responsibility for the health of the people. Your government assumes its responsibility in this regard with serious earnestness. You are aware that the budget for health has been substantially increasing from year to year. When the present Administration took over last January 1, 1954, the appropriation for the Department of Health in the General Appropriation Act that fiscal year was ₱16,536,930. During this present or current fiscal year, the appropriation is ₱42,931,281 or an increase of 160 per cent.

We recognize that substantially more funds are needed to meet total needs for health. It is conceded that the amount of public money being spent for health is many times less the economic loss in terms of our sickness and deaths even from the leading causes alone. We also know, as I pointed out before, that positive health is essential for economic development and progress.

It will be for some years to come before we can have all the money that are needed for health. But perhaps we should try our best to do more from what we now have. I am aware that the Department of Health is extremely concerned about this matter. Its program of training is designed to acquaint its personnel in the newer knowledge, particularly the practical, and equipped them in the developmental skills and techniques that would gear them for greater and more effective performance. Its program of health education for the masses and the emphasis that it gives to prevent health measures with the progressive integration of the various medical and health services can be expected to yield more dividends per peso expenditure. Much more accomplishments can be anticipated by a continuing program of research.

When the late President Manuel Roxas assumed office in 1946, he stated that public health in the Philippines has been set back 20 years by World War II. The nation’s health today is satisfactory. We are completely rid of the epidemic diseases which decimated our people in great numbers. The crude death rate among the population is at its lowest and deaths among infants have lowered considerably. Because these are sensitive indices of health, we have reasons to be encouraged by the trends. We have been able to catch up with progress in the medical and public health fields and are now at par with many of the more advanced countries, and we are easily a leader in our sector of the globe. When we regard the conditions obtaining in some of the countries within our region such as Laos, Vietnam, and Indonesia where there is a dearth of medical and other professional personnel and where the ratio of physician to population reaches as low as 1 to 1 million, we can consider ourselves very fortunate indeed.

Where we are in public health today, we owe it to the dedicated men and women who at all hours of the day and night, in sunny weather or foul and often in complete disregard of self, are always at the guard and on call moving the frontiers forward. These are our public health men of whom you, the provincial and city health officers, make up the corps that give direction and provide the leadership. The country and the people owe much to your valuable work and we in the government are extremely proud of all of you.

Source: University of the Philippines College of Law Library