FRIENDS:

When I was informed that the late President left a promise to visit this village of Palanan, town of Makati, I immediately agreed to attend because I believe in continuing the work started by President Ramon Magsaysay. It is not unknown to you that I have held important positions in our province on several occasions. I have been elected provincial governor and representative of our district several times. Most recently, the people have also entrusted me to serve them as a senator and vice president of the country. What I can tell you is that I have never used any weapon from the very beginning, only love and care for my constituents, especially the poor like me. I have not used any defense against insults and attacks on my humble person except the courage to stand by the principles I swore to uphold and bring to the peak of success. Now that fate has designated me to shoulder the delicate and heavy responsibility left by our beloved President Magsaysay, I assure you that I will not lack in valuing the oath he swore to care for the welfare of the small people, because personally, this is a principle that is not merely borrowed but native, because like President Magsaysay, I was also born on a mat of poverty.

Your town of Makati is blessed. There are so many and increasing numbers of factories being built here, not only by our fellow countrymen but also by foreigners. Your formerly desolate lands are now teeming with homes, and all of this helps to provide some relief to the problem of unemployment and also greatly contributes to the prosperity of your town's treasury. But just as blessings come with corresponding responsibilities, the rapid development of this town is becoming a challenge to the ability of our government to adapt its public works, such as roads and waterways, to its progress; along with this is the addition of our public schools and support for institutions that care for the health and cleanliness of the citizens, especially mothers and infants.

You will feel many more needs gradually as your town develops. The government is currently striving to solve your problems, but you already know that our ranks are still very young and we are facing difficulties and needs in establishing our independence, so your help; the help of every Filipino citizen, is what this government needs so that through our complete unity and mutual support, we can lead our country to the peak of success.

University of the Philippines, College of Law Library