Ladies and gentlemen:

WHEN I was asked to speak on this, the Second Anniversary of the Social Security System, I did not hesitate to accept the invitation. There is no subject closer to my heart than the workingman and his welfare for which this System was conceived and to which it is dedicated.

As I join you in observing this significant occasion, I take great pride in the thought that, in my own modest way, I had helped bring it into being. I remember that some two years ago and shortly before the presidential elections, I was confronted with what seemed to be a weighty problem regarding the implementation of the Social Security Law. You will recall that this was enacted into law by the Congress in 1954, and it was not until 1957 that the problem of its implementation cropped up and pressed itself for immediate presidential consideration. I was, so to speak, caught in a cross-fire of conflicting interests. On the one hand, representatives of management manifested their strong opposition to the law’s immediate implementation; and on the other hand, the welfare and well-being of the workingman demanded recognition by way of the law’s immediate implementation. At the risk of losing the support of those who stood against the law and endangering my election bid, I decided in favor of the defenseless workingman—I implemented the Social Security Law. I believed then as I believe now, that it is the workingman who needs and should receive government attention and protection.

This occasion, therefore, assumes for me something of significance and meaning. It represents not only a personal vindication of the decision I had taken on the matter, but also as a reaffirmation of the faith that the people of our country, particularly the working masses, have in the wisdom and merit of the Social Security Law.

In deciding to implement the Social Security Law, I was actuated further by the realization that it was high time that the workingmen started to enjoy more of the benefits of social justice as guaranteed and pledged to them by the supreme law of the land—our Constitution. I was also motivated by the hope that with the institution of social security in our country, we would be able to develop further a contented citizenry as well as a healthy and stable economy. It is one of my articles of faith that as the future of the workingman is insured, he acquires a sense of confidence and responsibility as a citizen and pride as a Filipino.

It is, therefore, with singular satisfaction to note that, in the little time the System has been in existence, it is beginning to realize several of its major objectives. For instance, the records show that a total of ₱50,703,388.00 of the System’s funds was invested in the different well-established and responsible government and stable private institutions. This amount has tended to quicken the pulse-beat of our national economy and step up the pace of our march towards progress and prosperity. The records also show that almost ₱2 million have been paid out in death, disability, and sickness benefits. A detailed breakdown shows the following amounts having been paid out: ₱97,306.33 in sickness benefits; ₱296,173.67 in disability benefits; and ₱1,368,031.39 in death benefits.

Under the munificent dispensation of our social security law, a new era has been ushered in for the workingmen of this country. These figures will show that we have not been content merely in subscribing to the adage that there is nobility in labor. We have done more. Until recently, a great deal of lip-service was rendered to the workingmen and nothing more. Social justice was more of a dream than a reality, more of an ideal to be hoped for and yearned after. Under the aegis of our new Social Security Law, however, death has been robbed of some of the venom of its sting; misfortune, some of the horrors of its treachery; and old age, some of the anguish of its fears. The Administration is dedicated and committed to this social justice program and it will allow nothing and no one to stand in the way of its final fruition and fulfillment.

As I view the fast tempo of the growth of the System and as I size up its fast gathering strength, I feel that it is about ready to take a long stride forward toward helping its members to acquire a home of their own. This is a life-dream of every Filipino. “Be it ever so humble, there’s no place like home,” so goes an immortal song. I therefore call upon the Social Security Commission to start that study and efforts towards the realization of this laudable goal for the small man. You have any personal backing, the support of the Social Committee of the Senate, and of the Good Government Committee of the House. Let the new SSS slogan be: A Home for every member—the Hope of the Nation.

At this juncture, also, I desire to acknowledge publicly the self-effacing unselfishness of management without whose unstinted cooperation the blessings and benefits of the law would not be now enjoyed by our workers. In spite of the financial burden that the Social Security Law imposes, management readily responded by absorbing immediately the added financial responsibility. Thus, management has publicly recognized and accepted the salutary ends that the law seeks to accomplish—the advancement of the interests of society and those of the nation.

The institution of social security is one of the mainstays in our program of government. And I believe in this institution. I believe that it will not only secure and strengthen the social structure but also enhance and speed up the development of our national economy. I believe that if such institution has proved to be a boon to the peoples and governments of other countries, it should prove no less successful and beneficial in our own country. I believe that by instilling a sense of security in the workingman, we have thus strengthened the base of our society. I believe that, given the opportunity to grow with the years, our own Social Security System will have built itself up into a towering pillar of strength supporting the social security and required to dynamize the material advancement of our stability of our people as well as supplying the motive power nation.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech on the 2nd Anniversary of the Social Security System held Tuesday evening, September 1, 1959, at the Fiesta Pavilion of the Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (36) , 7644-7646.