Ladies and gentlemen, my friends:

THE health problems of our country today, though still many and varied, are receiving the attention and concern not only of the government but also of the private health agencies and medical organizations. We are gratified to note that the problem of “cancer” has aroused a great deal of interest not only of the medical profession but also of the public at large. I hope that this interest may culminate in a Cancer Program at the national level.

The incidence of cancer in the Philippines is increasing year by year. The disease is prevalent especially in the later decades of life—that period when a person is over 55 years old. It is said that one man in 8 and one woman in 11 are expected to die of cancer. According to the records of general hospitals in Manila, out of every 100 patients admitted, two have cancer, and that, roughly, there are about 200,000 to 400,000 persons now suffering from cancer in the Philippines. Today, cancer is one of the first ten in the causes of death in our country.

Our health agencies are realizing the tremendous problems that must be faced and solved if we are to fight this dreaded disease. Although scientific and clinical resarches have added knowledge regarding the disease, cancer cannot be controlled until we know the cause. Therefore, our greatest weapon against cancer still lies in its early recognition and prompt treatment. We believe that the failure of our people to recognize the disease is largely due to lack of cancer consciousness and to ignorance of the disease, especially in the remote areas of our country.

More professional and lay educational programs are needed so that valuable information may reach our people. Through lay educational programs, important information about cancer should be made available to all individual. We must take the greatest interest in the education of the physicians, the patients, and the people in each town and barrio throughout the country. Indeed, the time has arrived to devote more effort to an educational program in cancer detection, for only through a continuing educational program can we increase the rate of detection and ultimately the rate of cure and survival.

The public and the private agencies and health organizations and our people at large must accept a greater responsibility in the final solution of this problem. The Philippine Cancer Society is commendably assuming a substantial portion of this responsibility. I have noted with great satisfaction the strides made by this infant association. Already, with the sum of over ₱129,000 collected last year, the Philippine Cancer Society has begun building its Cancer Diagnostic and Detection Center on a lot donated by the Concepcion Paterno Memorial Foundation. It has met the representatives of hospitals, clinics, medical, and other allied professional groups and universities to map out a blueprint for the more accurate registration and reporting of cancer cases, in an effort to trace each case and provide the proper treatment and the best management of the case. It has launched an intensive educational campaign to teach our people the warning signals of cancer so that they may seek an earlier diagnosis, thus ensuring the possibility of cure. This is an impressive record for a short year of existence, and I believe it is our duty as Filipinos interested in the health and welfare of our present and future generation, to continue supporting the efforts of the Philippine Cancer Society by giving generously to the cancer fund drive.

I therefore call on every citizen of our Republic to heed the plea of the Philippine Cancer Society and contribute generously to the Cancer Fund Drive. Your contribution may mean the difference between life and death for some of our unfortunate people. Unfortunately, the weapons for the treatment of cancer are costly and need highly specialized operators. Your contributions will mean that the Philippines can some day boast of having the most modern facilities for the control of cancer, and that any Filipino with a cancer that is still curable need not despair for absence of such facilities. Let us not fail the men and women who are dedicating their time, knowledge, and efforts in their fight against cancer so that others may live.

To the Philippine Cancer Society and its corps of volunteers, I say Congratulations for a job well started! May your fund drive this year be a completely successful one.

And now, I take great pleasure in presenting my personal contribution to the second Cancer Fund Drive.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech at the 2nd Cancer Educational and Fund Drive at 5:30 p.m., December 18, 1957, at Malacañang Social Hall. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(24) , 8821-8822.