On this same day, one hundred and seventy-one (171) years ago, a poet who crowned glory upon Tagalog poetry was born in this village—Francisco Balagtas.

Whatever literature and whatever language may claim Francisco Balagtas, that literature and that language can boast, for in Florante at Laura are woven all the emotions that drive a nation to fight for its freedom, its redemption, and its self-reliance.

Courage, patriotism, and a thirst for freedom have never been new to the Filipino. When the first symbol of conquest—Magellan—fell into the waters off the shores of Mactan, it was written on the pages of history that in the hands of the Filipino champion Lapu-Lapu was the native love of the brown people for freedom.

The same purpose, the same conviction was championed by the pen of Francisco Balagtas.

Francisco Balagtas awakened the spirit of the nation, as Florante said:

“Deceit and evil have raised their heads, And goodness is humbled and bowed, Holy righteousness is weakened and exhausted, Only tears are allowed to flow.”

But amidst the cruelties endured by the Philippines at that time, Balagtas prophesied that with God's help, the courage of the Filipinos inherited from Lapu-Lapu, Diego Silang, Francisco Dagohoy, Pedro Ladya, Soliman, and others would be awakened. Balagtas said through Florante:

“But who can fathom Your great secret, O God? Nothing will happen on the face of the earth Without Your desired intervention.”

Fifty years after Florante at Laura was written, God awakened the Filipino people. In Balintawak, the cry of Bonifacio resonated. The Filipino people rose up, and the blood that watered our land gave brilliance to the flag of our race.

Bonifacio is a hero of the sword; Balagtas is a hero of the pen, of poetry, of literature and of language. This commemoration is worthy of the valiant poet of the national language, for we owe him our freedom.

Fellow citizens, I join you in honoring the poet we commemorate today for the sake of poetry, literature, and language.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). President Garcia’s speech on the occasion of the National Language Day celebration commemorating the 171st Birthday of Francisco Balagtas delivered at Panginay, Bigaa, Bulacan, Thursday, April 2, 1959, at 11:00 a. m.. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (15) , 2621-2622.