Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the Charter Presentation of the Rotary Club of Quezon City

[Delivered at the D & E Restaurant, Quezon City, June 20, 1960]

PRESIDENT CEFERINO, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FELLOW ROTARIANS:

MANY honors have been bestowed upon me, but one that I shall always cherish and remember is the honor of being made an honorary member of the Rotary Club of Quezon City. It is honor enough to be made a member of any Rotary Club, but I consider it an exceptional privilege to be counted among the Rotarians of Quezon City. For, as I have said once before, Quezon City is my second hometown—here I have built a home, the only home I and my family have known other than the old paternal home in Bohol. Here I hope “to retire—for like the great President Quezon, who conceived and launched the building of this city, I believe that it will not be long before our city will be the center of government, of arts, of culture.

I am sure my Rotary Ann—whom I would like you to call Inday—share the same thoughts and feelings with me. That is why she is devoting so much time and effort to the development of a man-made forest and flowerland. (I realize that as a fellow Rotarian I can now be fined for com­mercials—but I shall offer to pay a good fine for this park and flowerland project provided that the fine I shall willingly pay will bring the fullest and most wholehearted support of every Rotarian of Quezon City for this worthwhile project.)

Tonight marks my second public appearance since the state visit of President Eisenhower. I believe you will agree with me that the trip and the heartwarming and spontaneous demonstration of our people will do more than anything to dispel the clouds of doubt and misunderstanding that sometimes darkened our horizons of friendship.

When I visited the United States about two years ago, I saw how the Filipino people were held in high esteem by the American people. I knew then after the warm and inspiring receptions given me that our country and our people had a special place in the heart of most Americans. But there were those who doubted whether the Filipino people held the Americans and the “United States in the same high esteem as we did before the war and shortly after liberation. As a matter of fact, some of our people have taken potshots at the United States for taking our country for granted. The result was that many Americans have become suspicious about the Philippines.

The spontaneous and unprecedented receptions accorded President. Eisenhower should dispel all doubts among the American people as to our people’s friendship to America:

It is now up to us as a nation and as individuals to follow up and follow through this new advantage—the fresh atmosphere generated by the Eisenhower visit. On the part of the government, I want to assure that every step is being taken to pursue the course outlined in the joint communique issued by President Eisenhower and myself.

In simple terms the communique means that:

First, in the programming of American military assistance, the Philippines will now have an equal say. Heretofore, this function was exercised exclusively by JUSMAQ.

Second, we can expect early and prompt delivery of arms and weapons from the United States, including conventional missiles used essentially for defense purposes.

Third, President Eisenhower’s endorsement of more emphasis on the economic provisions of SEATO may be considered a recognition of Philippine efforts in that direction.

Fourth, we are now assured of more economic assistance from the United States.

While in the government sector the ground has been paved for improved relations between the United States and the Philippines, it is just as important that some action should be taken in the private sector. The program of Rotary fits perfectly into this picture. I noted that the fourth point in your Rotary program reads: “The advancement of international understanding, good will, and peace through a world of fellowship of business and professional men united in the ideal of service.”

In your Rotary Quezoniana, it is also pointed out that “Rotary differs from other organizations in that the establishment of a Rotary Club links its community to a world-encircling chain of cities and towns where other men have organized Rotary Clubs to give expression to their desire to serve. Their affiliation with other Rotary Clubs as an international organization, their balanced programs and activities, their financial solvency, and their unique basis of membership, give Rotary Clubs permanence and stability.”

In the light of our present day problems and realizing the scope of Rotary which spans 114 countries, this new Rotary Club of Quezon City faces a challenge. I am not familiar with the mechanics of Rotary—after all it was only tonight that I was made one of you—but certainly there must be a way of harnessing our club and all the good will behind it to help the cause of national welfare. I leave it to you and your able officers to find the way.

It would be a wonderful thing to see the Rotary Club of Quezon City lead in something different, in something international. After all Quezon City is by law the capital of the Philippines. By operation of law and by the natural expansion of population, this city will in a few years perhaps eclipse Manila as a cultural, arts, and international center.

That is why I consider the organization of civic clubs like the Rotary in this city significant and important.

Even in the local scene, the private sector must play a leading role in the development of a community, in the stabilization of social factors, in the upbuilding of the economy. The government can only do so much and no more. The rest must be done by private enterprise through private initiative, with private resources. And this is where Rotary and Rotarians come in.

In some communities I have seen Rotary Clubs take the lead in many fields of endeavor. I am confident that with your distinguished membership and under your present vigorous leadership, the Rotary Club of Quezon City— our club—will be able to point to concrete and specific achievements in the future.

Rotary has many admirable features which may be exploited to the benefit of our community, especially during these times of much misunderstanding. Your membership comes from all races and all creeds. I have noticed from your fellowship gatherings, from your singing together, that Rotary is one group that truly overlooks all barriers of color and religion. Indeed, Rotarians have in their organization the basic ingredient for mutual understanding. And out of such understanding grows cooperative efforts which in turn contribute to peace of mind. Expanded to world proportions, here we can have the basis of world peace—’that elusive Holy Grail for which Chiefs of States today travel all over the world in an unending search.

Let me give you a concrete example. I am told that politics is banned from discussions in Rotary Clubs—and I think that is a sound practice. But I sincerely believe that among Rotarians such questions as nationalism and Filipino First can be thoroughly threshed out and discussed without passion, without rancor, and without suspicion. Nationalism is so basic to every nation that it is a question that cannot and should not be skirted.

This is no time for me to discuss its meaning as we in the administration perceive it. I have many times in the past defined our position on this subject. I am bringing this up here merely to point out that this is one subject in which Rotarians can help dispel the clouds of misunderstanding. One cannot talk of good will and service, of fellowship and cooperation, without a basic understanding of a nation’s policy of nationalism.

I believe in the tenets of Rotary which among other things express this gem of thought: “In Rotary, thoughtfulness of others is regarded as the basis of service and helpfulness to others as its expression.” I wish to assure you that Philippine nationalism today does not depart from this concept—the concept of helpfulness to all elements of the community and respect for established and acquired rights.

The Rotary Club of Quezon City is being launched auspiciously at a significant period of our history. I hope this organization will do justice to the role it is called upon to play as Rotary Club of the capital of the Philippines, a growing, expanding metropolis whose early steps of development indicate it will become the nation’s most modern model city.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1960). Speech of President Garcia at the Charter Presentation of the Rotary Club of Quezon City, held at the D & E Restaurant, Quezon City, Monday evening, June 20, 1960. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 56(26) , 4319-4322.