PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH DELIVERED AT THE BATAAN DAY RITES ON THE LUNETA, TUESDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 9, 1957

FELLOW VETERANS, MY FRIENDS:

IT is difficult for a Filipino who is proud of his race to stand on this hallowed ground overlooking Bagumbayan Field, without feeling a twitch of glorious pain in his heart. It was here where a people’s aspiration for freedom was set aflame with the death of one man; where one bullet snuffed one life only to kindle the courage of millions of people. It is meet, therefore, that on the anniversary of Bataan Day, the stage be set on this sacred ground.

I have often wondered why year after year we choose to remember that heartbreaking day, 15 years ago, when organized resistance in the peninsula of Bataan by gallant Filipino and American soldiers crumbled before overwhelmingly superior forces of the enemy; why we have to recall every once so often the gallant but tragically futile stand of the Philippine and American Forces in that beleaguered and blood-drenched peninsula and bring to mind again the nightmares of the death march that followed.

If a people choose to remember the tragedy of Bataan, it is because Bataan may have been a military defeat but it was a magnificent victory of a people’s spirit, the victory of a strong and steadfast heart against a cruel and determined enemy. There must be something in the Fall of Bataan that makes our people take pride in being Filipinos. Wars have been lost in the past and defeated peoples have gone down with them, but the defeat of Bataan was a temporary military defeat: the Filipino people not only won that war but became stronger with it.

What did the Philippines lose in the battle of Bataan? As we look back through the years against the perspective of a people’s courage that rose from defeat and subjugation to a new and glorious present, it is now clear that all we lost in Bataan was merely a piece of real estate which our fighting men yielded to the enemy only because of overwhelming odds. The military bastions of Bataan were the ones that crumbled. The will to fight, the fortitude to endure, and the determination to win the battles, never died in the Filipino people. In fact within a few months this spirit swept the length and breadth of our country, fired the humblest farmer with a new determination, and gave birth to the resistance movement which was kept alive until American forces liberated the country from the enemy. It was this spirit that led small patrols into encounters with the enemy at tremendous odds, that forced a people to endure deprivation, starvation, and death rather than bow to the domination of a conqueror. Finally, this avenging spirit marched with the liberation forces and side by side with their American allies ferreted the enemy out of his ratholes and without regard to life or limb hastened the early liberation of his benighted country. It must be the inspiration of this spirit which led Jose Abad Santos to a smiling death rather than bow to the enemy; that led Manuel Colayco and more like him to disregard their safety for the sake of their hapless countrymen. Much later, in the frozen wastes of Korea, the Filipino brought this ringing courage to meet the challenge of the Godless Communist aggression in that part of the world that other peoples may live in peace and happiness.

It was inevitable that the world should take notice of the Filipino brand of patriotism and love for freedom. It was this spirit that earned for the Filipino a worthy and honored place among the sisterhood of free and independent nations. I know now that Bataan must be celebrated every year not only to remember the gallant dead but to fire the living with a new resolve to carry on the torch of freedom; to rededicate again those ideals for which so many suffered and died.

On this occasion, let us pledge to the heroes of Bataan, living and dead, that by our sincere dedication to liberty and democracy, by our unswering determination to keep our native land free from the curse of a godless ideology, and by our unrelenting crusade for peace and universal prosperity, we shall prove to history that they have not died in vain.

Let the spirit of Bataan be the new redemptive power that would rout the forces of corruption, greed, concupiscence, voices, and criminality in our midst. Let the spirit of Bataan be the regenerative power that would lift our people to a life of faith and hope, of triumphant nationalism without any isolationist fear to live with the free world on terms of equality and mutual respect. Let the spirit of Bataan symbolize unto perpetuity the Filipino-American covenant to stand together always as they stood together on the summits of Bataan and on the rock of Corregidor in defense of freedom and democracy, and of those institutions and causes that we commonly hold dearest and nearest to our hearts. Let the spirit of Bataan be the new dynamics to our economic renaissance that would turn the wheels of industry, multiply the productivity of our agriculture, open new avenues of employment for the sinews of labor and new fields of investment for capital. Let the spirit of Bataan be an added instrument of the people for the upbuilding of a Philippine nation truly free, truly prosperous, and truly happy.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library