Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines At the 45th General Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines where he was conferred the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa

[Delivered on April 7, 1959]

I ACCEPT in all humility the honor invested upon me by the University of the Philippines on this solemn occasion of the commencement exercises in honor of the thousands of graduates of the different colleges of this great institution of learning. I am deeply grateful for the recognition of my humble services to the nation, for which reason, this honorary degree has been ordained in my favor by the University of the Philippines. I would be lacking in candor if I did not make an open public confession that this honor has fired my heart with new and fresh determination to dedicate the best that I am and the best that I have at the Altar of national service to help make our beloved country a real home of the brave and the free and a patria worth living for and fighting for.

To the graduates who this day will receive the diploma that ushers them into the career as professional, I wish to extend to you and to your loved ones my warmest felicitations for your graduation and my best wishes for success in full measure for each and every one of you. Our motherland, like a true mother, has a deep concern in your career as professionals. Your success is her joy and she has a tear for each one of your failures. As professionals you have become members of the great army of nation builders and the future of the Philippines will mainly depend upon the spirit that inspires you as contributors in the great task of nation-building.

In this Cyclopean and continuing task of nation building we found ourselves at the end of the last century engaged in shaking off the yoke of Spain. With the pen of Rizal, the sword of Bonifacio, and the leadership of Aguinaldo, we touched the summit of independence but soon fell back to become a political ward of America. During the first four decades of this century, we kept on with unrelenting vigor with our fight for freedom in the fields of peace and by means pacific. We built the ramparts of freedom in the heart of our citizenry. We established democracy’s bastions in our institutions, in our Constitution, in our very way of life. In 1946 America in an unprecedented act of history voluntarily granted us independence.

After this our nation building took a new orientation. Confronted by the tremendous responsibility of maintaining a stable independent government, faced by the wreck and ruin of the most devastating world war, the nation undismayed rose equal to the task. We started the era of national reconstruction and rehabilitation. We can proudly claim that in one decade we wiped out the vestiges of war’s devastations with generous aid from America. There were heartaches, mistakes, recriminations, and even frustrations, but after all is said and done, we scored and achievement in nation building that won the admiration and respect of the world.

In 1954 the chapter of reconstruction and rehabilitation ended and the era of economic and social development opened. Right now we are in the midst of building a national economic structure designed to afford each one of the 23 million Filipinos not only economic stability but also full enjoyment of freedom and opportunity to rise and grow in a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy. Do we have the essential elements of success in this grand program of economic and social development? There are two essential elements—productivity of the people or manpower and natural resources. Divine Province has generously blessed us with an abundance of natural resources. Let us generate the man-power to fully utilize these resources.

Our educational institutions can do this job.

At this moment, we have before us the finest specimen of them among those who graduated from the different colleges of the University of the Philippines this year. Thousands of others have graduated from other institutions of learning. Of course our man-power must acquire the necessary skill. It must have the know-how, the technology. But this is not all. To me it is more important that man-power must have the right mental and emotional attitude—the right spirit. There is no greater driving power to the man behind the plow or wheel than his love for work. Lone after the man who works for a mere day’s wage quit, the man who works with the conviction and the vision that this work contributes to the nation’s abundance of life besides that of his family perseveres in the job. In nine cases out of ten the man in our industries or farms who starts his job with faith and hope of success, actually succeed. In other words, the man whether a manager or a laborer whose credo is positive thinking, whose imagination is creative, and whose heart glows with a positive desire to do good and right to his fellowmen, has a definite place iii the book of success. I warn the graduates that negative thinking, that is thinking inspired by envy, fear, doubt, mistrust, or hatred inevtitably leads to failure in life. He already lost his fight who starts with a fear or a doubt.

In memory of this occasion that I address to the cream of the youth of the land, permit me to recapitulate some cosmic verities: that like begets like; that you always reap what you sow; that you get out of life what you put into it. These are eternal laws of life the observance of which brings its own reward and the violation of which automatically brings its punishment or retribution. Under these laws, therefore, the nation builder who works with faith and love and vision is always the annointed man of Destiny. But in the grand program of the social and economic development of the Philippines, it is also important that we be inspired by the right principle and that we aspire to the right objective. Under what principles and for whom then is all this program of economic and social development? The program derives its validity and vitality from the fundamental principle of democracy that states or governments were made for man and not man for the State. Consequently the welfare of the people is the supreme purpose of government. States can stand only when the people are free and happy. Governments can endure only when the masses of the people are contented. Thus the tears of misery and the groans of starvation and the sufferings of the victims of social injustices and oppression undermine the foundations of a State. Thus in the social service item of this grand program, emphasis is given to education, health, welfare, and labor to make life enjoyable to the masses of our people among whom are the poor and the lowly and the underprivileged.

The supreme objective is the welfare of the masses of our people—the 23 million Filipinos of this generation. Thus, whatever benefits or fruits may be achieved by the development of our industries, the expansion of our agriculture and the utilization of our natural resources, and whatever opportunities or services may be generated by our achievements in our economic and social development efforts should be shared in as equally as possible to lift up all regions of the Philippines, and all social classes of the Filipinos. This in a nutshell is the concept of our social and economic development program for which the government spent ₱612.2 million in 1955, ₱785 in 1956, ₱803.7 in 1957, and ₱744.6 in 1958, and ₱727.1 in 1959 and propose to spend ₱847.1 in 1960.

We cannot build our economic and social structure for the benefit of a few big corporations only to make the rich richer and the poor poorer. We cannot build an economic edifice that would concentrate power, wealth, or privileges in some favored social classes or regions like Manila. If the Philippines must develop economically, socially, and politically, such development should be symmetrical so as to allow all the social classes and all the regions of the Philippines to share equitably in the benefits and blessings and opportunities generated thereby.

Accordingly, we must halt the present tendency to concentrate all in Manila and suburbs. It is borne out by statistics that the greater bulk of our industrial development is here in the area called greater Manila. The banks and the nation’s financial institutions are here in Manila. Statistics in the Central Bank show that 83% of the dollar quota holders among whom are allocated roughly one-half billion dollars every year for commerce, trade, and industries are living in the area of greater Manila. Records in the Bureau of Internal Revenue show that 80% of the revenues from taxes are collected in greater Manila. These facts indicate a situation where 80% of the nation’s wealth and monetary circulation are concentrated in an area inhabited by 13% of our people whereas only 20% of the wealth and monetary circulation of the country are thinly distributed in rural areas where 87% of the Filipinos are living. By the same token we get the inference that of our monetary circulation which now amounts to 1 billion. 600 million pesos—roughly 1.3 billion circulate in Manila among some 1.7 million people, whereas roughly 300 million only circulate in the provinces. Hence we have the paradox that while all the bankers and banking institutions, and Manila affirm by their books that there is an excess of monetary circulation in the country, in the provinces, however, the people feel the hardship of money shortage.

Such a monstrous disparity in development cannot be tolerated. We must act immediately to check such a tendency. Such an imbalance breeds many social problems. It causes labor in the provinces to converge into Manila and produce here the problems of congestion of population, while at the same time, it creates depletion of competent and skilled labor in the provinces. Such an imbalance in development produces a sense of frustration in the rural areas which have gotten the impression that all these efforts of the government in developing the economy of the country have been done only for the benefit of Manila. They begin to feel that all these raising of new revenues for economic development and social services have been done mainly for Manila neglecting the greater portion of the country where 20 million Filipinos expect to share in the opportunities and benefits of an economically developed Philippines.

Furthermore, this imbalance in development is contrary to the economy ordained by nature. For instance, Nature decrees that the northern parts of the Philippines be best suited to the production of tobacco; to that region therefore rightly belongs the establishment of cigarette and cigar manufacturing industries. Southern Tagalog, the Bicol provinces, and the Visayas are the regions designated by Nature for the productions of coconut and abaca and sugar. To these regions therefore rightly belong the manufacturing industries and centrals of these products. Nature has chosen the rich island of Mindanao as the ideal place for the production of all the principal exports of the country and the tremendous amount of iron and other mineral deposits and to it rightly belongs the corresponding industries to develop these natural resources. Statesmanship therefore, taking a cue from natural economy, should ordain that the different industries of the country should be distributed among the different regions of the country and thus distribute equitably the fruits of our economic development. It may be said also in passing that in case of war, God forbid: the resistance and figthing power of the nation will not end by the destruction of the industries in Manila. It is good for prospective invaders to know that if they must subdue the Philippines, they have to do it over the dead bodies of 23 million Filipinos and not only of 3 million Manilans.

I believe it bears repetition to state here again that our economic plan is to develop here a well-balanced agro-industrial economy. Since the Philippines is essentially an agricultural country, our destiny is anchored in the rural areas. But it is equally true and important that if we must put to work the skilled men and professionals who graduate from our universities by the thousands every year, we must develop our industries as fast as we can. In big cities and industrial centers let us establish our heavy industries but must never neglect the development of cottage and home industries and middle-sized industries where we can put to work the rural population. The concentration of money and power that goes with the establishment of heavy industries must be counterbalanced by organization of intelligent and patriotic labor. It is also envisaged that the organization of cooperatives in rural areas be realized to stimulate community development on the principal of collective self-help.

Ladies and gentlemen, for four centuries we were under foreign domination. Through hundreds of revolts led by inspired men in different regions of the country, we attempted to regain our freedom. We failed. Finally about the end of the last century we recaptured national unity. The mighty pen of Rizal and the great actions of Bonifacio, the leadership of Aguinaldo, and the statesmanship of Quezon and Osmeña brought about the national unity which won for us our independence in 1946. Since then we became masters of our destiny. We are now the architects of our own gloom or glory. Across the centuries of trials and tribulations we developed a rugged national spirit that would triumph even in death. It triumphed through the martyrdom of Rizal. It conquered through the failure of the Revolution of 1896. It triumphed through the fall of Bataan and Corregidor. It conquered through the four years or ruthless occupation by invaders. With that national unity and that national spirit anchored in our faith in the divine guidance of God, we cannot fail in establishing for the present generation and for the generations of Filipinos yet sleeping in the womb of Time, a patrimony of economic stability, social security, and abundance of life.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1959). Speech of President Garcia at the 45th General Commencement Exercises of the University of the Philippines where he was conferred the Degree of Doctor of Laws, Honoris Causa, at 5 p.m., Tuesday, April 7, 1959. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 55 (16) , 2872-2876.