Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines During the rites commemorating the 65th anniversary of the Battle of Pinaglabanan

[Delivered at San Juan, Rizal, August 29, 1961]

IT IS my privilege to be with you today as you commemorate a historical event of deep and tremendous significance to every freedom-loving Filipino. The first cry for liberty symbolized in crude weapons raised by Bonifacio and his men as they attacked the polverista in San Juan, has since found an answering echo in our people’s subsequent struggles for self-determination and political independence. We .recall the past today, therefore, not merely to evoke the sentimental thrill of that first, if futile, manifestation of patriotism, but also to reassess the persistence with which we have kept faith with the ideals of a small group of men. Their luminous patriotism and valor would be meaningless if we who now possess the freedom which they never enjoyed, should be found wanting in preserving the values which that very freedom entails.

The great era of the Philippine Revolution is over. Its passions, its tragedy, and its glory have merged into the present period of national struggle—no longer against alien domination—but against silent, insidious forces which would negate the very principles for which Bonifacio and our early heroes had fought with such remembered dedication. We have breached the gap between three major periods of foreign rule. Today we have taken our own modest place in the concert of free nations, and have striven to carry our own share of the burden, that must inevitably fall upon those who would maintain existence under peace, liberty, and order.

But we face odds even as formidable—and perhaps even more so—than those which challenged the Pinaglabanan heroes of old.

The flux of international events is a ceaseless one. Even as we pick ourselves up from the ashes of the last war, another more fearful destruction threatens not only our own existence but that of the entire world as well. Two conflicting ideologies—one adhering to the inalienable rights of all men to live in peace and according to the principles of right and justice, and othe other denying this right and subordinating it to that of the state, have not yet found a way to reconcile their mutually exclusive political beliefs. The small nations like us are caught squarely in the middle of this burgeoning conflict.

We in the Philippines, have chosen to cast our lot with the lovers of freedom. We have time and again proven to the rest of the world that—small and weak as we are—we shall not surrender our individual dignities and liberties to the enemy in abject surrender.

We have gone a long way from Pinaglabanan. Today, as free men, we constantly seek to buttress the foundations of our freedom in the formulation of both our national as well as our foreign policies. Thus, we are members of the United Nations Organization and its agencies. We have entered into regional security pacts with our Western and Asian friends. Lately, we initiated the formation of the Association of Asia (ASA) envisaging economic and social cooperation among Asian governments with the hope that in the not-too-distant future, other Asian countries will join us in this cooperative endeavor. We have entered into a military agreement with the United States with the end in view of protecting our country in the event of another war.

On the national level, we have sought to strengthen existing individual liberties, and to preserve peace, order, and justice. Perhaps one of the most telling manifestations of our desire to stress self-determination as a people is the Government’s present “Filipino First” policy which is geared towards the encouragement and protection of Filipino interests on the economic front. Designed mainly to favor the expansion of native industries and national trade the “Filipino First” policy has, understandably, encountered opposition from extraneous sectors. We have, however, tended to deal with foreign investors on an unchanging basis of equity even, as we extend the largest measure of protection to our own people.

These movements, however, which are aimed at giving meaning and substance to the freedoms we now enjoys, would be fruitless unless we make ourselves worthy of the values intrinsic to these freedoms. It would be quixotic to assume that a nation or its people would fight for principles once these were threatened, if there is no sense of identification between the two, and no feeling of pride or merit in being free.

As we commemorate today the historic significance of the Pinaglabanan stand, let us not lose sight of its wider implications. Freedom, for which Bonifacio and his men fought with such dauntless courage and heroism is both a heritage and a deep and heavy responsibility. To the degree and sincerity with which we carry our share of of the burden would depend our continued existence as a free people.

I have implicit faith in the Filipino nation. I am of the firm conviction that with its well-known courage, its industry and unflinching belief in the democratic way of life, the priceless legacy left by our heroes in the past shall not have been bequeathed in vain.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Garcia during the Rites Commemorating the 65th anniversary of the Battle of Pinaglabanan. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(37) , 6598-6599.