Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On the Luna Centennial Celebration

[Delivered at Badoc, Ilocos Norte on October 23, 1957]

SENATOR PAREDES, SECRETARY LIM, GOVERNOR FARINAS, MAYOR AGABIN, MEMBERS OF THE JUAN LUNA CENTENNIAL COMMISSION, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, AND FRIENDS:

ONE hundred years ago to this very day, this historic and peaceful town saw the birth of a baby boy who was destined to achieve world renown. He was born to one of its well-known families, Mr. and Mrs. Joaquin Luna de San Pedro. Juan, the child, grew up to join that small group of immortals whose names, in the words of Jose Rizal, “in themselves signify achievement invoke, reverence, and greatness—names which, like magic formulas, recall agreeable arid pleasant ideas, names which come to form a compact, a token of peace, a bond of love, among the nations.”

I join you today in proudly and reverently honoring the memory of Juan Luna. You have given Juan Luna to our people, and our people have given him to the entire world.

For, in the realm of art, Juan Luna ranks among the world’s immortals. Because of him, and perhaps also because of his young brother, Antonio, who, with fierce courage, commanded the Filipino forces during the war with America, Badoc ranks with Rizal’s Calamba as the cradle of Filipino patriots and heroes.

Although Juan Luna began his art education in Manila, it was in Spain, Italy, and France that his great talent developed. Through the intercession of an enligthened Spanish official, Don Francisco, Paula de Rodoredo, the Ayuntamiento of Manila granted him a four-year scholarship to study art in Europe. It was also Spanish recognition and acclamation that encouraged him in his studies and brought his art to perfection.

One of Luna’s early paintings in Europe was “The Death of Cleopatra.” Not only did this work win signal recognition at the Exposition General de Bellas Artes in Madrid with the award of a silver medal, but the Spanish Government purchased it for 1,000 duros and placed it on permanent exhibition at the Museo National de Pinturas in the Spanish capital. It is said that this canvas later commanded rice of 500,000 pesetas.

Luna created perhaps his greatest masterpiece, “El Spolarium,” in 1884 when he was only 27 years old. He painted in Rome after having been exposed to Murillo, Michael Angelo, and Raphael. It was a painting which, in exaltation of Rizal described as “that canvas which is not mute,” for it brought to the ears of viewers “the tumult of the throng the cry of slaves, the metallic rattle of the armor on the corpses, the sobs of orphans, the hum of prayers, with as much force and realism as the crash of thunder and the roar of the cataracts, or the fearful and frightful rumble of earthquake.” No wonder his canvas was honored in Rome when it was exhibited at the Palazzi del’ Expocione de Nacionale, together with those of famed Spanish painters in that city and opened by no less than the Italian Queen. When exhibited in Madrid in the same year, “Spolarium” won the first of the three gold medal prizes painting.

But Luna was not awarded the much-coveted “prize of honor”, a denial which created a prolonged controversy among art critics and artists all over Spain. However, Spain soon atoned for this denial. No less than King Alfonso XII received Luna in the Royal Palace, together with other artist friends, congratulated him warmly for his triumph, and expressed regret that he had not been awarded the “prize of honor”. This meeting led to a mutual friendship that subsequently served Luna in good stead during his short life of 42 years. It partly influenced the Spanish Senate to commission Luna, to paint a heroic canvas for its Session Hall, at the same time commissioning the famous Spanish painter, Pradilla, last winner of the “prize of honor”, to paint a matching canvas for the hall, thus bracketting them together in the same category. Later on, when Luna was tried in Paris court and again when he was arrested in the Philippines on returning from abroad shortly after the Cry of Balintawak, Spanish royal intervention saved the great artist.

Full justice came to Luna when no less than the Deputacion Provincial de Barcelona purchased the “Spolarium” for 20,000 pesetas and placed it on permanent exhibition in the Museo Moderno in Barcelona, where it hanged until the last civil war. In 1886 the Ministry of Ultramar of Spain commissioned him to paint “España y las Islas Filipinas” for its Library Hall. In the next year, his painting for the Senate Hall, the heroic “Batalla de Lepanto”, depicting the great Spanish victory over the Turks, was unvailed by no less than the Queen Regent.

Luna harvested other honors. In 1888 his “Las Damas Romanas” won a diploma of honor at the exposition in Munich, Germany. One of the last paintings of Luna, “People and Kings”, was intended for exhibition at the Chicago Exposition, but it was not until 1904, 12 years after he had finished the canvas and five years after his death in Hongkong, that it reached America to be exhibited at the Universal Exposition of St. Louis. There, it won a gold medal.

Thus, Luna reaped honors and acclamations in Italy, Spain, Germany, and America at a time when the Filipino race was relatively unknown, even despised. But perhaps it was because of this fact that Luna and his contemporaries like Rizal, Hidalgo, del Pilar, and others, strived mightily to prove by deeds that their race was in no way inferior to others. Luna, like the others, therefore, served his country not only by proving the abilities of his people in the arts hut also by bolstering up their claim to a better political and social life. Talking of the arts of Luna and Resurreccion Hidalgo, Rizal declared in a memorable address in the English Restaurant in Madrid, where the Filipino community celebrated the “Spolarium” success: “Both express the spirit of our social, moral, and political life; humanity subjected to hard trials, humanity unredeemed, reason and aspiration in open flight with prejudice, fanaticism, and unjustice . . . if the pen fails them and the printed the word does not come to their aid, then the palette and the brush are not only a delight to the eyes but are also eloquent advocates.”

Parenthetically, I feel that we owe Badoc in particular and the nation in general an explanation for the fact that “El Spolarium” has not been brought from Spain to Manila in time for the Juan Luna Centennial Celebration. The truth is that there has been some misunderstanding. The canvas legally belongs to the city of Barcelona which purchased it from Luna. When the Spanish civil war broke out in 1936, it was taken down from the Museo Moderno, together with other work of art, and stowed away in the cellar. After the war it was discovered to have been considerably damaged and to need restoration. It was about this time that Filipino groups started a movement for the transfer of the canvas to Manila.

Although the Spanish Government was sympathetic to the Philippine representation, delay inevitably resulted. The painting was moved from Barcelona in June, 1955, to the National Museum in Madrid, which was to supervise the work of restoration. Although Madrid authorities have announced that the restoration will begin at any time now, this project was considerably delayed because the Museum’s expert decided that, to facilitate the work, the enormous canvas would have to be cut into three sections. This plan was, however, strongly opposed by art-lovers among Filipinos who believe it nothing short of sacrilege. So widespread did the Filipino protest become that the idea of cutting up the great masterpiece was finally given up.

But further details have yet to be settled. Although part of the expense of restoration has been provided for, both the formal transfer of ownership from the Spanish Government to the Philippine Government and the shipment of the canvas to the Philippines still have to be worked out by our Ambassador with the Spanish Minister of Education, Sr. Don Jesus Rubio. It is indeed to be regretted that it has not been possible to bring this great masterpiece to the Philippines in time for today’s celebration.

But here and now, I promise the good people of this town, as well as of the Ilocos region and the rest of the nation, that if I am continued in office, I shall see to it that the works of Luna, including and especially the original “El Spolarium”, and at least copies of his other famous works that cannot be secured, will be collected together and, with other deserving Filipino paintings, hung in a fitting section of the National Museum. Unfortunately, some of the Luna originals, including “Don Miguel Lopez de Legaspi”, were destroyed during the last war. The loss is irreparable. Fortunately, however, “Blood Compact” is safely housed in Malacañan, where it has a place of honor. You know, of course, that the “Blood Compact” represents early Philippine-Spanish good will and that Sikatuna who is represented as drinking a blood compact with Legaspi, first governor-general of the Philippines, was a chieftain from my native province of Bohol. It is equally interesting to note that modelling for this painting were Trinidad Pardo de Tavera as Legaspi and Jose Rizal as Sikatuna. The painting, therefore, through naturally dear to all Filipinos, is perhaps dearer to the people of the Ilocos and Bohol.

Yet, while it would be a great source of pride and inspiration for our country to bring home the scattered paintings of our great artists and house them together in a worthy museum of arts, I believe that this would be a short-sighted policy. These paintings, exhibited side by side with the works of other famed artists in the great museums of the world, perform for us a great mission of friendship and good will. They bear witness to the high development of our culture. Their technical excellence and beauty are permanent contributions to humanity’s cultural wealth. In the same manner, many of the greatest masterpieces in marble and canvas that were created in Greece and Italy, France and Spain, England and Scandinavia, Germany and America, are housed in museums all over the civilized world. In this sense we have truly given Luna, Hidalgo, and other artists with similar fame to the entire world.

The flame of fame that was Luna’s was first kindled in this community. Your people gave it nourishment and shelter. The young Juan Luna played and dreamed among you, breathed the air you breathe, fed on the products of your farms and waters, sprung from your soil. To you our country owes the birth of this great genius; to you the entire world owes his contributions to the sum total of the beauty that will forever bring inspiration and satisfaction to mankind.

The donation by this municipality of the original Luna family lot as the site for the reconstructed home in which Juan Luna first saw light, is itself an act of patriotism for which the town’s official and inhabitants deserve our gratitude. We have now laid the cornerstone of the future national shrine. It is my hope that its construction will be expedited, that it will be as faithful a reproduction as possible of the original Luna home, and that it will forever serve to encourage and inspire our people to strive, like Luna, for excellence and perfection. When the shrine is completed and opened to the public, I am sure that, not only Filipinos from all parts of the country, but also visitors from abroad who love art will converge upon this hallowed spot to help honor and revere the memory of Juan Luna.

On behalf of our people and of the peoples of the world, I have come here to thank you, your hospitable town, your picturesque province, and all Ilocandia. I am certain that this town, if only out of sheer habit, will continue to produce other great men to follow in the wake of the Lunas. But even if it should never again give birth to another man destined to fame and honor, the fact that Juan Luna uttered his first cry in this very place will forever be sufficient to entitle Badoc to the respect and gratitude of our people and of the world.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1957). President Garcia’s speech on the Luna Centennial celebration at Badoc, Ilocos Norte, Wednesday, October 23, 1957. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 53(20) , 7223-7227.