PRESIDENT AGUINALDO, YOUR EXCELLENCIES, SECRETARY BALAO, GENERAL ARELLANO, OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES:

I AM deeply moved by this solemn and unprecedented occasion when, for the first time in an otherwise traditional rite of reaffirming the loyalty of the Armed Forces to its Constitutional Commander-in-Chief, we have invoked the substance and inspiration of our nation’s history in order to reaffirm something higher and nobler yet than routine constitutional duty:—the pledge to God and fellow humankind that human dignity and the liberties of the individual are to be maintained and kept sacred in our Christian and freedom-loving land. We are here sanctifying through this solemn ceremony, heavy with the aura of our glorious past and the remembrance of our heroes and martyrs, the true substance of our people’s independence, the 11th, anniversary of which is commemorated tomorrow.

In honoring General Aguinaldo, the first President of our First Republic, on this historic occasion, we symbolically weld the past with the present into the solid substance of Filipino nationalism which in Rizal’s time, in General Aguinaldo’s time, and in the time of our people’s ordeal at Bataan and Corregidor, and to this duty-laden present, was, and is, and shall always be, a defiance of all forms of tyranny and oppression, a challenge to all forms of obscurantism and other evil forces of darkness, a rejection of all totalitarian creeds and ideologies, and an unceasing promotion of the well-being and prosperity of all our people, and the steady pursuit of the ideals of freedom, dignity, and self-respect.

The pursuit and defense of freedom and human dignity are endless duties. We have as a people engaged with a united will, with incomparable capacity for sacrifice, with inexhaustible love and loyalty, in that glorious pursuit from Lapu-Lapu, to Rizal and Aguinaldo, to Jose Abad Santos, to Ramon Magsaysay. In so doing we have won stature and respect as a member of the family of free nations.

We are therefore beholden to our ancestors, brave and free men who founded this nation on this rich and beautiful cluster of islands,—a priceless treasure which is ours to enjoy and to cherish, to defend and to enrich further with our labors and our genius. We are beholden to our heroes and matryrs and all outstanding men of our race, the dead as well as the living, who have given us much to be proud of, who have bequeathed to us valuable legacies worthy of perpetuation. We are beholden, too, to all our fellow humankind who share with us, as we share with them, the same united devotion to the ideals and institutions of freedom and human liberty, of human dignity, of progress and growth, which are the free man’s valid warrant for tenure in the fathomless mystery of life.

We are beholden, finally, to our sincere and sympathetic friends of another race and nation—the Americans—who have been and continue to be of assistance to us in the unending tasks of nation-building, in strengthening the ramparts of liberties, in developing the sinews of our national economy, that the institutions of freedom and justice will rest secure in the confidence of the nation and air nations of the free world. History moves sometimes with easy and slow stages; at other times, in the inscrutable ways of the Lord of Creation, it moves by leaps and bounds. Sometimes the duties of nations are instinct with high and dramtic purposes, attuned to those great leaps of progress in the history of man; at other times, the duties are humble, simple, and earthbound—wrapped in the common dross of human existence.

Officers and soldiers, it is my wish that you continue your noble task of protecting our home and hearth; that you maintain that peace with which we have labored hard, fought hard, and prayed hard to attain through the crowded decades of our national life; that you continue to assist the other departments of our government in the rapid implementation of our rural development program; and that you keep yourselves so instructed in the basic creeds of soldiery that you may stand shoulder to shoulder among the progressive armies of nations.

Friends and countrymen, on the eve of the national commemoration of the attainment of our independence, and at this historic hour, let me make this solemn pledge that as long as I am the Chief Executive of our Republic and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, I will not tolerate nor countenance any pollution of the ballot, any frustration or perversion of the popular will as expressed through the vote, or any illicit, or unconstitutional interference of the military in the conduct of elections. Our proud history has entitled us to the claim of guardianship over democratic institutions. That claim and duty of guardianship must be fulfilled even at the price of personal sacrifice so as to insure the integrity and purity of the ballot. If those who are in power must face defeat, let it be; but nothing must be done to tarnish the sanctity of the free man’s vote.

Fellow countrymen, we are still in the midst of test and trial in the transcendental task of democracy-building in Asia. We must emerge triumphant out of this acid test. We cannot, therefore, afford selfish ambition or interest to weaken the foundation of democracy in this country—the faith of the people in the government. We shall therefore permit this year or any other year only free, clean, and honest election. Fraud and terrorism must never again be allowed to destroy and undermine democracy. As your Commander-in-Chief, that is my order to all officers and men of the Armed Forces.

Devotion to the institutions of freedom and human liberty, faith in the ideals for which our heroes and martyrs immolated themselves, undying hope in the greatness of our destiny as a people—these are the substance and meaning of the deep gratitude I express to you, men of the Armed Forces. This I express in all humility and love on this occasion when you and I honor the living symbol of our greatest libertarian struggle, General Aguinaldo. In honoring him and what he stands for, we have honored ourselves and exalted our deathless nationalism.

Thank you, and may the Lord’s blessing be upon us all.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library