Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Accepting his nomination as President at the Nacionalista Party Convention

[Delivered on July 29, 1957]

MR. CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT AND MRS. OSMEÑA, DELEGATES TO THE CONVENTION, FELLOW NACIONALISTAS, FRIENDS, COUNTRYMEN:

YOU have honored me with your decision to make me our party’s candidate for President. With abiding gratitude and deep humility, I accept the nomination. I accept your summons, fully confident of your unstinted support. Whole-heartedly, I embrace the tremendous responsibility of leading our party to victory.

For this expression of confidence and trust, I thank you from the bottom of my heart. The nomination for President, being the highest honor within the gift of a political party, I well realize the great-heartedness of your action. The inspiring unity you have shown behind the nomination is in itself a command to me to win the election of our entire ticket, for our party, and for our people.

But it is more than the nomination that I now accept. It is much more than the duty and responsibility to bring victory to our party to which I pledge my humble self. I also accept the great responsibility of bringing to a happy and successful completion the task left unfinished by bur great leader, my beloved predecessor, President Ramon Magsaysay.

Under his energetic leadership, we have made an auspicious start on all the most important sectors of our national task. The bold steps he took for the prosperity, advancement, and happiness of the masses of our people have begun to attain fruition. We will carry on and finish the task he has started, not only as a sincere tribute to his memory, but also as a duty to ourselves, our people, and our Republic.

The Nacionalista Party had worked with unrelenting determination for four decades to bring about our independence. It is unfortunate, however, that our Republic was launched in the confusion that followed the war, and worse still by an inept and corrupt administration, which gave it a poor start. Fortunately in 1954, by popular mandate we began to give it a new and better direction. We have just started to replace expediency with long-range planning, ineptness with efficiency, extravagance with thrift, dishonesty with integrity. I call upon every Filipino of good will, regardless of party, to give us the opportunity to continue this task and to cooperate with us in bringing it to its fullest fruition.

On this, the fiftieth anniversary of our great Party, permit me to pay sincere and deserved tribute to the memories of our great founders who have since joined eternity—Don Alberto Barreto, Dr. Rafael Palma, Manuel L. Quezon, and the many others who have gone with them. And to the leaders of them all in the founding of the Nacionalista Party, the Honorable Sergio Osmeña, who triumphantly piloted the Nacionalista Party from 1907 to 1923, let us give thanks both for his most fruitful work for the party and the country and his continuing counsel and guidance to our party and to our nation.

Former President Sergio Osmeña, drawing from the political experience and wisdom of half a century, pointed out the other day that only unity among our members has been responsible for the great victories and the constructive administrations of our party. To his respected voice I humbly add my own. Unity is our key to victory in November. Harmony and solidarity must continue to be our Arc of victory. I appeal to unite where we have been divided. From this day on, we who are here and our party members and friends everywhere shall continue a unified and indivisible force unswervingly moving forward to the goal of victory.

And as, after this convention we begin our march to victory, let us keep in our minds the ultimate objects of our unity and dedication—the husband and wife and children in every home, in every barrio, in every town, and in every city in this our blessed Motherland—our 22 million people whose material, spiritual, and intellectual welfare we are sworn to promote.

There are those who believe that in politics the end justifies the means; that in order to achieve victory no means, legal or illegal, moral or immoral, may be spared. As for me I would rather be right than successful. I would rather keep faith with justice than with power. I take it that we are determined to confine our political action within the bounds of morality. Popular control is the essence of democracy. But to win popular control by disregarding the virtues of civilization is to betray democracy. We can be true to democracy only if the people live in a regime of justice and liberty and security. We are for a victory won through an honest campaign and a clean election because we are for an administration that is honest and moral and dedicated to the common national welfare.

My fellow Nacionalistas and friends: You have made me the standard bearer of the Nacionalista Party. You have chosen me the leader of our Party. By virtue of this mandate, and invoking the guidance of the Divine Providence and the inspiration of our Nacionalista heroes and leaders, my first battle cry is: Forward to Malacañang; forward to Congress; and forward to the highest seat of power—the heart of the Filipino People!

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library