PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH READ BY HEALTH SECRETARY ELPIDIO VALENCIA AT THE OPENING OF THE 54TH CONVENTION OF THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL ASSOCIATION AND THE 2ND GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CONFEDERATION OF MEDICAL ASSOCIATIONS IN ASIA AND OCEANIA HELD AT UNIVERSITY OF THE PHILIPPINES IN DILIMAN, QUEZON CITY.

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

I AM grateful for the invitation you have extended me to address you this morning. I mean it when I say that when I address a gathering of doctors, such as you are today, I cannot help feeling that, indeed, here are men whose one dedication in life is not only to bless life and be grateful for it but also to preserve life and be reverent about it. In an age where men have seemed to have lost their sense of reverence for the many gifts God had given us, primarily the gift of life, it is truly refreshing and heartening to be with a group whose life work is distinguished by its supreme homage to life itself. In an age when some desperate or selfish and perverted men corrupt the meaning of life and violate its sanctity by cheapening it, and even by wantonly destroying it, it becomes one’s moral obligation to crusade for life, to crusade for its worth, and to crusade for it such that people may have a deep and profound reverence for life. This is; why I am happy to be with you this morning. Your invitation has given me this opportunity to make my testament of faith in the worth, dignity, and goodness of life itself.

It is a tribute to the Philippine Medical Association that it is now holding its 54th Convention and, too, the second meeting of the General Assembly of the Confederation of Medical Association in Asia and Oceania. I wish to congratulate the Philippine Medical Association for its glorious tradition of leadership in medicine. Your record of the 53 past conventions is a testimony of your solidity and stability as a medical organization. Your 54 years of Philippine leadership in medicine represents the selfless efforts that have gone into the training and systematization of the medical profession. In any professional field, leadership comes naturally to an organization that has earned it. I, therefore, heartily congratulate the Philippine Medical Association, not only for having sustained a dedicated leadership through all these years but also for having shown enough initiative and graciousness to invite the different Asian countries to strengthen even more a cooperative venture in leadership in medical training.

As you all very well know, I have long cherished the hope that in more and more areas—in teaching, economics, political science, culture in general, and now medicine—the Asians may meet on common ground and together support their common purpose and lend to each the resources of all. This is especially important in the field of medical research. Considering that diseases among Asians do have common causes and effects, it would be highly profitable if we can maintain a regular and free flow of information regarding research among the nations in Asia. I have always been for pooled, cooperative efforts; for a deep sense of unity and brotherhood is forged among nations only when they work together for common goals. It is very reassuring to see that in this highly important field of medicine, we have begun our joint efforts so effectively as to ensure more comprehensive areas of cooperation in the future.

The topic of your Asian confab, “Trends in Infant Mortality in Asia and Oceania,” shows most of all this reverence for life I cited at the beginning. Your commitment to the preciousness and worth of life—even that or especially that of infants—-speaks highly of your noble understanding that life in its more elementary form, at its initial universal oneness with all life, demands purity and full competence in service. Therefore, to concern yourselves with studying ways and means of decreasing mortality among infants makes of you God’s caretakers, for you are, by profession, preservers of created life. I have no doubt at all that the deliberations and results of your sessions will be very enlightening and helpful. I, therefore, congratulate you on the choice of your topic because you have thus shown a primal concern with the most elementary and basic problem of infant mortality.

As a host country, the Philippines is honored by the participation of delegates from Korea, Australia, China, Indonesia, Thailand, Iran, Japan, India, Pakistan, and Burma. On behalf of the Filipino people and especially of the Philippine Medical Association, let me welcome you most cordially into our country.

We hope you will find your stay in the Philippines and your participation in the convention pleasant and fruitful.

I wish further to congratulate the Philippine Medical Association for its perceptive and wise program of administering the maximum of medical care at minimum cost to our people. Some quarters have voiced the possible good socialized medicine can do for the country. On the other hand, the PMA has pointed out, and rightly so, that a better program than socialized medicine is possible through the voluntary medical insurance program. Personally, while I am aware of the merit of socialized medicine and its success in some countries, I also equally realize that our attitudes and ostentation as a people cannot assure for us the success of socialized medicine. I say this because by nature, we Filipinos are deeply personal in our ways, almost cripplingly personal even when we should not be. This is especially true when we consider medical services. The sickness of only one member of a family, necessitating the visit of a doctor, becomes the whole family’s concern. The doctor thus summoned becomes another member of the family. The moment he comes to feel the pulse of a patient, he finds himself literally grilled by every adult member of the family.

A visit by a doctor to a Filipino home is usually an occasion also of a social call, where the doctor finds it natural, because necessary, to ask the non-ailing members of the family, the particular ways their fortunes have gone. This is how personalized medical services in our country become. Our people want it so. It is what is perhaps very Filipino about us. Socialized medicine does not make this possible. Professional services become public and institutionalized but this our people cannot and will not appreciate. Therefore, I commend the stand the PMA has taken along this line, their more realistic and Filipino-oriented way of maximizing cost.

Moreover, the economy of the country, while vigorous and promising, is nevertheless unequal to the responsibility it shall be made to shoulder under socialized medicine. I heartily and gratefully endorse the PMA program of offering voluntary medical insurance to our people. This takes the good points of both socialized and personalized medical services. I wish to reassure the group here and those of you directly connected with the health program for our people, that I shall work hand in hand with you. I pledge the resources of the Government under your care so that you may truly believe that the Government is deeply committed to do all it can to secure for our people the greatest amount of service they are entitled to. That is why I plead for a more enlightened coordination between government agencies and the private medical practitioners. I should like to assure you that the Government wishes not to hinder but, in fact, to help advance and professionalize the practice of private practitioners by encouraging them to take advantage of the resources which the Government offers for research studies, for example, or for coordinated programs. To unite such efforts and direct our resources wisely should be our common aspiration. I hope that in your deliberations during this convention, you will be able to formulate ways and means of coordinating government and private activities. I shall be most happy to study your proposals and projects. I pledge here and now my full support of your program that will ultimately redound to the welfare of our people.

Safeguarding the health of the nation has always been of top priority in my program for the country; for, as I said, a nation that reverse life cannot but be grateful for it. And being grateful for life, that nation shall so strive to make life constantly honorable, and not only bearable. Life is given to us not for us to bear it as if it were an imposition. Life is given to us not only for us to live it, which is plain common sense; but life is given to us principally so that we may honor it by giving it honorably. This is to reverse life and to be grateful for it.

If we come away from this convention with a very clear conviction that we are all bound by one commitment—the commitment to reverent life—then we shall be true to our professions, true to ourselves, and true most of all to Him who is the creator of all life. In this commitment, may we be blessed forever.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library