Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines Before the Third Labor-Management Congress

[Delivered at the UE Auditorium, May 11, 1961]

CHAIRMAN DALUPAN, SECRETARY CASTAÑO, DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, FRIENDS AND DELEGATES:

THE great drama of our times centers in the attempt to extend the human frontiers into boundless space; the world is a stage, and at this moment, there are but two performers on it, with the names of Gagarin and Shepard—the rest are spectators.

But that is only a metaphor. Neither Gagarin nor Shepard, neither the U. S. nor the Soviet Union, is the hero of this great drama; the hero is an abstract entity—the human spirit, the Daring One who, speaking through Faust, reproved the devil thus:

“Poor devil! What have you to give? Was any human spirit struggling to ascend Such as your sort could ever comprehend?”

The conquest of space is nothing but an extension of our attempts to master our environment. The spectacular for the moment dazzle us; but in the end we realize that a Gagarin or a Shepard flying into space, and a Juan de la Cruz building a great dam to modernize his primitive agriculture belong to the same genus of heroism.

In either case, it is the human spirit daring and conquering new frontiers. The entrepreneur founding a new industrial plant; the scholar delving into the obscure past for materials to illuminate the history of his people; even anyone who sets up in new business ventures—all these know the feeling of passing into, and overcoming a new frontier. For truly, the frontier is where you find it. It consists in self-surpassing. Every man is his own Gagarin or Shepard; as T. S. Eliott said it—

“And so each venture Is a new beginning, a raid on the inarticulate.”

The frontier is where you find it. For the Filipino people, as we march past the middle of the 20th Century, the frontier lies much closer to earth than above it; it consists in the earthly task of economic development—setting up factories, modernizing farms, opening up new lands on the rims of jungles.

Earthly indeed this task seems to us; but in the perspective of history, it acquires a grandeur and a magnificence that even the conquest of space cannot rival. For what can be grander than the conquests of mass poverty, with its concomitants, disease and ignorance?

It is by means of economic development that the burden of poverty, the ancient curse of man, had been lifted from men’s back in a significant area of the world—what we know as the West, thus extending to an unheard-of extent the areas of human freedom and human possibility. Unfortunately, the Western advance barely dragged the bulk of mankind after it. That is why a tremendous gap parts the world today between, on one hand, the developed countries—the prosperous one third of the world—and the underdeveloped countries, which make up the penurious two-thirds of mankind.

This gap can be expressed statistically in terms of incomes. Asians, Africans, and Latin Americans constitute 65 per cent of the world’s population; and they produce only 17 per cent of the world’s income. The remaining one third of the world, which we call the West, accounts for more than 80 per cent of the world’s income.

The gap is indeed wide—and according to the United Nations estimates it is getting wider still. We know, however, that this is not gap in human intelligence, not a difference in the native capacities of the world’s races; it is a gap in development. The Western countries underwent their industrial revolution more than two hundred years ago; and today it is our turn to have ours. But in the meantime, rather than politely wait for us to catch up, the West has already entered the threshold of a second industrial revolution powered by nuclear energy, and of which Gagarin and Shepard represent but the opening chapter.

But to catch up with the West is not right now the measure of our ambition as a people. We shall rejoice with them in their space and other scientific glories; we shall follow with vicarious pride the conquest of newer and farther frontiers by their Gagarins and Shepards. But the same human spirit that lobs a man into space and sends robots to the interstellar universe we shall employ to build factories, furnaces, and iron shops; build feeder roads, bridges, and wharves to connect our barrios and towns; install more schools, health clinics; and everywhere extend the frontiers of our economic and social development.

The frontiers of economic development, no less than the frontiers of space, require the sturdy, pioneering and heroic will of a Gagarin or a Shepard. Challenges may vary, but the quality of the human response, if it be heroic, is ever the same. What was Andres Bonifacio but a Gagarin of his own time, a mere worker who, with boloes and bamboo lances, launched the first nationalist revolution in the history of Asia? What was Mabini but a Gagarin of the intellectual and the moral worlds, conceiving and founding a modem republic fifty years ahead of his time? And Rizal? Rizal was a hundred times Gagarin. He spent his whole life exploring and extending the frontiers of liberty, in an Asia darkened with timeless despotism.

The heroic spirit runs strong in the Filipino people; but it has known too many brillant flashes for us to be convinced of its constancy. In its perverse form, this spirit assumes that shape of get-rich-quick schemers; but its most characteristic expression is the endless number of beginnings that we make,—whether civic, business, literary, or political projects—good, promising beginnings that never go farther.

We have matured enough as a people to be suspicious of sudden bursts of energy which, like the words we speak, perish in the very saying. The tasks of economic development will resist all our ningas-kugon enthusiasm. They call for large stretches of sustained effort, a patience and perserverance, a steady quality of the will for which, as a people, we are exactly noted.

We are all impatient to solve our problems, to abolish all the great ills of our society and lessen human suffering in our midst; and a President, it seems to me, cannot help being the most impatient of the whole lot. For more than most, he knows the gap between the ideal and the means to its attainment; the gap between his own dream for his people and the reality of their suffering.

Powerful as the President is, he must be prone to feelings of helplessness when he sees that his programs, excellent as they are, do not work as well and as quickly as a magic wand in realizing those transformations that he desires for his people. And no President is so bereft of soul and sensibility that his heart would not quicken at some modest success achieved here and there by the efforts of his people; thus, he does not begrudge himself the time spent in inaugurating a new strip of road, a factory or a mill, or a new hydroelectric plant.

Yet hard as we pray and hard as we reproach ourselves, the fact remains that in this business of economic development, there are no short cuts. No, there might be, but we shrink from the heavy cost of blood and lives that it entails—for this is the method of wholesale regimentation of the people by Communism. We even shrink from any prospects of more extensive government participation in business and industry, associating this in our minds with Socialism.

We have in fact elected to undertake our economic development along a path already suspect in a predominantly Socialist Asia. I mean that we have chosen to make private enterprise the mainstay of our economic development. The government is to create the climate, and private enterprise is to assume the major work of development, not the government itself. This is our policy. And as I have indicated, this is a lonely choice.

As to whether our system of private enterprise will prove a match for the socialist systems taking form in such countries as India, Indonesia, and Burma, as the basic instrument for economic development, we cannot exactly determine now. To a large extent, it is going to be you, Filipino labor and management, who will decide the answer to this question. The Government, of course, does not and will not disclaim its share of the responsibility. But in an economy of private enterprise, neither can you divorse yourselves, as free management and free labor, from the responsibility or success of our system.

Present trends from a purely pragmatic point of view give grounds to hope that we have chosen wisely. The highest rate of economic growth in Asia today, according to informed sources, is taking place not in the socialist economic but in the private-enterprise economies of Japan and the Philippines.

In the Philippines in particular, we have cause to be proud of the significant strides that have been attained here, mainly to the credit of Filipino management and the Filipino workers. The United Nations statistics established the Philippines as the fastest-growing economy in the ECAPE region, over a period of one decade.

Consider that our gross national product has registered a spectacular increase by P600 million in the year 1960 alone. This GNP for last year stood at P10.8 billion as against P10.2 billion in 1959.

Our agricultural crop yield last year rose by 3 per cent over the preceding year’s level.

Our manufacturing production in 1960 scored a remarkable increase of 8.3 per cent, surpassing the previous peak level attained in 1959 which was 7.8 per cent.

In terms of electric power output, this rose by 80 per cent during the first nine months of 1960 over that of the corresponding period in 1959.

The impact of this economic development has created an estimated 810,000 new job opportunities, during only the two-year period from 1957 to 1959, according to the consciously conservative estimate of our statistical information services.

Statics, however, can only give us a sketchy picture. No amount of figures can give a fair and adequate representation of the great efforts that are being mustered by all sectors of our people to accelerate our economic development. I still think that, important as we all are over the rate of our program, we are right now chalking up a record in the rate of growth no other country in Asia can match at this time, save only our usual exception, Japan.

This achievement speaks highly of the caliber of Filipino management and Filipino labor. It speaks highly of all our people, but especially those entrusted with the tasks of economic leadership, as we move forward across the frontiers of economic development to our vision of a modern, industrial Philippines, the same country that Jose Rizal saw and foretold in his prophetic essay, “The Philippines a Century Hence.”

But that vision lies yet in the horizon, and we can but pause briefly from the tasks of hurdling the frontier to indulge in romanticizing the future. The Filipino’s per capita income has increased remarkably in a few years to a new level estimated at close to P396. But this remains still far below the level of income in the develop countries; it still marks us only too closely as an underdeveloped country.

Under our Three-year Economic and Social Development Program effective until next year, it is the goal of our economic policy to raise this per capita income to the level of P417, not in monetary, but in real terms. I am confident that, studying present signs, we not only will attain this goal but actually surpass it.

But as I said, the long, tedious tasks of economic development will continue to require our unremitting effort and a steady will. We cannot rest content with any achievement today, no matter how impressive. We are winning the war against mass poverty, ignorance, and disease, but the enemy is stubborn, as one would expect of an entity as old as human history itself.

Though a team representing our nation’s total productive force, Filipino labor and management will not excape the strain of many conflicts between them. But already it is a source of pride for many Filipinos that under the common impulse to make over this land into a better country, Filipinos on both sides of the industrial fence have so far successfully maintained a peaceful but dynamic relationship, which finds expression in voluntary cooperation and increasing productivity.

To this relatively mature attitude on the part of Filipino labor and management we must credit, I believe, a great part of our gains in economic development. It is an attitude remarkable in a country just now starting its own industrial revolution. And it is an attitude that is splendidly served by Labor-Management Congresses of this kind.

The heroes of this period of our history are those from the ranks of both labor and management who, by their imagination, skill, and spirit of enterprise are moulding here, on this ancient land, a modern nation; and who, in the process, are helping to conquer mass poverty and to lift Filipino humanity to a higher level of life.

Economic development—industrialization—modernization, especially in technology, these are the frontiers waiting to be conquered by the Filipino spirit and the Filipino will. That spirit and that will work equally through labor and management, and indeed, through every one of us. With it let us fashion together a new country, where poverty is no longer festering wound, but a scar of history; where the good things of life made by honest human labor are in abundance, and are fairly shared; and where, unshackled from poverty and disease, the Filipino nation shall direct its heroic spirit to higher goals and newer frontiers of achievement.

Finally, the Space Age, which is already a reality, brings in revolutionary changes of undetermined magnitude. One thing is already certain and, that is, that change of technology will have to be at much faster velocity. For instance, in five or six years, the jet plane may have to be junked for planes five times as fast. Television broadcasting may be done from stellites so as to cover the whole world. Fuel light enough for interplanetary navigation is a vision near realization. The science of electronics is changing with amazing speed and so automation has become an irresistible reality that Labor-Management will have to face. The miracles in chemistry (we have particular interests in sucro-chemistry because of our abundance of sugar is on the eve of revolutionizing or doing over practically all the industries. Only one invention or discovery in electronics, chemistry, or nuclear science may be sufficient to make obsolete what we are yet building now.

But the Space Age is a reality and we cannot live out of, or away from, it. We have to change our technology faster. We have to endow our science foundations for research in basic and applied sciences to unprecedented proportions. We have to change our educational system to endow it with a capacity to train and prepare all citizens for productive or creative enterprise—the only way to full employment of our educational system capable to produce technicians and technologists and workers veratile enough to change over their work or career three or four times in their lifetime. Our investment figures will have to rise from millions to billions. Yes, gentlemen, the Space Age ushers us into an area of undreamed of possibilities, of boundless opportunities, to achieve indivisible universal peace and happiness. I have faith that the Filipino management and labor will prove worthy of the 21st Century.

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Garcia, C. P. (1961). Speech of President Carlos P. Garcia before the Third Labor-Management Congress. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 57(21), 3897-3902.