PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH BEFORE THE PERSONNEL OFFICERS ASSOCIATION OF THE PHILIPPINES IN THE EVENING OF SEPTEMBER 19, 1960, AT THE MANILA HOTEL, ON THE OCCASION OF THE DIAMOND JUBILEE CELEBRATION OF THE CIVIL SERVICE

I MUST say at the ouset that this is one gathering which I would have felt greatly honored to join and which even this very minute, as I realize that this program is now going on, makes me genuinely happy to think about. You are, however, familiar with the unbending tyranny of doctors, which is the only reason why I am unable to obey my great desire to be with you tonight.

Young as your organization is, it has already demonstrated over the past three years that when men of a high purpose and an honest will join hands to achieve an important mission, barriers disappear quickly and rewards, both for themselves and the country at large, wait to crown their efforts. At the very least, you have as a determined and progressive group brought to an immense segment of our society a deep and disturbing consciousness of the need for an efficient, competent, and sincere public service. To produce a body of men dedicated to the fulfillment of this need has been your unswerving purpose, and I am happy to join the rest of the country in remarking upon your success.

Even as you meet tonight, you have already completed one fruitful day of deliberations on the vital subject of improving various aspects of the public service. I am confident that the discussions you have today, particularly those concerned with the development of an attractive career service, the recruitment and selection of management personnel, and the civic responsibility of government employees, will contribute immensely to the enrichment of public service in this country. By holding these deliberations during the celebration of the 60th anniversary of the civil service, you are also drawing appropriate and timely attention to one of the outstanding institutions of Philippine democratic government.

Let me assure you that I share one paramount concept of your organization—which, that public service is a growing thing, requiring advancement in ideas as well as in methods. For this reason, frequent appraisals, especially by those involved in its management and conduct, are a continuing necessity. Public service, such as you have devoted yourselves to, whether as employees in government or in private enterprise, needs constantly to attune itself to changes brought about by social, cultural, and economic growth. We cannot as a nation afford either complacency or indifference in the handling of those serious and often critical services upon which our society depends. In the final analysis, whatever progress is gained in economy, education, and social relations will endure and achieve their proper value only insofar as the efficiency and the humaness of public service will permit it.

I, therefore, find it excellent step in the right direction that, under your guidance and sponsorship, personnel involved in various forms of public service are steering their thoughts and efforts towards an eventual reorganization of the public service so that only those will remain who are fit in mind and spirit to conduct its complex affairs.

The selection of the right men in any organization concerned with public welfare and public service is one of those fundamental obligations that for so long in the past had received only scant attention. Even today, sincere efforts to perform this important obligation are often frustrated or shunted off by certain manipulations and conspiracies of selfish politics or bureaucracy. If the Personnel Officers Association of the Philippines has succeeded only in agitating the public mind to correct this condition, it will have gone a long way toward the mission it has chartered for itself. The need to recast thinking on the methods and responsibilities of the public service has existed for countless years, and I am gratified by the observation that an association like yours is finally standing up to its huge challenge.

It has always been one of my fundamental aims to promote every effort in this direction. It has been the desire to achieve that aim with the least delay and with utmost profit to the ideals of good public service that I sought the passage of an effective anti-graft law designed at once to protect the deserving and remove the unfit from the government service. Much earlier, upon my assumption of office as President, I insisted upon and secured the organization of the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency, equipped with sufficient authority to root out the sources as well as the instruments of incompetence, inefficiency and corruption in the government. In doing so, however, I have extreme care that the process of purification be both thorough and fair and that the removal of dishonest personnel be itself an honest process, free of malice and unjust premeditation.

This seems to me the essence of every sincere endeavor to develop an honest and efficient public service. The preciousness of the individual man ought to be recognized every step of the way, and respect for the human person ought never to be lost sight o£ even we measure, evaluate, criticize, and hold up to the light his capabilities and attitudes. Charitableness of this kind is not inconsistent with the urgent need of securing a high order of public service personnel. I am happy to realize that your methods, as suggested in the topics of discussion during your current conference, point to the observation of ethical norms.

I wish to emphasize at this point that in the campaign against graft and corruption, the full cooperation of all the members within the province of civil service is a vital factor if this campaign against graft must succeed. My administration is committed to eradicate venalities in all forms from the public service. I believe that with your sincere and all-out cooperation, we can give our people the best and the highest standard of public service.

In recent months, a reappraisal of our entire civil service has been going on. I am happy to report that my administration has created the stimulation for such an appraisal and will, as it is now doing, provide unceasing support to every honest attempt outside its own sphere to attain the previously elusive ideal of an excellent civil service.

I realize that contributions from special groups like yours and from the general public itself, in the form of initiative, cooperation, and fresh and effective techniques, are indispensable to this upheaval in the civil service. This is my special reason for being eager to convey to you tonight my gratefulness for the admirable work in which you are engaged. I wish to assure you that, as it is with you, an early and effective reformation in our entire public service lies at the very core of my plans for the advancement of this country.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library