PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH AT THE 9TH REPRESENTATIVE ASSEMBLY OF THE PPSTA AT THE GOMEZ ELEMENTARY SCHOOL MANILA, APRIL 23, 1957

MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW-TEACHERS:

A WRITER once said that there are two ways of getting home. One of them is to stay there. The other is to walk around the world until we come back to the same place. I suppose that today, after figuratively having walked many years around the world, I have come back home at last, home in the midst of my brothers and sisters in the teaching profession. For I was once a teacher who dwelt in your midst; joining you today is like coming home, and I am immensely thrilled.

That is why I can speak only from the depth of my heart. I speak with a realization of the awesome dignity of your assemblage. It is an assemblage drafted from the heart and sinews of the Philippine Public School Teachers Association, men and women whose dedicated mission in life is the education of the people. I am proud to be identified with you, for there is no employment nobler or more valuable to the state than yours. You work, as Webster said, not upon marble that will perish, or upon brass that time will efface, or temples that will crumble to dust, but upon men’s immortal minds, imbuing them with high principles, with the just fear of God, and with love of their fellow man.

There might have been a time when men were wont to overlook the nobility of your mission and the significance of your task, but today your importance as public school teachers is being more and more tremendously recognized. This mounting importance is reflected in the increasing benefits which the Government is giving to the teacher in the form of greater financial rewards for their work, greater security for their families, and greater chances of building for the future.

I assure you that these are not mere forms of speech, but the substance of governmental action. For one thing, the Government is fully committed to a complete implementation of Republic Act 842, providing for compensation and automatic salary increases for our public school officials, teachers, and other school personnel. In fact, the Department of Education has been actually giving the teachers their partial salary adjustments since over a year ago. In the current fiscal year, an outlay of ₱17,000,000, in addition to last year’s appropriation, is released to carry out the purposes of the Act. I also assure you that the WAPCO plan will be implemented to give you yet a better deal. Already in the vocational schools where adequate funds are immediately available, we are implementing the law so as to give not only partial but complete salary adjustments.

Incidentally, the Government is at present drafting an equitable formula to solve the incongruous cases where principals and supervisors receive less than classroom teachers on the basis of adjustment in their present positions. We are even considering adjustment for teachers whose transcripts of records are still under evaluation. We are making efforts to secure additional appropriations for the full implementation of the current salary scale for elementary school teachers and others who are paid from the regular budget of the national government.

It is a source of satisfaction for all our people that the mood and temper of the times are strongly in favor of the teachers. The Government is constantly striving to give them improved working conditions and an increasing number of better facilities and equipment, in addition to more convenient and suitable teaching time arrangements. In addition to their basic salary, teachers engaged in the community development program are given an honorarium of ₱25 monthly—and we are raising this to ₱30. The teachers, in recognition of their significant role in the nation’s life, have been given a valuable seat in the Board of Trustees of the Government Service Insurance System.

All these are fitting and proper, because your profession is essential to the well-being of society, and because upon the Filipino teachers, more than any ther group of men and women, rest the heavy responsibilities for the survival of our way of life. It is a condition sine qua non, so that the teacher may properly fulfill his role, that the Government and society should look after his welfare and secure for him the benefits and blessings of an adequately comfortable existence. As Rizal said, the teacher, in order that he may be listened to, and so that his authority may not be placed in doubt, is entitled to a recognition of his prestige, good name, moral influence, and a certain degree of freedom. I dare say that there will always be an increasing concern for the welfare of teachers in this country, as in every other country, for man’s ceasless struggle towards the achievement of the ideal commonwealth, it is the teachers who are the artists whom the philosopher Plato may well have had in mind when he declared that no state can be happy which is not designed by artists who imitate the heavenly pattern.

That is why your responsibilities are correspondingly heavy and far-reaching. You are to work to achieve the end of learning which, as the poet John Milton beautifully put it, “is to repair the ruins of our first parents by regaining to know God aright, and out of that knowledge to love Him, to imitate Him, to be like Him, by possessing our souls of true virtue, which being united to heavenly grace of faith makes up the highest perfection.” So it is that the first fundamental objective of the Philippine school system, in the words of the Board of National Education, is “to inculcate moral and spiritual values inspired by an abiding faith in God.” More specifically, the Constitution directs all schools—and therefore the mandate devolves upon the teachers—to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. Our Civil Code, placing the teachers and professors, significantly, on the same level with parents, enjoins them to cultivate the best potentialities of the heart and mind of the pupil or student, and to see to it that the rights of the child are respected and his duties complied with, and, particularly, by precept and example, to imbue the child wih highmindedness, love of country, veneration for the national heroes, fidelity to democracy as a way of life, and attachment to the ideal of permanent world peace. The teacher is called upon to be a channel to transmit faithfully the heritage and traditions of our civilization to the young. His mission is to assist in their material and spiritual development because the habits, ideas, and way of life of the youth will determine the course of our national and world future.

We are all gravely concerned with the education of our people, knowing that it holds the key to their, devoutly-wish regeneration. I commit my administration to an earnest solution of the serious problems that beset our educational field. For one thing, the so-called recurrent school crises must be permanently solved, for we desire that all our people, without discriminations should partake equally of the advantages of our educational resources.

They must be particularly given the most of what we can offer in terms of vocational education. We are convinced that the needed educational orientation that will take our people to greener pastures of well-being truly lies in a proper emphasis on vocational education. That is why we shall always preserve in our schools the teaching of general science, mathematics, and physics, for these subjects constitute the basic elements for solid vocational competence. Indeed, we are embarked upon a program of community development reaching out into our most far-flung rural areas, a program geared to vocational requirements, and finding concrete and vigorous implementation in our community schools.

My administration, instead of reversing or even modifying the trend set by President Magsaysay in this field, will pursue it with increasing earnestness and vigor.

I need not discuss with you the meaning and implications of the community school program, for I am confident that since its earliest adoption in our country, you have gained a measure of familiarity with it. Let it suffice for me to say that this enterprising educational scheme imposes upon the teachers a responsibility more heavy than their traditional burden, for under its terms the school has become an effective—nay, a major—instrument for the accomplishment of our community development program. The thousands upon thousands of our teachers have become, not merely classroom figures, but community figures and community leaders, whose personalities, activities, and wholesome influences are projected not only in the classrooms, but also in the homes, in the farms, in the factories, in the councils of our towns and barrios, in public gatherings, in the various group institutions established for mutual help and improvement, so that, verily, they are catalysts in our democratic processes, who will endeavor to wipe away in all places the deficiencies and weaknesses that mar the sunshine of our days.

But in our efforts to build a vocationally-competent citizenry, we should not lose sight of the lesson drawn from the experience of other nations which have set up vocational training programs only to find out that they had sacrified education. We will not train our youth exclusively for manipulative or even mechanical proficiency, for man is not meant to be a mechanical robot or a mere cog in an industrial machine. He is a human being, and must be reared as one, educated and trained as a human being, with an immortal destiny in the realm of the hereafter.

I am confident that you are equal to these great responsibilities. You have to be. Even at this moment, forces of evil are busy working in our midst, rearing their ugly heads in areas of poverty and ignorance and discontent, propagating evil and nefarious doctrines, and seeking by violence and bloodshed the destruction of all society. But in the face of this danger, our people shall not fear, because you are with them, to guide them, inspire them, and guard their national destiny. With the grace of God, our people, under your enlightened and ennobling leadership as the mentors of our race, shall rise victorious. And for this you will always have the deep and abiding gratitude of our country

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library