PRESIDENT GARCIA’S SPEECH ON THE OPENING DAY OF THE CONFERENCE OF ASIAN UNIVERSITIES ON CULTURAL COOPERATION AT THE U. P. CONFERENCE HALL, DILIMAN, QUEZON CITY, DECEMBER 15, 1958

I AM highly honored and pleased to address this assembly of distinguished educators who have come from different parts of Asia in order to take common counsel on how the universities in this region may be made to do their part in fostering cultural cooperation in Asia. It is an honor because it is always a privilege to speak before a select audience like this, composed of illustrious members of the intellectual elite. And it is a pleasure because I I know that, in coming to this conference, I would be communing with learned scholars who are seriously engaged in man’s eternal search for knowledge and truth.

As President of the Philippines I am gratified that this conference on higher education is being held in this university, thus affording my country and people an opportunity to play host to the eminent delegates of universities in this part of the globe. I hope our guests will find their sojourn in this country not only fruitful but also pleasant and satisfying.

It is well that the mentors of the youth in Asia should get together in an earnest endeavor to discover the possibilities for cultural cooperation and exchange among our respective countries. With a population of more than 360 million, the countries of eastern and southeastern Asia that belong to the community of free nations have great potentialities for making a valuable contribution to the enlightenment and progress of the world. Historians tell us that, as far as can be determined, civilization as we know it began in the Orient; that is, in the valleys of the Nile and the Tigris-Euphrates. It is also recorded that great civilizations have thrived in Malaysia, China, Korea, India, and Japan. Among these were the Sri-Vishayan and Madjapahit civilizations the influences of which are still felt in the Philippines to this day. I hope I would not be accused of indulging in wishful thinking if I say that the universities of Asia can do much to hasten the return of cultural preeminence to the Orient. At any rate, I am throwing the challenge to the intellectual leaders assembled here to bring about a renaissance of learning in Asia.

I need not tell you what you already know that one of the important functions of an institution of higher learning is the training of leaders who can safely steer the Ship of State and who can be called upon for counsel and guidance in times of stress. Some of the nations represented here are still in their infancy. Born in the throes of the last war, these countries are still feeling their way in the world. A few have already reached or are about to reach political maturity. But young or old, all of them are still in the period of rapid growth. All of them are in the process of building, a task which requires strenuous effort and competent direction. And since the active life of an individual is subject to biological limitations, it is essential that the reservoir of leadership be replenished at all times. For in the life of a nation there is never a time when enlightened leadership is not needed to chart the course of its progress.

But I venture to say that the heavy demands on the leader’s wisdom and resourcefulness in this age of the atom and outer space conquest require a well-balanced education involving all powers of the individual—intellectual, physical, aesthetic, and spiriual. The modern leader must have the mental acumen to comprehend the import of the vast sweep of science and technology across the centuries, the physical stamina to withstand the rigors of modern living, the aesthetic sensibility to appreciate the beauty of the universe as well as the beauty of the human thoughts and ideas recorded in stone, on canvas, and on the printed page, and the spiritual insight to realize the sustaining strength of faith in the Supreme Ruler, who holds the destinies, of nations in the hollow of His palm.

And so, I repeat, training for leadership must make provision for culture. But what is culture? What constitutes the culture of a people? Different thinkers understand the term in different ways according to their educational background. However, I shall at this moment take the view of the anthropologist and define culture as the sum total of the social institutions and ways of living and acting which have been generally accepted by the people. Included in this concept are the laws, customs, music, art, literature, and the aggregate of the creations, material as well as non-material, of the group.

Since culture is the product of man’s ceaseless effort to adjust himself to his physical and social environment, it is only natural to expect that the culture of nations will vary, it being a fact that in the nature of things the environment of people differs in different countries. Furthermore, the impact of one culture upon another in the course of conquest and colonization must result in a modification of the culture and culture patterns of the colonized. And since the inscrutable hand of Destiny has placed most of our countries under the influence of colonizing powers for centuries, it is not to be wondered at that our cultures have developed along different lines. In so far as the Philippines is concerned. she has superimposed upon her autochthonous Malayan culture the culture of such countries in the Far East as China, Japan, and India and at the same time has taken on the Latin culture which she received from Spain and the Anglo-Saxon culture which came to her through her contact with the United States. Influenced by these two cultures of the West, our resultant culture has differed considerably from those of the other countries in Asia.

But in a way of speaking, this diversity is a blessing in disguise, for it makes the exchange of culture among our respective countries highly beneficial and fruitful. Because of this diversity every country has something to give to the other countries. Therefore, cultural cooperation among these countries is more desirable. In this way, we can move progressively toward the enrichment of one another’s cultural legacy. And in these days of increasing tension which in some countries threatens to develop into a conflagration, the consequences of which can only be imagined but not fully grasped, cooperation among nations in the field of culture will go a long way toward bringing about mutual understanding and friendship among them.

As a first step in this direction, the University of the Philippines established a few years ago, with the assistance of the Asia Foundation, the Institute of Asian Studies for students who desire to know about the culture of the Philippines and the neighboring countries. It is to be deplored that in spite of the geographical proximity of our countries and the racial affinity of our peoples, we have been almost total strangers to one another. It is our hope that through this institute we shall come to know one another better so that together we can make our contribution to the culture of the world.

It is a matter for congratulation that on the occasion of the Golden Jubilee of the University of the Philippines this conference of Asian universities is being held, for it will provide a splendid opportunity for the heads of universities and professors to put their heads together in the consideration of the important problem of cultural cooperation. It is my hope and wish that your deliberations will be attended with success and will be characterized by a sincere desire to foster international understanding and friendship.

The late English historian H. G. Wells, in his book, Outline of History, characterized human history as a race between education and catastrophe. We are witnesses to the fact that, in two world wars which were only less than three decades apart, education almost lost and that we came close to the brink of catastrophe. Humanity fervently prays that it be saved from the horrors of a third holocaust which may spell the end of our civilization. The educators of the world are the hope of the human race. Upon your shoulders rests the responsibility of strengthening the cause of peace by spreading culture as a unifying force in building the defenses of peace in the minds of men.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library