Speech of His Excellency Carlos P. Garcia President of the Philippines On foreign trade

[Delivered at the Winter Garden, Manila Hotel on April 28, 1958]

THERE is no doubt that trading and commerce with other countries represent a vital segment of our national life. They play a critical role in our economic life. Of our total population of 21.6 million today, probably about 8 million are dependent on export industries for their incomes. To a large extent, exports are the means by which the country obtains essential imports such as consumer commodities and capital goods so necessary to industry. The significance of foreign trade has been highlighted in our dynamic situation when we are undergoing a program of development. Our dependence on foreign trade constitutes the very foundation as well as the limiting factor of our economic growth.

This dependence on foreign trade saddles our economy with instability, in the sense that we are vulnerable to every buffering wind of inflation or ebb-tide of recession that sweeps over our trading partners, particularly the United States, from whom we buy 57 per cent of our imports and to whom we sell 53 per cent of cur exports. Should the price of machinery which we purchase for our industries go up, for instance, while the price of copra which we sell abroad go down, we suffer in effect a cumulative loss.

The extent of our dependence on international trade can be gauged by the fact that total trade is equivalent to 24 per cent of our national income, and 21 per cent of our gross national product, while in the United States it comes to only 8 per cent of national income and 7 per cent of gross national product.

Even though growth in our total trade has slightly exceeded trade expansion in Asia and overall trade expansion throughout the world, this has been due to our large volume of importation necessitated by economic development and social amelioration. It is a well-known economic fact that outside of an improbable large scale foreign assistance, a country pays for its imports by its exports. Yet, in spite of its importance to the country, our export trade has not kept pace with the overall expansion of world trade. While world trade expanded more than 4 times from $24.2 billion in 1957 to $100 billion in 1957, Philippine export trade has barely tripled itself from $153 million to $428 million during the same 20-year period. Conversely, our share in world export trade has gone down when it should have gone up. Aggravating this slower rate of expansion vis-a-vis the world’s total, the prices of our exports suffered more violent and frequent fluctuations than the prices of our imports, thus making necessary the frequent changes in our import policies. These have serious and disrupting impacts on many of our business activities. As all of you have experienced, the tightening of controls invariably led to a higher cost of living since importation of consumer goods is always the first to suffer restriction. It has also frequently interrupted: the flow of raw and semi-finished materials and machinery parts to domestic industries, thus giving rise to certain shortages and indirectly to some unemployment. It is this instability in our export earnings, accentuated by our mounting import requirements for development that induced the present foreign exchange crisis.

It is clear then that we are faced with a two-fold problem in this regard: that of stimulating trade, particularly on the export side to sustain our increasing development import requirements, and that of gaining a measure of economic stability by establishing balance between our import and export.

This undue dependence on foreign importation can only be assuaged in the long run by an increase in domestic production, especially in the face of a growing population. This implies the prosecution of an industrialization program not only to turn out more commodities for consumption and semi-finished raw materials for still further production, but to provide new employment opportunities as well. To achieve this end the government has sought to channel a greater proportion of our resources to productive fields. Of course, since our resources are limited, this has meant some short-run sacrifice to the consumption sector.

Any development program pursued by an underdeveloped economy necessitates large initial expenditures of foreign exchange for the purchase of industrial equipment and certain raw materials. Thus, the country’s earnings and holdings of foreign exchange set an effective boundary to any scheme of economic expansion. The bulk of our foreign exchange is supplied by our exports; and where export and other earnings fail to meet import requirements, payment must be made from the international reserve.

It is worthy of note that while imports expanded 5 per cent since 1949, exports have expanded 74 per cent. However, even this expansion was not enough to cover the high level of importation required by development. Since 1949 we have imported $4,784 billion worth of commodities while our foreign exchange earnings only came to ₱4.504 billion. As a result, our international reserve has been drawn down to a level around $150 million. We cannot allow our reserve to fall further without risking currency stability, and we must therefore balance our development efforts with the resources we have at our command.

In this rephasing of the economic offensive, the stepping-up of our export production is a most important task. Increased exports would mean increased foreign exchange earnings, and a wider latitude within which to pursue our goal of economic development. Also, steps should be taken to diversify our export trade over a broader range of commodities and directed towards a greater number of countries. This is an imperative necessity to remove or at least minimize the element of instability that has plagued us in the past owing to over-concentration in a few major products subject to price fluctuations in the few countries that commanded the bulk of our trade. Such diversification would broaden the base of export demand for our products, which would directly influence our exchange earnings and the potential level of imports necessary to our economic well-being.

What in brief are the prospects of our foreign exchange earnings during 1958? Economists believe that while value of export sales may not rise significantly over 1957 levels, we might realize an increase in dollar savings through a tightening of barter regulations and an ebb of consumer demand for imported commodities as the rise, in domestic production begins to take effect.

Our major crops, sugar, coconut products, and abaca, face, additional loss of preference in the U. S. market this year as gradual increasing duties are applied, and exporters should now try to cultivate other markets throughout the world, as well as exploit the export potentials of relatively new or expanding commodities. We may mention minerals, for one, and woodwork and rattan crafts, for another. Large timber resources in the country are still untapped; but we have noted with pleasure that greater investment in timber and plywood industries during the past year are beginning to yield good prospects for export expansion.

Increased processing of our products before export would be a practical way of boosting export earnings, while opening to more of our people socio-economic benefits in the way of employment and training in productive enterprise. Of course, the development of an oilseed crushing industry, for instance, would tend to increase coconut oil exports at the expense of copra; the establishment of copper smelting plants, to increase copper exports at the expense of copper ore. However, these refined products command higher export prices owing to added value through manufacture. These projects, besides creating additional domestic income, would be able to make substantial contributions to our foreign exchange resources.

On the part of the government, we shall certainly consider priorities and the incentives for industries which engage in extensive processing of local raw materials to higher forms before export. I have stated this in my state-of-the-nation message, and I wish to emphasize it again.

The acceleration of the diversification of our export trade could be greatly assisted by establishing research centers, promoting market studies, and improving the quality and greater utilization of the by-product.

Even as of now, our Bureau of Standards is devoting its utmost to improve the quality of our manufactures and the PHILCOA is to be commended for its vigorous efforts in trying to raise the quality of copra. Nonetheless, it is disturbing to note that in spite of the fact that we are the No. 1 copra producer in the world today, the quality of our product is in danger of falling below that of Indonesia and Ceylon. In a very competitive market like Europe, quality would spell a difference between expanding our market or losing it.

While economic functions of our diplomatic offices abroad shall be broadened so that they may aid actively in the search for new markets for our products, we must also expect our export-producers to strive continually to improve the quality of the products so that foreign buyers will be able to look to our country as a reliable supplier of their needs. How well do businessmen know that a satisfied customer is a steady customer and the best advertiser one can get!

Furthermore, we must exhaust all devices towards realizing the objective of greater export production within the next few years if our hopes for development are not to be frustrated. One step yet under study is the inclusion in our international reserve of stable and freely convertible currencies other than U. S. dollars, such as the Swiss francs and the Deutsche-Marks, would serve to promote beneficial contacts between our financial institutions and traders and their counterparts in the countries whose currencies we will use. The pros to this idea contend that this contact would be productive of closer commercial and financial relations which would certainly have a stimulating long-run effect on our trade with those parts of the world. Direct payments from Germany may encourage German purchasers of copra and other Philippine export products like abaca to deal directly with our exporters rather than through brokers in Amsterdam, London, or New York. Thus, by dealing directly, the Philippine exporters may be able to obtain better prices and better terms for their commodities and, consequently, realize more foreign exchange earnings.

Conclusions on this matter however, are yet to be reached in Congress not in councils. We are fully aware that to bring about an increase in exports that will balance with increasing import requirements of our development program is not easily attainable within the next year or so even if all our efforts were exerted and resources directed towards that end. Only an unlikely event like ah oil strike would immediately boost our foreign exchange earnings to significant figure. Otherwise, we must undergo the tedious processes necessary to raise productive capacity in agricultural and manufacturing industries which we hope to achieve with some American assistance. In the meantime, we can strive to maximize our use of what foreign exchange resources we have by encouraging projects most contributory to national income and employment. Economies in production through more efficient operation of existing plants can still be exploited, and simultaneously take exercise of strict budgeting of foreign exchange. They must strive to produce locally produced raw, materials. Many basic materials of local origin can now be generated to substitute for a number of raw materials we yet import for our industries.

As I have emphasized before and will do so again, we must achieve self-sufficiency in foodstuffs. Despite the increases that have occurred in our agricultural production, its slower rate of growth vis-a-vis manufacturing production, increase in population, and effective demand acts as a brake on economic development. We must remember that food imports compete with capital goods in straining our foreign exchange. The attainment, therefore, of our goal to make the country self-sufficient in food would constitute a big stride toward the attainment of the higher goal—a well-balanced foreign trade and stability of our currency.

While we strive our utmost to increase export earnings it is also thought desirable to seek foreign credits to tide us over to the period of productivity of our export industries and to the time of our achieving relative self-sufficiency in food, shelter, and clothing. Foreign economic assistance, it is believed, will materially help us in the difficult task of carrying our economy over the first crucial phase, and will enable us to realize this within a shorter span of time. Such foreign credits is wanted until such time as our economy has accumulated enough productive capacity not only to sustain itself but also to generate the continual expansion required by a growing population and our aspirations for higher standards of living. This is economic security we desire to achieve in our time in which the masses of our people fully partake of its blessings.

Source : University of the Philippines, College of Law Library

Garcia, C. P. (1958). President Garcia’s speech on foreign trade, delivered Monday, April 28, 1958, at the Winter Garden, Manila Hotel. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 54(9) , 2855-2859.