SPEECH OF PRESIDENT GARCIA AT THE KICK-OFF CEREMONY LAUNCHED THIS YEAR’S ANTI-TB FUND CAMPAIGN AT MALACAÑANG, MONDAY AFTERNOON, AUGUST 18, 1958, ON THE EVE OF PRESIDENT QUEZON’S BIRTHDAY

FELLOW COUNTRYMEN:

AFTER years and years of relentless effort on the part of both the Philippine Government and the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, the scourage that is Tuberculosis still claims thousands upon thousands of lives annually in our country, seriously depleting our manpower resources, at a time when said manpower resources are in great demand to cope with the requirements of a rapidly growing nation.

Of course, it cannot be denied that much has been accomplished in the field of tuberculosis control in the Philippines; yet it must be admitted that much more remains to be done.

Tonight, we are gathered here to open formally the annual fund-raising drive of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society. In my capacity as Honorary President of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, as well as on my behalf as head of this nation, I humbly appeal to all residents of the Philippines, citizens and foreigners alike, to support this very worthy cause.

While the Government is doing its utmost in controlling tuberculosis through the far-flung activities of the Department of Health, the active assistance of the people is needed to bolster the efforts of our Government which, because of limited resources can utilize every available help. In the annual fund drive of the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, our people have magnificent opportunity to show their interest in this laudable undertaking and to participate actively in the gallant fight against the white plague. Through the generous voluntary donations of the public, collected through the efforts of numerous unselfish and civic-spirited volunteers, our people have a splendid chance to play a role in the nation-wide campaign to stamp out tuberculosis, which is sapping our national strength unremittingly.

Our country, as all of us know, has emerged from the political era into what has been termed as the “economic era,” during which the economic problems of the country take precedence over and above everything else. And referring to the vast industrialization program which confronts the nation during this crucial period of our economic history, we should not overlook one important factor, the manpower factor. We may have the dollars with which to establish industries, buy the latest equipment and the finest raw materials, but if a major portion of our population suffers from disease, we shall positively fail in the job of solidifying our economy. This is in recognition of the fact that in the growth of industry, the manpower plays a very important part.

I am aware, of course, of the number of fund campaigns now going on, and the terrific problem in fund raising that this poses. But we have no chance. The job of fighting the White Plague is very important and requires the help of everybody.

I take advantage of this opportunity to commend those who are doing such a wonderful job in maintaining the Society and securing funds for its support. But, as I said before, the efforts and cooperation of everyone are needed.

I appeal to all of you to support this campaign generously. This is one civic organization that has performed its obligations faithfully and is, therefore, fully deserving of your assistance.

On my part, let me start the drive with my own personal contribution of ₱1,000.00. I hope the campaign will be overwhelmingly successful. I extend to you all my best wishes.

Source: University of the Philippines, College of Law Library