MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 126

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TIGAO IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Sur a municipality to be known as Tigao, to consist of the barrios of Tigao, Mabahin, Matho and Balibadon, all of the municipality of Cortes, with the seat of government at the barrio of Tigao.

The municipality of Tigao as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at the point marked A on the plan which is on the southeastern part of Panhasan Island following an imaginary line due west until it intersect the boundary line between Cortes and Lanuza at point B; thence following the Cortes-Lanuza Municipal Boundary in a southerly direction to point C; thence following the Cortes-Tandag Municipal Boundary in a easterly direction up to the mouth of Balawan Creek at point D; thence following the seashore in a northerly direction up to the point of beginning.” (Based on the map of the proposed municipality of Tigao submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Sur, Scale 1:50,000, on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Cortes shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Tigao, as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 4012, was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Tigao shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Cortes, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Tigao, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 126 : Creating the municipality of Tigao in the Province of Surigao del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (47), 7725-7726.