MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 211-D

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAYANIHAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE

Pursuant to Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Norte a municipality to be known as Bayanihan to consist of the following barrios and their respective sitios of the municipality of Katipunan, said province.

The seat of government of the municipality of Bayanihan shall be at the barrio of Taga.

The municipality of Bayanihan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the mouth of Tamilokan River following upstream the said river until it intersects longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees twenty-two minutes (123 deg. 22 min.); thence due south to latitude eight degrees thirteen minutes (8 deg. 13 min.); thence due west until it intersects longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees sixteen minutes (123 deg. 16 min.); thence due north to latitude eight degrees eighteen minutes (8 deg. 18 min.); thence northeast in a straight line until it intersects the nearest part of Dicayo River; thence following downstream Dicayo River to the mouth of the said river; thence eastward following the shoreline to the mouth of tamilokan River the point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description prepared by the Office of the District Engineer of Zamboanga del Norte based on the map of the proposed municipality of Bayanihan, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this Office).

The municipality of Katipunan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the municipality of Bayanihan as delimited above.

The municipality of Bayanihan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 29th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixt-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 211-D : Creating the municipality of Bayanihan in the province of Zamboanga del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (7), 987.