MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 11

ABOLISHING THE PEACE AND AMELIORATION FUND COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission was created under Executive Order No. 7, dated January 7, 1954, for the purpose of raising additional funds from voluntary contributions needed for the maintenance of peace and order during the upsurge of the dissident and subversive elements in the country; and

WHEREAS, the tasks of maintaining peace and order may now be adequately carried on with regularly appropriated funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

1. The Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission created in. Executive Order No. 7 dated January 7, 1954, as amended by Executive Order No. 153, dated December 31, 1955, is hereby abolished.

2. Such minimum essential personnel as is necessary to handle the work connected with the holding of raffles already scheduled to be held after the abolition of the Commission, the clearing, closing, or liquidation of accounts and records, and all other residual activities shall be retained and attached to tie Executive Office until the completion of the work. The number and salaries of this personnel shall be determined by the Executive Secretary.

3. The payment of gratuity from the funds of the Commission to employees who will be laid off as a result of the abolition of their positions under this Executive Order at a rate not exceeding one month salary for every year of continuous satisfactory service in the Government but not exceeding a total of twelve months, on the basis of the last salary received, is hereby authorized: PROVIDED, That if any of said employees are entitled to gratuity under any retirement law, they shall select either such gratuity or the gratuity herein provided: And, provided, further, That in case an employee who received gratuity-is reinstated in the government service, he shall refund to the National Government the unexpired portion of his gratuity.

4. All the property, equipment, records, and my unexpended balance of the funds of the Commission shall be transferred to the Executive Office, the said unexpended balance to be spent for any of the purposes stated in the aforecited Executive Order No. 7, as amended by Executive Order No. 153, and for the pay of the residual personnel referred to in paragraph 2 above.

5. This Order shall take effect on July 1, 1962.

Done in the City of Manila, this 25th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 11 : Abolishing the Peace and Amelioration Fund Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (26), 4701.