MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 121

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF GENERAL AGUINALDO IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as General Aguinaldo to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of San Miguel, Dumalinao, San Pablo, and Dinas, said province:

From the municipality of San Miguel:

From the Municipality of Dumalinao:

From the Municipality of San Pablo:

From the Municipality of Dinas:

The seat of government of the municipality of General Aguinaldo shall be at the barrio of Guipos.

The municipality of General Aguinaldo as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Starting from Point 1, the intersection of the latitude 6° 37′ and longitude 123° 20′; thence due West following latitude 6° 37′ with a distance of about 3,500 meters to point 2; thence N 45° 00′ W with a distance of about 4,200 meters to point 3; thence following a straight line with bearing N 18° 30′ E until it intersects latitude 7° 59′ to point 4; thence due East following latitude 7° 59′ until it intersects the shoreline of Illana Bay to point 5; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code along Illana Bay until it intersects latitude 7° 42′ 30″ to point 6; thence due West following latitude 7° 42′ 30″ with an approximate distance of 7,300 meters to point 7; thence due South with a distance of about 3,900 meters to point 8; thence due West until it intersects longitude 123° 20′ to point 9; thence due South following longitude 123° 20′ to point 1; the point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description of the proposed municipality of General Aguinaldo prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur).

The municipalities of San Miguel, Dumalinao, San Pablo, and Dinas, shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of General Aguinaldo as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 7892 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of General Aguinaldo shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of San Miguel, Dumalinao, San Pablo, and Dinas, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of General Aguinaldo, can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 121 : Creating the municipality of General Aguinaldo in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (46), 7531-7532.