MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 176

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MABUHAY IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a new municipality to be known as Mabuhay to consist of the barrios of Mabuhay, Malinao, Sagay, Katipan, Mualbual, Tuburan, Kawilan, Abunda, Punawan, Kaliran, Taguisian, Bag-ong Silang, Sioton, Bagurod, Paminsa-an, Pinalim, Kasigpitan, Sawa and Ligaya, all of the municipality of Olutanga, with the seat of government at the barrio of Mabuhay.

The municipality of Mabuhay as herein created shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point “1”, the intersection of the Northern shoreline of Olutanga Island and Longitude 122°40′; thence S 22°00′ E until it intersects the. Southern shoreline of the said Island at point 2; thence following the shoreline in a counterclockwise direction back to point 1, the point of beginning.” (From a technical description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur based on the map of the proposed municipality of Mabuhay, scale 1:50,000, now on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Olutanga shall have its present territory minus the (portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Mabuhay as delimited above.

The municipality of Mabuhay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 176 : Creating the Municipality of Mabuhay in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (49), 7833.