MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 207

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF ALEGRIA IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao del Norte and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Norte a municipality to be known as Alegria, to consist of the barrios and sitios of Alegria, Ombong, San Pedro, Alipao, Pungtod, Gamotan, Anahao, Camp Eduardo, Budlingin, Lomuhdo and Manag-as, all of the municipality of Mainit, with the seat of government at the barrio of Alegria,

The municipality of Alegria as herein organized shall have following boundaries:

“Beginning from a point marked “A” on the map, at the mouth of Magpayang River, in Lake Mainit, going upstream along same river to pungtod Bridge, marked point “B”; thence from Pungtod Bridge on an easterly direction to the intersection of the common municipal boundary of Tubod, Bacuag and Mainit, marked point “C”; thence, from point “C” folloing the municipal boundary of Bacuag and Mainit, on a southwesterly direction to a point marked D” on the map, common pont of intersection of the municipal boundaries of Bacuag, Gigaquit and Mainit; thence from point “D” following the municipal boundary of Mainit and Gigiquit on a southeasterly direction to a point marked “E”, intersection at the provincial boundary of Surigao del Norte and Agusan provinces; thence from point “E” following the provincial boundary of Surigao del Norte and Agusan, westward, to a point along the shoreline of Lake Mainit, marked point “F” on the map; thence, from point “F” following the shoreline of Lake Mainit on a northerly direction to the mouth of Magpayong River, marked point “A”, point of the beginning.” (From the map of the municipality of Mainit submitted by the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Norte, scale 1:40,000, on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Mainit shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Alegria.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 7639, was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Alegria shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 207 : Creating the Municipality of Alegria in the Province of Surigao del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (5), 689.