MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 10

DESIGNATING CALENDAR YEAR 1962 AS ECONOMIC CENSUS YEAR

WHEREAS, Commonwealth Act No. 591 authorizes the Bureau of the Census and Statistics “to prepare, for and undertake all censuses of population, agriculture, industry, and commerce” and Republic Act No. 3100 sets aside an appropriation for the taking of the 1961 Economic Census.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby designate Calendar Year 1962 as Economic Census Year for the collection of date relating to the Calendar Year 1961 of all establishments engaged in economic activities in accordance with the plans of the Bureau of the Census and Statistics which may be deemed advisable by its Director, including such possible activities as forestry and fishing; mining and quarrying; manufacturing; construction; utilities (electricity, gas, water, and sanitary services); commerce; transportation, storage, and communication; and services (professional, education, medical and health, recreational, business, and personal): Provided, That in the collection of said data and information, the constitutional guarantees of the privacy of the people’s abodes and the prohibition against the revelation and publication of such data and information collected, except in the form authorized by Commonwealth Act No. 591, shall be strictly observed.

The collection of information is by mailing or delivering the necessary forms and explanatory matters furnished by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics to the persons best qualified to accomplish them, in which case the proprietors, officers, partners, associates, directors, administrators, managers, or any of their legal representatives shall be required to complete the questionnaires or forms or cause them to be completed on their own responsibility, The persons, required to complete such schedules are required to mail or deliver them upon completion to the Bureau of the Census and. Statistics or to any of its authorized representatives at such time as required by law.

All heads of Departments of the Government and its agencies and instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as provincial, city, and municipal officials, are hereby enjoined to authorize and direct all bureaus and offices under them, to make available, for purposes of the census-taking, the services of their personnel as may be requisitioned.

They are further enjoined to give such assistance as may be requested by the Bureau of the Census and Statistics in the execution of the provisions of this Executive Order.

The Bureau of the Census and Statistics is hereby charged with the implementation of this Order and it shall issue the necessary rules and regulations therefor.

Done in the City of Manila, this 23rd day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 10 : Designating Calendar Year 1962 as Economic Census Year. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (22), 4263.