MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 205

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TAMBLOT IN THE PROVINCE OF BOHOL

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Bohol a municipality to be known as Tamblot, to consist of the barrios of Bagacay, Bihi, Basdio, Biaaong, Cabacongan, Calayugan, Cambaquesa, Campatud, Candaingan, Canigaan, Canhandon, Canmag, Cansuagwit, Cantam-is, Cantaongon, Cantomocad, Catagbacan, Genomoan, Mocpoc, Lo-oc, Nueva Vida, Panangkilos, Pantudlan, Pondol, Sondol, Talisay, Ubayon and Ubujan, all of the municipality of Loon, with the seat of government at the barrio of Catagbacan.

The municipality of Tamblot as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From point 1 marked Km. 38 bearing distance of 2-½ Km. South 40 degrees 00′ E, to point 2 highest point of (Ktedong Hill); thence South 45 degrees 00′ E, distance 2 Km. to point 3 (highest point) Paulino Escal Hill; thence South 47 degrees 00′ E, distance 2 Mm. to point 4 (highest point) Esteban Uyang Hill; thence South 65 degrees 00′ West distance 3-½ Km. to point 5 (Northern Approach of Genomoan Bridge); thence following the course of Mo-along River to point 6 (Northern Approach of Me-along Bridge Km. 31-450).” (From the Technical Description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Bohol based on the map of the proposed municipality of Tamblot (Barcelona) Scale 1:25,000 prepared by the said Office.)

The municipality of Loon shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Tamblot, as delimited above.

The municipality of Tamblot shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of November, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 205 : Creating the Municipality of Tamblot in the Province of Bohol. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (5), 687.