MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 227

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUMAGABOK IN THE PROVINCE OF MARINDUQUE

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Mariñduque and; pursuant for the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province; of Marinduque a municipality to fee known as Tumagabok ; and to consist of the following barrios of the municipalities of Boac and Torrijos, both of the same province:

From the Municipality of Boac

From the Municipality of Torrijos

1. Sibuyao

The seat of the government of the municipality of Tumagabok shall be at the barrio of Tumagabok,

The municipality of Tumagabok as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning; at point 2 following a straight line S 34 deg: 00 min. E. along the Sta. Cruz-Torrijos boundary to point 3 or; a distance of 7,600 meters; thence a straight line S 56 deg. 00 min. W. along Boac-Buenavista boundary to point 4’or a distance of 8,250 meters; thence a straight line N. 55 deg. 00 min, W. alongi Boac-Gasan boundary to point 5 of ; a: distance of 7,600 meters; thence a straight: line N 56 deg.; 00 min. E. until it intersects point point 2 of beginning or .a distance of 8,500 meters.” (From the technical, description submitted, by, the Office of the Highway Dsitrict Engineer of Marinduque based on the map of the province of Marinduique. Scale 1:100,000 now on; file in this Office).

The municipalities of Boac and Torrijos shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Tumagabok, as delimited above.

The municipality of Tumagabok shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) FROILAN R. MONTALBAN Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 227 : Creating the Municipality of Tumagabok in the Province of Marinduque. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (9), 1331.