MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 18

INTENSIFYING THE NATIONAL FOOD PRODUCTION CAMPAIGN

WHEREAS, one of the most serious problems confronting the country today is the recurring shortage of foods, particularly rice and corn, fish, meat, poultry, milk and milk products, etc., to meet the standard nutritional requirements of our fast-growing population;

WHEREAS, the attainment of self-sufficiency in foods is one of the principal objectives of the Government’s 5-year Integrated Socio-Economic Program, and its realization will help in the stabilization of the price of prime commodities;

WHEREAS , the Philippines is endowed with extensive and fertile agricultural lands and with abundant rainfall, and with the use of the known tools of production, we may develop not only self-sufficiency, but surplus in production needed for export and to supply the raw materials necessary for the establishment of industries;

Now, therefore, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a NATIONAL FOOD PRODUCTION CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE whose membership, duties, and functions are as follows:

I. Membership. -This nation-wide Food Production Campaign shall be implemented by a Cabinet Committee composed of the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Secretary of Education, and the General Manager of the Rice and Corn Administration.

The Cabinet Committee is hereby empowered to create production coordinating committees in the different regions, provinces, municipalities, and municipal districts: organize Work Groups; and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out effectively the functions of the Food Production Campaign. The Cabinet Committee is also empowered to call on other departments, bureaus, and/or offices of the government for the proper implementation of its duties and functions.

II. Duties and Functions

The National Food Production Committee shall formulate short and long range programs and shall have the following duties and functions:

1. Conduct a nation-wide campaign for the production of food crops, meat, poultry, milk, fish, etc., all over the country.

2. Encourage the production of sufficient seed and plant materials; promote gardening in schools, backyards, and promote crop diversification by planting mongo, onion, garlic, and other short season crops after rice.

3. Intensify stocking of fish seeds in inland waters and wage a campaign against dynamite fishing and effect the speedy processing of fishpond applications under the jurisdiction of government agencies concerned.

4. Intensify and promote artificial insemination, particularly on swine and cattle, and encourage dairying, backyard poultry, and/or swine raising.

5. Intensify the control of plant and animal pests and diseases and implement the international and national quarantine rules and regulations.

6. Intensify educational campaign among the people on the use of improved agricultural practices through the establishment of more plant and animal breeding stations, seed and livestock farms and farm demonstrations and fish nurseries.

7. Promote food production by awarding prizes and certificates of recognition to deserving barrio farmers, school children, and teachers in the production of better plants, livestock, and fishes.

8. Promote the organization and enlist cooperation of Farmers’ Extension Clubs, Parent Teachers Association, 4-H Clubs, Rural Improvement Clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout Organizations, and other similar organizations, and encourage the holding of regular farmers’ and animal’s field day in rural areas.

9. Intensify the in-service training of government personnel, particularly those engaged in food production.

10. Recommend measures for the use of other agencies and offices in the extension of more credit facilities, particularly to indigent farmers.

11. Recommend measures to appropriate government agencies for the establishment of more adequate storage, transportation, and marketing facilities.

12. Do other duties and perform other functions which will help contribute in the attainment of the goals set in our 5-year socio­economic program.

III. Funds. -The Cabinet Committee is hereby authorized to draw such amount as may be needed to carry out the duties and functions of the National Food Production Campaign from such available funds as may be needed for the purpose under existing rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the President of the Philippines.

Done in the City of Manila, Philippines, this 30th day of August, in the Year of Our Lord, Nineteen Hundred and Sixty-Two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1962). Executive Order No. 18 : Intensifying the National Food Production Campaign. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (39), 6213.