MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 112

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAYOG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur, a municipality to be known as Bayog, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Buug, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Bayog shall be at the barrio of Bayog.

The municipality of Bayog as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point “1” junction of Sibuguey river and Dipuri river; thence due East until it intersects the municipal boundary of Kumalarang and Buug at point “2”; thence due North following the municipal boundary of the municipalities of Buug and Kumalarang until it intersects the municipal boundary of Lapuyan and Kumalarang at point “3”; thence due East to point “4” following the municipal boundary of Kumalarang and’ Lapuyan with a distance of 2 kilometers; thence due North until it intersects the provincial boundary between Zamboanga del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur called point “5”; thence following the said provincial boundary in a westerly direction until it intersects the municipal boundary of Siay and Buug at point “6”; thence S 1° 30′ E following the municipal boundary of Siay and Buug until it intersects the Northern boundary of the proposed municipality of Diplahan at point “7”; thence due East following the Northern boundary of the proposed municipality of Diplahan until it intersects the Center-line of Sibuguey river at point “8”; thence following the upstream course of Sibuguey river back to point “1” point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description of the proposed municipality of Bayog prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District-Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur).

The municipality of Buug shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Bayog as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 7571 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Bayog shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a. majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Buug after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Bayog, can still maintain Creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 112 :  Creating the Municipality of Bayog in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (43), 6966.