MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 103

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAGSAYSAY IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao a municipality to be known as Magsaysay to consist of the barrios of Magsaysay, Bala, Barayong, Bog, Bacungan, Biocon, Dalawinon, Kanapulo, Kasuga, Mabini, Kialeg, San Isidro, San Miguel, Dalumay, Tecul, Daig, Lipara and Malungon, all of the municipality of Bansalan, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Magsaysay.

The municipality of Magsaysay shall be bounded as follows:

“Northwest: Point of National (Davao-Cotabato) Highway; thence straight line to the west following the Davao-Cotabato boundary; On the Southeast: Point of Matanao River at the Matanao-Bansalan boundary following said river upstream to the National Highway; thence following said highway to the point of Davao-Cotabato boundary; On the South: Matanao-Bansalan boundary; On the West: From a western point of Davao-Cotabato boundary; thence straight line to the South following the western Bansalan boundary up to a point of Matanao-Bansalan Boundary.” (From House Bill No. 1599)

The municipality of Bansalan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Magsaysay, as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 1599 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Magsaysay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Bansalan after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Magsaysay can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.