MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 62

CREATING THE RICE AND CORN AUTHORITY

Whereas, there are at present numerous government agencies charged with interrelated functions relative to the stabilization of the rice and corn industries, and the production, procurement, and distribution of these staple commodities;

Whereas, this diffusion of functions and responsibilities without an immediate unifying authority has led to confused, unintegrated measures which slow down or frustrate government efforts to insure constantly for the public an ample supply of rice and corn at prices within their reach; and

Whereas, there is a real necessity for a coordinating agency to unify and integrate the administration and implementation of existing laws, rules, and regulations on rice and corn;

Now, therefore, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Rice and Corn Authority under the Office of the President composed of the following officials who shall attend in person the meetings and deliberations of said body:

The Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Chairman The Rice and Corn Administrator The Chairman of the Rice and Corn Board The Chairman of the National Economic Council The Assistant Executive Secretary on Economic Affairs

The Rice and Corn Authority shall have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the Government.

It shall have the following functions and powers:

( a ) It shall supervise and coordinate the programs and policies of the various government agencies charged with the administration and implementation of existing laws, rules, and regulations concerning the production, procurement, distribution, and supply of rice and corn, and the stabilization of the rice and corn industries.

( b ) It shall make studies and draft of a long-range program calculated to develop and stabilize the rice and corn industries and to achieve national self-sufficiency in these staple commodities.

( c ) It shall have the authority to call on any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government for such assistance or information as it may need in the discharge of its function.

( d ) It shall prepare and draft legislative proposals designed to improve existing laws on rice and corn.

( e ) It shall perform such other functions as may be necessary to attain its objectives and shall discharge such other duties as the President may direct.

The Rice and Corn Authority shall submit to the President from time to time reports on the progress of its work.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 62 : Creating the Rice and Corn Authority. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (2), 131-132.