MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 179

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF DITAY IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Ditay to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Siay, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Ditay shall be at the barrio of Ditay.

The municipality of Ditay as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point 1 the center of Ganyangan Bridge; thence following straight line with a bearing of S 57-30 E until it reaches at the center of Gusawan Bridge; point 2; thence following downstream course of Gusawan Creek until it reaches the center of the mouth of Gusawan river; point 3; thence following the shoreline of Sibuguey Bay in westerly direction until it reaches the mouth of Calapan river, point 4; thence N 13-00 E, point 5; thence N 1-00 E until it reaches the Provincial boundary between Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte, point 6; thence following Easterly the boundary line between the Province of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte until it reaches the old boundary of Siay, the mother municipality, point 7; thence S 1-00 W, following the boundary of the mother municipality and Bayog until it intersects Sibuguey river, point 8; thence following downstream course of Sibuguey river, until it intersects Ganyangan creek, point 9; thence following upstream course of Ganyangan creek to point 1, point of beginning.” (From the Technical Description submitted by the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur based on the Map of said proposed municipality, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this Office)

The municipality of Siay shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Ditay as delimited above.

The municipality of Ditay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five,

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 179 : Creating the Municipality of Ditay in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (50), 8008.