MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 47

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAGANOY IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato a municipality to be known as Maganoy, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Datu Piang, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Maganoy shall be at the barrio of Labulabu.

The municipality of Maganoy as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from a point (1) where the boundary lines of the municipalities of Ampatuan, Dinaig and Datu Piang meet; thence following the boundary line of the municipalities Dinaig and Datu Piang in a northerly direction to a point (2) on Mt. Calipapa; thence following a straight line in an easterly direction to a point (3) on the national Highway at Barrio Mata; thence following said national highway in a northwesterly direction to a point (4) at Maitumaig; thence following a straight line in a northeasterly direction to a point (5) on a bridge at Barrio Pagatin; thence following a straight line in a easterly direction to a point (6) on bank of Dansalan River at Barrio Dasikil; thence following Dansalan River tipstream, southerly direction, to a point (7) at junction of Cabulnan and Allah Rivers; thence going on a southwesterly direction following the course of Cabulnan River upstream to Cabulnan Bridge point (8) on the Cotabato-Dalican-Allah Road; thence due west following boundary line between the Municipalities of Ampatuan and Datu Piang to the point of beginning. (Based on the map showing the municipalities of Datu Piang and Ampatuan and the proposed municipality of Maganoy, prepared and certified correct by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Cotabato, on file in this Office, Scale:  1:250,000)

The municipality of Datu Piang shall have its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Maganoy.

The first mayor, vice-mayor, and councilors of the new municipality of Maganoy shall be elected in the next general elections for local officials on November 12, 1963.

The municipality of Maganoy shall begin to exist upon the election and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Datu Piang, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maganoy, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the municipality of Cateel, Davao, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-three.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RUFINO G. HECHANOVA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1963). Executive Order No. 47 : Creating the municipality of Maganoy in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 59 (36), 5974-5975.