MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 180

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF DIPLAHAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR.

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Diplahan to consist of the following bairios of the municipalities of Malangas, Buug and Siay, said province: From the Municipality of Malangas:

From the Municipality of Buug:

From the Municipality of Siay:

The seat of government of the municipality of Diplahan shall be at the barrio of Diplahan.

The Municipality of Diplahan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from point 1, intersection of longitude 123° 00′ and the center line of Daplahan-Malangas national road; thence S. 67° 30′ W. until it intersects the municipal boundary of Malangas and Alicia, with a distance of about 9,250 meters called point.2; thence N. 43° 00′ W., following the municipal boundary of Alicia,; and Malangas with a distance of about 2,000 meters to point 3; then N. 13° 00′ E. with a distance of about 19,100 meters to point4; thence due east until it intersects longitude 123° 00′ called point 5; thence due south following longitude 123° 00′ back to point 1, the point of beginning.” (From the map of the proposed municipality of Diplahan prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer)

The municipalities of Malangas, Buug and Siay shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the Municipality of Diplahan as delimited above.

The Municipality of Diplahan shall begin to exist upon the : appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 180 :  Creating the Municipality of Diplahan in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (51), 8146.