MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 97

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF NAGA IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Naga, to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Kabasalan, said province;

The seat of government of the municipality of Naga shall be at the barrio of Naga.

The municipality of Naga as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point 1, center of the mouth of Bacalan River; thence, northward following the course of Bacalan River until it intersects the Provincial Boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte at Point 2; thence, following the Provincial Boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte on an easterly direction up to pointy 3, its intersection with longitude 122°-44′; thence, due south until it intersects Gacbusan Creek called point 4; thence, following the downstream course of Gacbusan Creek on a southwesterly direction up to point 5, intersection of Baga River and Gacbusan Creek; thence, following the downstream course of Baga River until it joins Kabasalan River at Point 6; thence, following the downstream course of Kabasalan River up to Point 7, center of the mouth of Kabasalan River Near Barrio Mamagon; thence, following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of Section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to point 1, point of beginning.” (From the technical description prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboangadel Sur)

The municipality of Kabasalan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Naga, as delimited above,

The municipality of Naga shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Kabasalan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Naga, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.