MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 172

CREATING THE LABOR CODE COMMITTEE

WHEREAS, there has been a long-felt need for coordinating, improving and harmonizing the laws, judicial precedents, administrative policies and regulations involving labor-management relations by the adoption of a progressive and all-encompassing Labor Code, guided by the constitutional mandate for the promotion of social justice and protection of labor; and

WHEREAS, there is also an urgent need for a systematic and realistic adjustment of existing policies and procedures affecting government agencies, labor unions, work standards, employment, regulations, judicial remedies, compensation affecting farm and industrial workers, agrarian lessees and government employees, and consequent remedial legislative measures for the attainment of these objectives;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Labor Code Committee to study, examine and harmonize existing labor laws, policies and regulations and submit recommendations for the amendment, revision and codification of labor and social legislation of the Philippines. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chairman. It is authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency or instrumentality of the government for such information and assistance as it may require in the performance of its work.

The Committee is also authorized to secure such personnel, funds and equipment as may be assigned or alloted to it to enable it to carry out this undertaking which the administration is determined to accomplish.

The Committee shall submit its report and recommendations to the President before the, opening of the regular session of Congress.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 172 : Creating the Labor Code Committee. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (47), 7847.