MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 89

CREATING THE SUGAR DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

Pursuant to the authority conferred upon me by law, in acknowledgment of the need for the implementation of nationwide development programs for the sugar industry as a potent force in economic development and general social welfare, and in view of the industry’s capacity for rapid and expansive growth, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, do hereby create the Sugar Development Committee under the Office of the President.

1. The Committee shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

( a ) As a deliberative body concerned with the problem of the entire sugar industry, to discuss and objectify current situations confronting the industry;

( b ) As a recommendatory council representing the interests of the industry, to draft and submit concrete recommendations to the President concerning policies and action programs which affect the industry;

( c ) As a planning committee concerned mainly with the future requirements for sustained growth of the industry, to conduct research and market development programs designed to accomplish the objectives of growth in the sugar industry; and

( d ) As an implementing body geared toward the proper execution and management of policies and action programs approved and proclaimed by the President, to harness available potential resources from both government and private sectors for the development of the industry.

2. The Committee shall be composed of eleven members:

3 The Committee shall be headed by its Chairman who shall be the chief executive officer of the Committee, and will be empowered to appoint such persons or entities and to issue such rules and regulations for the purposes of assisting him in the discharge of his duties and responsibilities and of implementing the objectives and programs of the committee.

4. The Chairman is also authorized to call directly upon any department, bureau, or office in the executive branch of the government or upon any government-owned or controlled entity or agency for such assistance as the Committee may need, and subject to approval of the President, to requisition for, utilize, and make use of, the services of their personnel.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 89 : Creating the Sugar Development Committee under the Office of the President. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (30), 4413-4414.