MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 104

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF STA. MARIA IN THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Davao, a municipality to be known as Sta. Maria to consist of the barrios and sitios of Basiawan, Kidalan, Pongpong, Cogon, Kimatay, Pugad Buaya, Kadaatan, Sta. Maria, Culibao, Camasi, Kibulan, Kulungan, Longag Bato, Gandang, Sulok, Ogpao, Mamacao, Dool, Kisulad, Cabalantian, Tagbilaran, Boca, Dita, Malalag Tubig, Lagaylay, Tambo and Magapisa, all of the municipality of Malalag, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Basiawan.

The boundary that shall separate the municipality of Sta. Maria from the municipality of Malalag shall be as follows:

“Beginning at a point where the Malalag Bay cuts deepest inland and including all areas within the barrio of Bato; thence a line following the ridge of Baculing Mountain range which crosses the Malalag-Malita provincial road in the vicinity of Km. 342/000 and to the highest point above barrio Cadaatan; thence a straight line towards the peak of Mt. Tangali and beyond until it intersects the Malalag-Malita Boundary line.” (From the technical description prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Davao based on the map of the municipality of Malalag, scale 1:62,500, on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Malalag shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Sta. Maria,

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 89 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Sta. Maria shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Malalag after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Sta. Maria can still maintain creditably its municipal governments, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.