MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 113

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MAASIM IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Cotabato, a municipality to be known as Maasim to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Kiamba and General Santos, both of said province:

From the Municipality of Kiamba

From the Municipality of General Santos

The seat of government of the municipality of Maasim shall be at the barrio of Maasim.

The municipality of Maasim as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point No. 1, at the north of Taluc Creek, following the course of the said Creek northward as far as its uppermost reaches; thence going due north to Point No. 2 at the common boundary of Kiamba and Surala; thence following the same boundary going eastward to Point No. 3 along the common boundary of Kiamba and General Santos; thence due South terminating at Point No. 4 at Siguil River; thence following Siguil River downstream to Point No. 5 at its mouth at Sarangani Bay; thence following the coastal line westward to Point No. 1.”

The municipalities of Kiamba and General Santos shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Maasim as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 10063 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Maasim shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Kiamba and General Santos after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maasim can still maintain creditably their municipal governments, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 113 :  Creating the municipality of Maasim in the province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (43), 6967.