MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 67

CREATING THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENTIAL ASSISTANT ON HOUSING

In order to achieve greater efficiency and better coordination in the implementation of the nationwide housing program now being undertaken by different agencies of the Government concerned with housing and to provide a single and effective machinery, therefor, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create in the Office of the President the Office of Presidential Assistant on Housing.

1. The Office shall be directly under, and responsible to, the President of the Philippines and shall be headed by an official to be designated or appointed by the President, who shall be known as the Presidential Assistant on Housing. The latter shall act for, and in behalf of, the President in all matters pertaining to housing.

2. The Office shall have the following specific functions and responsibilities:

( a ) It shall study, formulate, and implement the nationwide housing program of the President in chartered cities, municipalities, municipal districts, and barrios.

( b ) It shall analyze, coordinate and integrate the plans, projects, programs, and studies of the various government offices, agencies, and instrumentalities engaged in housing development, particularly the government-owned or controlled corporations, such as the People’s Homesite and Housing Corporation, the Government Service Insurance System, the Social Security System, the Home Financing Corporation, and the Development Bank of the Philippines, which are called upon to cooperate to the fullest extent with the Presidential Assistant on Housing and to make available to the latter such personnel, materials, and other resources ass are necessary to ensure the successful implementation of the President’s National Housing Program.

( c ) It shall formulate uniform housing standards to govern mass housing construction financed through government loans.

( d ) It shall recommend to the President such legislations as are necessary to implement effectively the nationwide housing program.

( e ) It shall receive, handle, and disburse any and all funds that may be allocated either by presidential order or by act of Congress for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this executive order.

( f ) It shall perform such other functions as the President may assign to it.

3. The Presidential Assistant on Housing is hereby authorized to execute for, and in behalf of, the Republic of the Philippines deeds of conveyance or lease contracts in carrying out the functions of his office.

4. The Presidential Assistant on Housing is also authorized to issue such directives, rules, and regulations as he may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this executive order. He is empowered to organize a staff personnel to assist him in the discharge of his duties and functions. He may also secure the services on detail basis of officers and employees of any department, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government whose assistance may be needed by him in accomplishing the purposes of his office.

Done in the City of Manila, this 5th day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Musuem and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 67 : Creating the Office of Presidential Assistant on Housing. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (6), 763-764.