MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 201

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF EVA IN THE PROVINCE OF BOHOL

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Bohol a municipality to be known as Eva to consist of the following barrios of the municipalities of Balilihan, Catigbian, Batuan, Sagbayan, Bilar and Sevilla, all of said province:

From the Municipality of Balilihan:

1. Janopol

3. Baocon

From the Municipality of Catigbian:

From the Municipality of Batuan:

From the Municipality of Sagbayan:

1. Cabasaoan

From the Municipality of Bilar:

1. Dagohoy

From the Municipality of Sevilla:

1. Calinginan

3. Cambague

The seat of government of the municipality of Eva shall be at the present site of the barrio of Janopol.

The municipality of Eva as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point 1 in a straight line bearing S89° 00’E to point 2, a distance of 10.2 kms.; thence, in a straight line bearing S21° 30’W to Point 3, a distance of 6.5 kms.; thence, in a straight line bearing S5° 00’W to Point 4, a distance of 6.3 kms.; thence, in a straight line bearing S55° 30’W to Point 5, a distance of 6.9 kms.; thence, in a straight line bearing N47° 00’W to Point 6, a distance of 6.75 kms.; thence, in a straight line bearing N15° 30’E to Point 1, the point of beginning, a distance of 12.4 kms. (Based on the map prepared by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Bohol, on file in this Office, Scale: 1:100,000)

The municipalities of Balilihan, Catigbian, Batuan, Sagbayan, Bilar and Sevilla shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Eva, as delimited above.

The municipality of Eva shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1965). [Executive Order Nos. : 101 – 229]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.