MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 13

CREATING THE BUSINESS GUIDANCE AND STATISTICAL CENTER

In order that private investors may have a source of statistical and other information pertaining to business prospects and to achieve efficiency and avoid confusion in the release and distribution of statistical data and information concerning the Philippines for official and private purpose, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Business Guidance and Statistical Center.

1. The Center shall be administered by a board composed of the Chairman of the National Economic Council, as chairman, and the Governor of the Central Bank and the Secretary of Commerce and Industry, as ex oficio members and two members representing the private sector. It shall have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from the National Economic Council and other offices and entities of the Government.

2. The Center shall be the sole entity to issue official statistical data and information concerning the Philippines. All other entities and offices of the Government performing statistical work shall use their statistics only for the purposes of their functions and activities.

3. The Board shall issue rules and regulations with the approval of the President for the guidance of the public.

4. The Center may call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the Government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, for such assistance or information as it may need in the perform­ance of its functions.

5. This order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-two.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) AMELITO R. MUTUC Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1962). Executive Order No. 13 : Creating the Business Guidance and Statistical Center. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 58 (27), 4814.