MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 116

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF PANGANURAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE

Pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Norte a municipality to be known as Panganuran to consist of the following barrios and sitios, all of the municipality of Labason, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Panganuran shall be at the barrio of Gutalac.

The municipality of Panganuran as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at the mouth of the Quipit River going upstream following the main body of said Quipit River until it intersects the Interprovincial Boundary of Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte at Latitude Seven Degrees and Fifty-four Minutes (7° 54′) and Longitude One Hundred Twenty-two Degrees and Thirty-five Minutes (122° 35′); thence following said Interprovincial Boundary until it intersects the Labason-Siocon Municipal Boundary at Latitude Seven Degrees and Forty-five Minutes (7° 45′) and Longitude One Hundred Twenty-two Degrees and Twenty-four Minutes (122° 24′), thence following a straight line along said Municipal Boundary until the shore line.” (From the Technical Description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Norte, based on the map of the mother municipality of Labason and the proposed municipality of Panganuran. Scale: 1:100,000, now on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Labason shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Panganuran as delimited above.

House Bill No. 4941 creating the new municipality was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Panganuran shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Labason, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Panganuran, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 116 :  Creating the municipality of Panganuran in the province of Zamboanga del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (46), 7528.