MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 178

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SURABAY IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Surabay to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Ipil and Tungawan, said province:

From the Municipality of Ipil:

From the Municipality of Tungawan:

The seat of government of the municipality of Surabay shall be at the barrio of Surabay.

The municipality of Surabay as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from point “1” at the center of the mouth of Buluan River; thence following the shoreline of Sibuguey Bay to point “2” at the center of the mouth of Tigbawang River; thence due west with a distance of 15,000 meters known as point “3”; tlience N 53-00 E° following the municipal boundary of Ipil and Titay with a distance of 31,700 meters known as point “4”; thence due south until it reaches the mouth of Buluan River known as point “1”, the beginning point.” (From the technical description submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur based on the map of the proposed municipality of Surabay, scale 1:100,000, now on file in this Office.)

The municipalities of Ipil and Tungawan shall have their present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Surabay as delimited above.

The municipality of Surabay shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

By the President:

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 178 : Creating the Municipality of Surabay in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (50), 8007.