MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 228

CREATING A PHILIPPINE COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

WHEREAS, in its bid for the sito of the Asian Development Bank, the Philippine Government has offered to provide certain physical facilities, including land and buildings, for the free use and occupancy of the Bank;

WHEREAS, the Philippines has been chosen as the site of the headquarters of the Asian Development Bank;

WHEREAS, a coordinating committee is required to undertake the necessary arrangements for the preparation of the site and construction of the physical facilities of the Asian Development Bank and to act as liaison between the Bank and the Philippine Government;

WHEREAS, Cornelio Balmaceda, Philippine Representative to the High Level Consultative Committee of Experts for the Asian Development Bank and Chairman of the Second Asian Ministerial Conference, has been deeply involved in the organization of the Bank and has gained the respect and confidence of the representatives of the other ECAFE member countries;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a Philippine Coordinating Committee on the Asian Development Bank, composed of the following:

The composition of the Committee may be expanded to include representatives of other government offices and other persons, upon the recommendation of the Chairman and approval by the President.

The powers, functions and responsibilities of the Philippine Coordinating Committee on the Asian Development Bank are as follows:

1. To work closely with the Committee for the Preparatory Arrangements for the Establishment of the Asian Development Bank on the preliminary details for the establishment of its headquarters at Pasay City, Philippines;

2. To make arrangements for leasing and furnishing the temporary offices of the Asian Development Bank;

3. To consider plans for the buildings, furnishing and premises of the Asian Development Bank; select the architects who will design the same, and submit to the President recommendations on the final plans for the buildings, furnishing and premises;

4. To act as the Committee to advertise for, evaluate, and submit to the President recommendations on the contracts for the construction of the Asian Development Bank buildings; the procurement of furnishing therefor and the landscaping to be done;

5. To coordinate with other government offices and make representations with the Congress of the Philippines to enact such legislation as may be required in connection with the establishment of the Asian Development Bank in the Philippines including the ratification by the Senate of the Philippines of the Agreement Establishing the Asian Development Bank opened for signature at Manila, Philippines on December 4, 1965, and signed by the authorized representatives of the Philippines and other member countries; the law authorizing the President of the Philippines to reserve certain parcels of land of the Philippine Government and appropriating funds for the construction of building thereon for the free use of the Asian Development Bank and the United Nations Organization and for other purposes; the law appropriating funds to cover the subscription of the Philippine Government to the Asian Development Bank; and the law providing for a site and appropriating funds for the construction of buildings and other facilities for the Philippine Merchant Marine Academy;

6. To act as liaison with and assist the Asian Development Bank in such matters as may require action by the Government of the Philippines;

7. To make studies and submit to the President recommendations on the relocation of the Philippine Merchant Marine Academy to another site; and

8. To perform such other functions affecting the Asian Development Bank as the President may designate from time to time.

All departments, bureaus, offices, government owned or controlled corporations and provincial, city and municipal governments and their officials and employees are hereby directed to render such cooperation and assistance as may be requested by the Committee in the performance of its powers, functions and responsibilities.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) RAMON A. DIAZ Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 228 : Creating a Philippine Coordinating Committee on the Asian Development Bank. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (18), 2943.