MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 181

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF BAWANG IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Bawang to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipalities of Buug and Kumalarang, said province:

From the Municipality of Buug:

The seat of government of the municipality of Bawang shall be at the barrio of Bawang.

The municipality of Bawang as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning from point “1”, at the centerline of Picanan Bridge, of the Pagadian-Zamboanga City National Eoad; thence following the centerline of Picanan Creek, in a downstream direction until the mouth of said Picanan Creek, called point “2”; thence following the shore line of Dumanquilas Bay in a southwesterly direction until it exceed seven (7) kilometers and six hundred (600) meters more or less from the centerline of Palalian River known as point “3”; thence due north until it intersects the center-line of the Pagadian-Zamboanga City National Road at Km. 239.000 known as point “4”; thence following the centerline of the said National Road until it reaches point “5”, a point which is one (1) kilometer before the junction of the said National Eoad andl Samar Mining Company Private Road; thence S 30-00 E with a distance of two (2) kilometers to point “6”; thence N 60-00 E with a distance of two (2) kilometers to point “7”;’ thence N 30-00 W until it intersects the centerline of the aforesaid National Eoad at point “8”; thence following again the centerline of the Pagadian-Zamboanga City National Eoad until it reaches kilometer 229.000 called point “9”; thence due north until it reaches the centerline of Picanan Creek known as point “10”; thence following the course, of Picanan in a downstream direction back to point “1”, the point of beginning. This includes the islands of Cabog, Baong-Baong, Lapinigan, and Pamonoan.” (From the Technical Description submitted by the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur based on the map of the proposed municipality of Bawang, scale 1:40,000, now on file in this Office.)

The municipalities of Buug and Kumalarang shall have their present territories minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Bawang as delimited above.

The municipality of Bawang shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 181 :  Creating the Municipality of Bawang in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (51), 8147.