MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 177

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CABATAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Cabatan to consist of the barrios of Biopus, Danan, Linogwayan, Balasan, Limason, Capatagan, Waling-Waling, Lunib, Cogon, Sogokan, Cabatan and Maculay Island, all of the municipality of Margosatubig, with the seat of government at the barrio of Cabatan.

The municipality of Cabatan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at point 1, center at the mouth of Timboligue River; thence, following the upstream course of said river straight line to the center of Mount Tamaru called point 2, thence, following straight line to the center of Mount Eiga; thence a straight line until it intersects longitude 5.39 °E to the boundary of Dimataling Municipality; thence, following the shoreline in a clockwise direction back to point 1, the point of beginning.” (From House Bill No. 3911.)

The municipality of Margosatubig shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Cabatan, as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 3911 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Cabatan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 177 : Creating the Municipality of Cabatan in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 61 (50), 8006.