MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 96

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MARUING IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Sur a municipality to be known as Maruing to consist of the following barrios and sitios of the municipality of Lapuyan, said province:

The seat of government of the municipality of Maruing shall be at the barrio of Maruing.

The Municipality of Maruing as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“Beginning at Point 1, center of the mouth of Kumalarang River; thence following the upstream course of said river with a distance of 3,800 M. to point 2; thence, following a straight line northeasterly direction until it intersects the inlet of Kumalarang River at Lake Wood called point 3; thence following the old boundary of Lapuyan clockwise direction to point 4; thence following the old boundary of Lapuyan and Midsalip with a distance of 2,700 M. to point 5; thence following a straight line southward until it intersects the national highway at Kumalarang Bridge called point 6; thence following a straight line SW direction until it intersects the shore line of Igat Bay called point 7; thence following the boundary of the marine waters which this municipality shall have pursuant to the provisions of Section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code along Igat Bay in a clockwise direction back to point 1, the point of beginning. This includes the Island of Kabog.” (From the map of the proposed municipality of Maruing prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Zamboanga del Sur. Scale 1:1,000,000).

The municipality of Lapuyan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Maruing as delimited above.

The municipality of Maruing shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Lapuyan, after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised in the municipality of Maruing, can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all their statutory and contractual obligations and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 4th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1964). [Executive Order Nos. : 1 – 100]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.