MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 196

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF MANGAGOY IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao del Sur and pursuant to the provisions of Section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Surigao del Sur a municipality to be known as Mangagoy to consist of the barrios of Mangagoy, Mampaya-an, New Bohol, Guicob, Tabon and Lawigan, all of the municipality of Bislig, with the seat of government at the barrio of Mangagoy.

The municipality of Mangagoy as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the Eastern shore of Mancarogo River at its mouth marked point “A” on the map; thence from point “A” following the course of Mancarogo River upstream until its source at point “B” on the map; thence from point “B” following an imaginary straight line on southwestern direction until it reaches the intersection of Bislig River at point “C” on the map; thence from point “C” following the course at right side of Bislig River upstream until it reaches the established municipal boundary line of Bislig and Lingig at point “D”; thence from point “D” following the established boundary line of Bislig and Lingig Northeastwardly until it reaches the shoreline marked point “E”; thence from point “E” following the shoreline Northwestwardly until it reaches the point of beginning at point “A”. (From the map of the municipality of Bislig prepared and submitted by the Office of the Highway District Engineer of Surigao del Sur, scale 1:50,000, on file in this Office.)

The municipality of Bislig shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Mangagoy as delimited above.

The creation of this new Municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 2821 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Mangagoy shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-five.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) SALVADOR L. MARIÑO Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1965). Executive Order No. 196 : Creating the municipality of Mangagoy in the province of Surigao del Sur. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 62 (4), 523.