MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 75

RENDERING IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT THE PLAN OF ORGANIZATION PROPOSED BY THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON REORGANIZATION OF AGENCIES FOR LAND REFORM FOR THE ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY OF THE AGRICULTURAL LAND REFORM CODE

WHEREAS, Republic Act No. 3844, otherwise known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code, provides that all agencies affected by the Code be reorganized and realigned to enable them to fulfill the objectives and requirements of the land reform program;

WHEREAS, Administrative Order No. 72 created the Special Committee on Reorganization of Agencies for Land Reform to undertake the establishment of the basic administrative machinery of the Agricultural Land Reform Code;

WHEREAS, upon the authority of said Order the Committee has formulated a plan of organization for the various agencies to be integrated into the machinery under the Code; and

WHEREAS, the plan is essentially in accord with the requirements of the Code and is specially designed for the effective and adequate implementation of the reforms contemplated by the Code;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Diosdado Macapagal, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare the following plan of organization in full force and immediately executory:

ARTICLE 1 The Land Reform Project Administration (LRPA)

SEC. 1. The Land Reform Project Administration established by Chapter VII of Republic Act No. 3844 shall assume the primary responsibility for carrying out the policy of the State established in section 2 of the Preliminary Chapter of the aforesaid Act to wit:

“(1) To establish owner-cultivatorship and the economic family-size farm as the basis of Philippine agriculture and, as a consequence, divert landlord capital in agriculture to industrial development;

“(2) To achieve a dignified existence for the small farmers free from pernicious institutional restraints and practices;

“(3) To create a truly viable social and economic structure in agriculture conducive to greater productivity and higher farm incomes;

“(4) To apply all labor laws equally and without discrimination to both industrial and agricultural wage earners;

“(5) To provide a more vigorous and systematic land resettlement program and public land distribution; and

“(6) To make the small farmers more independent self-reliant, and responsible citizens, and a source of genuine strength in our democratic society.”

Provided, That the matter treated in paragraph (4) shall be the responsibility of the appropriate bureaus and divisions of the Department of Labor.

SEC. 2. Composition and Function of the Land Reform Administration:

The Land Reform Project Administration shall consist of the National Land Reform Council, the Regional Land Reform Committee, the Land Reform Project Team, and such other branches of these units as may be necessary for effective administration. The Land Reform Project Administration is the organization through which the field operations of member agencies shall be undertaken by their respective personnel under a unified administration; Provided, That any resolution of the National Land Reform Council, the Regional Land Reform Committee, and the Land Reform Project Team with respect to the approval of loans or the financing of land acquisition and resale shall be valid and binding if in the case of the former the representative of the Agricultural Credit Administration votes with majority members of said Council, Committee, or Team and in the case of land financing subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees of the Land Bank or in accordance with such delegation of authorities as the said Board shall approve.

SEC. 3. The Land Reform Project Administration shall be considered in single organization and the personnel complement of the member agencies, including the legal officers of the Office of the Agrarian Counsel which shall provide legal services to the LRPA, shall be regarded as one personnel pool from which the requirements of the operations shall be drawn and subject only to civil service laws, rules and regulations, persons from one agency may be freely assigned to positions in another agency within the LRPA when the interest of the service so demands.

SEC. 4. The Land Reform Project Administration shall be considered as one organization with respect to the standardization of of job descriptions position classification and wage and salary structures to the end that positions involving the same or equivalent qualifications and equal responsibilities and effort shall have the same remuneration.

SEC. 5. The Civil Service laws, rules, and regulations with respect to promotions, particularly in the consideration of persons next in rank, shall be made applicable to the Land Reform Project Administration as a single agency so that qualified individuals in one member agency must be considered in considering promotions to higher positions in another member agency.

ARTICLE 2 The National Land Reform Council (NLRC)

SEC. 6. The authority and responsibility for the operations of the Land Reform Project Administration is vested in the National Land Reform Council, which shall be the governing body of the LRPA and shall provide general executive direction and control over the entire organization. The NLRC shall have the functions and responsibilities set forth in section 128 of the Republic Act No. 3844.

SEC. 7. Composition: Pursuant to the provisions of the Code (Sec. 126), the NLRC shall be composed of the Governor of the Land Authority who shall act as Chairman, the Administrator of the Agricultural Credit Administration, the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the Land Bank, the Commissioner of the Agricultural Productivity Commission, and another member appointed by the President to represent the party receiving the second largest number of votes in the last presidential election. The Agrarian Counsel shall be the legal counsel of the NLRC.

SEC. 8. Rank and responsibilities of the Chairman: in addition to his responsibilities as Presiding Officer of the NLRC having the powers defined in section 127 of the Code, the Chairman shall be the Administrator of the National Land Reform Project Administration and shall have the rank of a Cabinet member. In the performance of his function as presiding officer he shall be assisted by two staff units; A Secretariat and a Plans and Programs Unit.

SUBSEC. 8. 1. Secretariat. The Secretariat shall: (1) serve as the principal clearing house for information on land reform operations; (2) keep records of all proceedings, deliberations, decisions and resolutions of the NLRC; (3) review the budgets of the member agencies for proper funding of projects approved by the NLRC; (4) provide assistance in the establishment of uniform administrative procedures and office management in the LRPA; (5) provide assistance in the implementation of uniform personnel policies and keep the Chairman informed and manpower placement and utilization in the entire LRPA; (6) plan, design, and supervise the training of personnel to be assigned to land reform operations; (7) assist in the implementation of policies and procedures governing materials and equipment administration in the LRPA; and (8) perform such other functions as the NLRC shall assign to it. It shall be composed of the following sections: (1) Office of the Executive Director, (2) Administrative Staff, (3) Budget and Logistics Section, (4) Personnel Administration and Training, (5) Legal Section, (6) Management Services.

SUBSEC. 8. 2. Plans and Programs Office. The Plans and Programs Office shall: (1) provide assistance in the formulation of the overall plans and programs for the implementation of the functions and objectives prescribed for the LRPA, (2) evaluate and integrate the specific projects and programs submitted by the member agencies for the consideration of the NLRC. The Plans and Programs Office shall have the following sections: (1) Office of the Director, (2) Research and Statistics, (3) Project Analysis and Program Preparation, (4) Program Performance Evaluation.

SEC. 9. Members of the NLRC as Deputy Administrators of LRPA. In the performance of his functions as Administrator of LRPA, the Chairman of the NLRC shall be assisted by the heads of the Agricultural Credit Administration, the Agricultural Productivity Commission, and the Land Bank who shall serve as Deputy Administrators of LRPA respectively for Agricultural Credit, Agricultural Operations, and Land Financing, and who shall assist the Administrator in supervising the implementation of the policies, plans, programs, and projects approved by the NLRC.

ARTICLE 3 Land Reform Operations: Field Organization

SEC. 10. The field operations of the LRPA shall be administered through Regional Land Reform Committees and Land Reform Project Teams of such numbers as the NLRC may deem necessary for effective supervision and control, provided that the NLRC may constitute Sub-Regional Land Reform Offices to cover areas that are so large that the number of individual Land Reform Project Teams does not permit effective supervision through a single Regional Land Reform Committee.

SEC. 11. The Regional Land Reform Committee. The authority and responsibility for operation of the Land Reform Project Administration within a region is vested in the Regional Land Reform Committee.

The Chairman of the Regional Land Reform Committee shall be the Administrator of the operations of the Committee and shall be assisted by:

a ) An Administrative Staff which shall provide the necessary administrative and general services;

b ) Staff Assistants who shall provide the necessary services for the extension and supervision of credit, for the supervision of collection of credit and other accounts, and for the supervision of extension and cooperative development activities within the region.

c ) A supporting Staff composed of specialist units from non-member agencies on detail with the Regional Land Reform Committee, which shall undertake and perform supporting services like pest control, soil analysis, veterinary services, and similar other supporting functions.

SEC. 12. The Sub-Regional Office. There shall be as many Sub-Regional Offices as may be necessary for efficient administration. The Sub-Regional Office shall be composed of representatives of the member agencies and shall have the authority and responsibility for the operation of the Land Reform Project Administration within its territorial boundaries. The Sub-Regional Office shall be headed by the representative of the Land Authority who shall be the administrator of the operations of the Sub-Regional Office. He shall be assisted by:

a ) An Administrative Staff which shall provide the necessary administrative and general services.

b ) Staff Assistants who shall provide all the necessary services for the extension activities of the sub-regional office, for the extension and supervision of credit, and for the supervision of collections of credit and other accounts.

c ) A supporting staff which shall be composed of specialists detailed from non-member agencies to provide the necessary supporting services to field units like pest control, soil analysis, and similar other supporting functions.

SEC. 13. The Land Reform Project Team. The authority and responsibility for the operation of the Land Reform Project Administration at district levels is vested in the Land Reform Project Team. The leader of the team shall be the administrator of the operations of the Land Reform Project Team. He shall be assisted by an appropriate number of credit and extension supervisors, farm technologists, home technologists, legal officers, and rural youth officers.

SEC. 14. Transitory Provisions. Field operations in areas where Regional Land Reform Committees have not been fully constituted shall be undertaken directly by member-agencies through their performance evaluation units, provided that all programs and projects or activities of member-agencies in these areas shall be subject to the approval of the National Land Reform Council.

Field operations of member-agencies in areas not serviced by appropriate units of the Land Reform Project Administration within a region where a Regional Land Reform Committee has been duly constituted and organized shall be undertaken through the said Regional Land Reform Committee.

ARTICLE 4 Land Authority (LA)

SEC. 15. For the purpose of accomplishing the functions provided in the Code, the following organizational units shall constitute the Land Authority:

SUBSEC. 15. 1. The Office of the Governor. Administers and assumes responsibility for the operations and activities of the Authority in implementing the national policy of establishing owner-cultivatorship and the economic family-size farm as the basis of Philippine agriculture. Acts as the Chairman of the National Land Reform Council and as overall Administrator of the Land Reform Project Administration.

1) Legal Staff. Acts as legal adviser, to interpret laws, executive orders, rules, and regulations affecting the operations of the Land Authority.

2) Administrative Services. Plans, directs, and supervises all administrative functions of the Authority, including accounting and medical services.

SUBSEC. 15. 2. The Office of the Deputy Governor for Plans and Programs. Assumes responsibility for the formulation of operating plans and programs and direct surveying and mapping activities and evaluation of program implementation.

1) Aerial Photogrammetry Division. Plans, directs, and supervises the conduct of aerial photography for land capability survey and classification requirements.

2) Mapping Division. Plans, direct, and supervises the completion and printing of map manuscripts.

3) Land Surveys Division. Plans, directs, and supervises the survey and subdivision of lands under the Authority.

4) Operational Planning and Statistics Division. Formulates integrated plans and programs for operations and evaluates program and project implementation.

SUBSEC. 15. 3. The Office of the Deputy Governor for Field Performance. Directs and is responsible for the implementation of approved plans and programs to achieve a speedy and systematic distribution and settlement of dispensable land.

1) Engineering and Construction Division. Plains, directs and supervises all the engineering activities of the Authority involving civil, mechanical, and agricultural engineering works.

2) Land Acquisition Division. Recommends the expropriation of landed estates and the proclamation of agricultural lands of the public domain for settlement purposes.

3) Land Distribution Division Plans, directs, and supervises the allocation and disposition of private and public agricultural lands acquired by the Authority.

4) Land Administration Division. Plans, directs, and supervises the proper and efficient administration of all private and public lands acquired by the Authority for settlement or resale.

ARTICLE 5 Agricultural Credit Administration (ACA)

SEC. 16. For the purpose of accomplishing the functions provided in the Code, the following organizational units shall constitute the Agricultural Credit Administration.

SUBSEC. 16. 1. Office of the Administrator. Provides executive direction and control as Assistant Administrator of the Land Reform Project Administration for agricultural credit.

1) Legal Staff. Acts as legal adviser; and interprets laws, executive orders, rules, and regulations affecting the operations of the ACA.

SUBSEC. 16. 2. Office of the Assistant Administrator. Advises and assists the Administrator in the over-all execution and administration of approved policies and programs.

1) Plans and Programs Staff. Formulates and develops plans and programs relating to agricultural credit extension and agricultural cooperatives supervision, and evaluates program implementation.

2) Management and Internal Audit Staff. Institutes and administers a program for achieving the efficient, effective and economical performance of ACA operations.

SUBSEC. 16. 3. Administrative Services. Plans, directs, and supervises administrative functions of the ACA including personnel administration, records management, medical, and general services.

SUBSEC. 16. 4. Office of the Comptroller. Plans, develops and administers a program for fiscal and property management and control.

SUBSEC. 16. 5. Credit and Cooperatives Department. Develops procedures and formulates rules and regulations on credit extension and collection; and provides technical assistance in the audit and supervision of agricultural cooperatives.

SUBSEC. 16. 6. Special Operations Department. Plans and directs special projects of the ACA relating to the effective procurement, storage, and distribution of fertilizers and the proper disposition and liquidation of old Virginia Tobacco stocks and accounts.

SEC. 17. The Board of Governors of the former Agricultural Credit and Cooperative Financing Administration is hereby abolished and its powers and functions under Republic Act No. 821, as amended, to formulate policies and to approve plans and programs shall henceforth be exercised by the National Land Reform Council, and the power to implement and carry out the functions, powers, and duties of the administration shall be exercised by the Administrator who is the Chief Executive of the ACA and whose salary is hereby fixed at P24,000.00 per annum.

ARTICLE 6 Agricultural Productivity Commission (APC)

SEC. 18. For the purpose of accomplishing the functions provided in the Code, the following organizational units shall constitute the Agricultural Productivity Commission:

SUBSEC. 18. 1. Office of the Commissioner. Provides executive direction and control as Assistant Administrator of the LRPA for agricultural operations.

(1) Management and Internal Audit Unit assists management in achieving an efficient, effective, and economical performance of agency affairs through studies on organization and methods; institutes and administers a program of internal audit for fiscal affairs of the Commission.

(2) Communications Media Division plans, directs, and supervises all information and education activities of the Commission.

(3) Agricultural Tenancy Office plans and recommends program for the dissemination of information on the legal rights and obligations of landholders, tenants, and lessees under the Code.

SUBSEC. 18. 2. The Director for Plans and Programs prepares and recommends integrated plans and programs for the Commission’s operations and evaluates program implementation.

(1) Plans and Programs Division formulates and develops plans and programs for agricultural extension services.

(2) Evaluation Division evaluates the effectiveness of program implementation of the Commission.

SUBSEC. 18. 3. The Director for Administration plans, develops, and coordinates an effective program of administrative services for the Commission.

(1) Administrative Services Division plans, directs, and supervises such, administrative services as supply and records management, security, transportation, and building maintenance including medical and legal services.

(2) Budget and Cash Division plans, directs, and supervises the budget preparation, execution, and reporting activities of the Commission.

(3) Personnel Services Division plans, develops, and administers sound practices for personnel administration and advises management on all personnel matters.

(4) Accounting Division establishes, develops, and maintains an accounting system and program of the Commission.

SUBSEC. 18. 4. The Director for field performance assists the Commissioner in formulating and setting general guideline for the execution of agricultural plans and program previously approved by the NLRC.

(1) Agricultural Division coordinates implementation of approved agricultural extension programs relating to farm management.

(2) Home Economics Division coordinates implementation of approved plans and programs on home extension services.

(3) Rural Clubs Division coordinates implementation of approved plans and programs on rural youth development.

(4) Cooperatives Division coordinates implementation of approved plans and programs on the promotion and organization of agricultural cooperatives.

(5) Applied research and specialist Division conducts applied researches and renders staff advice to operations unit of the LRPA.

ARTICLE 7 Office of the Agrarian Counsel

SEC. 19. For the purpose of accomplishing the functions provided in the Code, the following organizational units shall constitute the Office of the Agrarian Counsel:

SUBSEC. 19. 1. The Agrarian Counsel, as chief executive of the OAC, administers and assumes responsibility for the OAC operations designed to strengthen legal assistance to agricultural lessee and owner-cultivators, and acts as legal counsel of the NLRC.

(1) Special and Appealed Cases Division plans, directs, and reviews the modification of theory of cases and trial techniques of cases handled by the regional and branch offices.

(2) Technical Staff provides legal advice to the Agrarian Counsel on policies, enforcement, and administration of laws; undertakes consultation liaison work with Land Reform Agencies.

SUBSEC. 19. 2. The office of the Deputy Agrarian Counsel coordinates for the Agrarian Counsel staff activities relating to legal research, administrative, and management services for the main office as well as for field units.

(1) Administrative Division plans, directs, and supervises auxiliary services, including personnel, supply, and records management, budget and accounting, secretarial, duplicating, security, transportation, janitorial, building maintenance, and repair; and advises the Councel on matters concerning administrative services.

(2) Legal Research and Statistics Division plans, directs, and conducts research and drafts legal opinions on agrarian disputes and administrative proceedings; supervises the keeping and maintenance of a library and statistical data on contracts.

(3) Management Staff conducts to improve the organization, methods, and procedures of the OAC.

SEC. 20. The policies, plans, programs placement, and budget of the legal officers of the Office of the Agrarian Counsel who shall provide legal services to LRPA shall be subject to review and approval of the NLRC for the purpose of achieving a complete integration of the Land Reform Operations.

ARTICLE 8

SEC. 21. The NLRC may create upon recommendation of the head of member-agencies such units, divisions, or departments as may be necessary to carry out effectively the responsibilities, functions, and duties of such member-agencies consistent with the LRPA organization herein established.

This Order shall serve notice upon all government agencies concerned to render the necessary assistance to carry the plan into effect.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) CALIXTO O. ZALDIVAR Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 75 : Rendering in full force and effect the plan of organization proposed by the Special Committee on Reorganization of Agencies for Land Reform for the administrative machinery of the Agricultural Land Reform Code. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 60 (22), 3045-3052.