EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 1

CREATING THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTERING PERFORMANCE EFFICIENCY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.

In order to achieve greater efficiency, competence dedication in the administration of government and ensure the prompt and faithful performance of assigned duties, functions and directives by implementing government duties, functions and directives by implementing government offices, agencies and instrumentalities, I, DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Presidential Committee on Administration Performance Efficiency as the executive agency in the Office of the President which shall render the requisite services and assistance to attain the above objectives.

1.The Committee shall be directly under and responsible to the President of the Philippines.

2.It shall be headed by a Technical Assistant, to be designated by the President, and who shall be known as the Presidential Executive Assistant. He shall be a member of the Cabinet.

3.The Committee shall have such personnel as may be assigned or detailed to it from departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government upon the recommendation of the Presidential Executive Order.

4. The Committee shall have such duties and functions as the President may assign to it in order to carry out the objectives of this Executive Order.

5.The records, properties and equipment of the Presidential Committee on Administration Efficiency created by Executive Order No. 306 dated July 15, 1958, and abolished by Executive Order No. 306 dated July 15, 1958, abolished by Executive Order No. 456 dated December 29, 2961, shall be turned over to the Committee herein created.

6.This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 30 th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL

By the President:

Executive Secretary