MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 114

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF SIAYAN IN THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE

Pursuant to section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the province of Zamboanga del Norte, a municipality to be known as Siayan to consist of the barrios of Siayan Proper, Polayo, Moyo, Diongan, Gonayen Proper, Datagan, Makasing, Soriao, Gunyan, Dinoyak, Pange, Balak, Litolit, Mangilay, Domogok, and Paranglumba, all of the municipality of Sindangan, said province, with the seat of government at the barrio of Paranglumba.

The municipality of Siayan as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

“From the intersection of longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees ten minutes (123°-10′); and latitude eight degrees seventeen minutes (8°-17′); thence due west to longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees and four minutes (123°-04′) ; thence due south to latitude eight degrees and ten minutes (8°-10′) ; thence southwest to the intersection of longitude one hundred twenty-two degrees fifty-seven minutes (122°-57′) and latitude seven degrees fifty-five minutes (7°-55′); thence due east to longitude one hundred twenty-two degrees fifty-eight minutes (122°-58′); thence northeast to the intersection of longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees four minutes (123°-04′); and latitude eight degrees zero minutes (8°-00′); thence due east to longitude one hundred twenty-three degrees ten minutes (123°-1Q’); thence due north to latitude eight degrees and seventeen minutes (8°-17′); the point of beginning.” (From the technical description submitted by the District Engineer of Zamboanga del Norte based on the map of the municipalities of. Manucan and Sindangan on file in this office).

The municipality of Sindangan shall have its present territory minus the portions thereof which are included in the territory of the municipality of Siayan as delimited above.

The creation of this new municipality as proposed in House Bill No. 4454 was approved by the House of Representatives.

The municipality of Siayan shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance that said municipality is financially capable of providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipality of Sindangan after the segregation therefrom of the territory comprised fin the municipality of Siayan can still maintain creditably its municipal government, meet all its statutory and contractual obligations, and provide for the essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-four.

(Sgd.) DIOSDADO MACAPAGAL President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN S. CANCIO Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Macapagal, D. (1964). Executive Order No. 114 :  Creating the Municipality of Siayan in the Province of Zamboanga del Norte. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 60 (43), 6969.