Excerpts from a Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines During a visit to Batanes

[Released on March 18, 1993]

The final frontier

BATANES is the final frontier of the Philippines. Its isolation from the Luzon mainland made it so. And in its isolation it has remained more pristine than our cities. Yet, in its utmost simplicity and tranquility, Batanes is enviable. Here, the virtues of honesty, unity, fortitude and industry have found haven among a people who have persevered and found strength in themselves. These lessons of hope teach us to go back to the basics—concern for others, piety, perseverance, and trust in mankind.

Although it is naive to think that we can bring back to the cities the same unspoiled outlook of the people of Batanes, it is not unreasonable to hope that we can learn and live even just a fraction of their ways. For they hold the key to our growth, not by their modern technology but by the way they lead their lives.

As we contemplate preserving much of Batanes’ pristine state, I am committed to provide the infrastructures and institutions of development that would help ease the plight of the people in this island province. . . .

We are pushing for the development of Batanes because we believe in the vast potential it offers. Batanes is at the northernmost tip of the Philippine archipelago and the closest gateway to our neighboring Asian countries, particularly Taiwan. If it is equipped with modern facilities, Batanes can offer a viable port of commerce and trade for us in our dealings with our neighboring dragon economies.

As we plan to modernize Batanes, we are also addressing its people’s immediate needs—for land, schoolbuildings and other basic services.

I do not believe that the people of Batanes want to remain in constant poverty, to be left out of development while the rest of the country progresses. We share a common heritage. We dream of reaching the heights of development long due our people. And that development should also benefit the people of Batanes.

Our choice then is progress—where the virtues of honesty, unity, fortitude and industry remain a part of our lives.

You need not fear the onslaught of change, for your heritage has made you strong and will carry you onward as you deal with the challenges of development. . . .

Excerpts from a speech given during a visit to Batanes, March 18, 1993.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1993). A call to duty : citizenship and civic responsibility in a third world democracy. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.