Excerpts from a Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines Before the Multisectoral Assembly

[Delivered at the Zamboanga del Norte Cultural Center, Dipolog City, Zamboanga del Norte, May 8, 1993]

Sustaining our vision of growth in the South

I AM HERE to ask you, the leaders of Zamboanga del Norte and the twin cities of Dipolog and Dapitan, if you have a plan for “Zamboanga del Norte 2000,” “Dipolog 2000” and “Dapitan 2000.” Because we must now think in those terms and set aside the secondary considerations of partisan politics or our vested and family interests. We must now look forward to the vision of making the Philippines a newly industrializing country—an emergent dragon—in the next few years.

Our vision for “Philippines 2000” is based on two important principles, which inform our platform of government. First, the empowerment of our people . This is not an empty democratic principle; it is an economic necessity. Its aim is to make the people productive as economic units; as individuals, as families, as households, as cooperatives, as people’s organizations.

The second principle is global competitiveness . That is the name of the game outside, competitiveness of the bureaucracies. Our bureaucracy must be as good as if not better than those of other countries because what is going to bring in any investments, trade and tourism is efficiency in government at the national and local levels.

Our educational system must be as competitive as those in other countries, so that we can produce talents and skills on a par with the young people of Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, China and others.

Our products must be competitive. They should be of such high quality that they can sell in the markets not only of Dipolog or Manila but also of the world. . . .

Our people are proficient in computers. Maybe because they start playing video games at an early age. That is good. But do you know what China is doing now, because it wants also to be competitive? It is exposing its Grade 1 pupils to computers. One computer for every two pupils! Mrs. Ramos saw that in an elementary school in Guangzhou (Canton).

Can you imagine the advantage of those Chinese kids? Give them another ten years when they become high school seniors and about to enter college. That is the kind of global competition out there.

But we must not be deterred. The Philippines is in the strategic center of Asia and the Pacific. Dipolog and Zamboanga del Norte are very close to the strategic center of the Philippines, having access to other regions, to Palawan, which is fast-growing as a growth center, in the middle of the South China Sea, the main passageway for this dynamic, economic area called Asia and the Pacific.

I challenge you to seize the initiative, the advantage, and to work together with the rest of the country to bring about a progressive “Philippines 2000.”

Excerpts from a speech given before the Multi- sectoral Assembly, Zamboanga del Norte Cultural Center, Dipolog City, Zamboanga del Norte, May 8,1993

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1993). A call to duty : citizenship and civic responsibility in a third world democracy. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.