Excerpts from a Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines During his visit to Tagbilaran, Bohol

[Released on May 27, 1993]

Meeting the needs of progress

THERE ARE 1,532 municipalities, 60 cities and 75 provinces and subprovinces in the country. All are crying for priority. So what do we do? First, let us help those who most help themselves. Second, let us give priority to projects that can generate revenues so that in turn these can contribute to national development and open up more jobs. We can create new national wealth. We can raise public morale because we can give our people better food, better clothing and better shelter. But this must be done so that each step is self-generating, self-multiplying and productive in all its aspects.

We have agreed that we will select projects important to you.

What are these projects? First, the improvement of your circumferential roads—the Tagbilaran interior road, the junction of Cortes-Balilihan-Catigbian-Macaas roads and the bridges along the Tagbilaran-Trinidad road, as well as those along the Tagbilaran east road.

The bridges are 82 or 85 percent completed. The rest of the road projects are to be selected in the 1994 public works and highways component of the General Appropriations Act, as well as in the MulHyear Public Works and Highways Act between 1993 and 1998.

Panglao Island, identified as among the five or six priority programs for tourist development, has been chosen also for our Medium-term Philippine Development Plan for 1993-98. This will include auxiliary components such as roads, drainage, piers, marinas, sewage, piping system, treatment plants, telecommunications facilities and the upgrading of waterworks. . . .

But let us make sure that the infrastructure we develop is not only the roads and bridges, the buildings and the physical structures. Human-resource development must be emphasized and that must start with values training—values more than anything else. Or course, skills and other talents must be developed. As we have seen in the newly industrializing economies of Asia and the Pacific, the emphasis was not so much on infrastructure as on human-resource development. This is the success story of Korea. Everything else followed when it made its people more capable.

That is why during the election campaign, I always emphasized empowerment of the people. Empowerment, so that the individual Filipino can be more productive, a better team player and, above all, a contributor to national society instead of depending on doleouts and donations and assistance. . . .

This is the challenge that faces us. Let us produce all the things we want for Bohol together. It cannot be a doleout from above, but better yet, for everybody’s appreciation, a building up from the bottom starting with the smallest barangay and the humblest community upward so that as we go up, we bring everybody up also, including the least skilled and the least talented among us.

I repeat my commitment: I will help you if you help yourselves. You can count on your President to be quick and responsive to those that show spirit, industry, teamwork and, above all, a feeling of nationhood.

Excerpts from a speech given during a visit to Tagbilaran, Bohol, May 27, 1993

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1993). A call to duty : citizenship and civic responsibility in a third world democracy. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.