Excerpts from a Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines During the proclamation of ARMM elected officials

[Released on April 2, 1993]

Empowering the ARMM

MY INTEREST in carrying out the Organic Act for Muslim Mindanao goes beyond the regional territory or having its leadership in the hands of allies.

The sustained development of Mindanao and the solution of its long-standing problems, including their unwanted violent aspects, have been among my most urgent concerns for most of my career as a professional military and civil servant.

My Administration is determined to develop the full potential of Mindanao—perhaps the island with the country’s richest potential—so that peace, justice and prosperity may reign there and all may benefit from its strategic position and natural and human resources, be they Christians or Muslims or members of other cultural communities regardless of political affiliations.

The Organic Act created the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) to respond to the clamor for autonomy and self-determination within the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of our republic. . . .

With the assumption of office of the ARMM’s new officials, I reiterate my call that whatever animosities the recent elections may have bred should now be set aside. It is time to end our divisiveness and gather our energies toward the attainment of autonomy and sustained development in Muslim Mindanao and rally our people in the ARMM so that they, too, shall march to the vision of a brighter “ARMM 2000.”

Our vision of Philippines 2000 cannot be achieved without achieving first “Mindanao 2000” and “ARMM 2000.”

Therefore a top-priority action program that the new ARMM administration must tackle without delay is to devise its Medium-term Development Plan for 1993-98, which will lead to “ARMM 2000.”. . .

Some people assert that the Organic Act is to blame for ARMM’s shortcomings; that it does not provide sufficient fiscal autonomy; that the ARMM has its hands tied because Manila continues to intervene unnecessarily; and that the Act should be amended. . . .

I am amenable to amendments in the Act if these will redound to a more efficient and effective regional government and accelerated ARMM development. . . . In the meantime, let the new ARMM leadership and constituencies operate as best as they can under the present Organic Act for the common good and regional welfare.

There is so much to do with so little time. . . .

I commit the National Government’s support for ARMM’s sustained development. Brothers and sisters in ARMM, let us now show the rest of the Filipino nation your capacity for self-rule. Your success will earn the gratitude not only of our Muslim brothers and sisters but also of our entire people. It’s now your turn to act.

Excerpts from a speech given on the proclamation of ARMM elected officials, April 2, 1993

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1993). A call to duty : citizenship and civic responsibility in a third world democracy. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.