Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines On the 58th Anniversary of the Armed Forces of the Philippines

[Delivered at Camp Aguinaldo, December 21, 1993]

Back to basics

THIS YEAR we have a real reason to celebrate this foundation day of our Armed Forces.

Thanks to your courage, devotion to duty and self-sacrifice, the internal armed threats to our country have been dramatically reduced.

Political stability has been restored—clearing the way for our country to pursue unhampered its arduous struggle toward economic growth and social development. The Armed Forces must continue to provide the shield behind which self-sustaining development can take place.

Mission of the Armed Forces

Friends and comrades of the AFP, your concurrent mission is to provide the protective shield behind which our economy can grow, our democracy can become meaningful to every Filipino, and our people can enjoy the good life and the dignity they deserve.

Last week I approved the Cabinet Cluster “E” recommendation for a 17-day suspension of military offensives against the CPP-NPA-NDF starting today as an important aspect of our observance of Armed Forces Day. We extended the suspension to allow everyone throughout the land to enjoy the holiday season. I am certain that this comes as a welcome development not only for the protagonists in the field but also for all our countrymen in the remotest corners of the entire archipelago.

We recognize, however, that in our pursuit of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, much remains to be done. We certainly cannot achieve this without the cooperation and support of the citizenry and all others in the peace process.

Although the benefits of the improving situation in the countryside are now felt more than ever, the Government must remain ever vigilant in its responses to continued internal threats and risks. To this end and in consideration of certain logistic constraints, I have authorized the extension for one more year, up to December 31, 1994, of the retention by the AFP of the primary responsibility for maintaining internal security, with the Philippine National Police in a supporting role.

Internal reform

The restoration of political stability has enabled us to look ahead with clearer focus on the future. We have devised a strategic framework—which we call “Philippines 2000″—to set our country on the road to newly industrialized country status by the turn of the century.

Our vision is to wipe out material poverty from among the majority of Filipinos.

Today, as you know, more of our countrymen (in percentage terms) live in poverty than do Indonesians, Chinese or Thais.

“Philippines 2000” is also a vision to empower ordinary Filipinos so that they can take control of their future and realize the full potential of their lives.

The goals of “Philippines 2000” are eminently possible. These we can attain for ourselves and our children if we are steadfastly united. We need stability so that we can turn our attention to economic growth without being distracted by rebellion, crime and violence.

Over the next few years, the AFP must prepare to take full responsibility for our own defense against external threats.

Toward this goal, the AFP leadership must direct the steady modernization of the major services. This means the AFP must once again focus its training and orientation on the basics as a prelude to modernization. More than ever, it must emphasize discipline—whose foundation is the recognition of the supremacy of civilian authority and respect for the rule of law— and the intensified professionalization of the officer corps.

Internal reform must continue in every aspect of AFP activity. Most vital of all is the task of strengthening the chain of command and raising the efficiency of every unit to the maximum. One lingering problem here is the barkada mentality that compounds our problem of tightening discipline among small units of the AFP.

Esprit de corps—the spirit of mutual loyalty, mutual pride and mutual support that binds every fighting unit in the accomplishment of its mission—you must extend beyond the level of the platoon, the company, or even the battalion to the entire organization and to the national cause that the AFP serves.

Modernizing the AFP

An important constitutional reform was the separation of police functions which had previously been integrated into the AFP’s functions for more than 40 years. The Constabulary has now become the civilian national police, and the AFP has moved closer to the conventional tri-service model of the professional military establishment.

Modernizing the AFP must focus on developing this tri-service mode. Modernization will call for a slight reduction in the size of the regular army—to make it a highly mobile force with enhanced capability to deploy its units fast, to support them as they fight, and to maintain command and control over field units through effective communication links.

As for the territorial reserve forces deployed in their home-regions—the Citizens’ Armed Forces Geographical Units-modernization will mean greater central control, stricter discipline, and better supervision of these units by our special forces teams.

Whenever necessary, the professional core of the new army shall be strengthened by mobilizing our reserves for training and active duty. Our program to integrate more closely our reserve force into our defense organization starts with a national registration of all reservists next year.

The modernization of the Navy must be given priority and steadily pursued because of its capital-intensive, technological and long-term nature.

For the Air Force—we shall be acquiring new flying assets on a modest scale. As vital auxiliaries to our air defense—we shall also need a dependable air defense radar and early warning system.

The AFP as a civic institution

Modernization also means more intensive and systematic training of the reserves—according to the constitutional concept of a citizen armed force.

Modernization must be anchored on the principle of self-reliance. We can no longer depend on continuing security assistance from the United States, and we have only limited funds for modernization. The AFP leadership must ensure that expenditures are made judiciously—with planning and forethought toward a cost-effective program.

Let me turn to the AFP’s role as a civic institution. As a true citizen armed force, our AFP must be a teacher—and a model—of civic responsibility.

We are all familiar with the AFP’s role in socioeconomic development and nation building—in support of the civilian agencies of Government and the private sector. You have done well in road-building, in schoolhouse construction and in rescue and relief during calamities.

By your courage, devotion to duty and self-sacrifice, you of the Armed Forces have given our country much of the political stability it needs to develop economically.

As you rededicate yourselves to national protection and nation building on this day, may you be encouraged in your endeavors by Government’s support and the Filipino people’s trust in your collective faithfulness and commitment.

Keep up this covenant with our people—a covenant of solidarity, under a regime of freedom and democracy. This is the challenge before us all even as I say to you: “Keep up the good work—and carry on!”

Finally, let me make the announcement I know you have all been waiting for. I did not come here today empty-handed.

Priority concern

I am delighted to announce the fulfillment today of a promise I made sometime ago on a subject that is of utmost importance to the welfare of our men and women in the uniformed services of both the AFP and the PNP.

This is a priority concern shared by the national leadership and most members of our legislature who have long sympathized with the plight of our soldiers, policemen and jail guards, firemen and others who constitute the core of the Armed Forces and the National Police. I speak of those who keep the peace and maintain order in our communities and who secure the nation.

For many years now, Government has been unable to adjust the salary rates of our uniformed personnel to a standard level comparable to that of their counterparts in the civilian sector of Government. The uniformed services received their last pay increases in 1987, while their civilian counterparts enjoyed salary raises in 1989.

Therefore, as I have recommended in the 1994 General Appropriations Act, and as therein authorized in the conference committee report, I hereby direct the Secretary of Budget and Management to carry out Phase 1 of the three-year program to increase the pay of military, police, fire service and jail management personnel beginning January 1, 1994.

The amount required, estimated at P3.2 billion for uniformed personnel of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Philippine National Police and others in the uniformed services of the Department of Interior and Local Government, has now been made available and shall be drawn from the Compensation Adjustment Fund and other sources authorized in the 1994 budget.

As the initial increase under Phase 1 and in accordance with the joint recommendation of the Secretary of National Defense, the Secretary of Interior and Local Government, and the Secretary of Budget and Management, I have approved the salary raises proposed by them.

Socialized approach to salary adjustments

This is based on a socialized approach, whereby the personnel at the lower brackets of the enlisted and officer levels shall receive more in absolute increases. On the average, enlisted and nonofficer personnel shall receive an additional P800 a month in base pay adjustments, while officers shall receive an additional P700 a month. The adjustments are also applicable to and effective for the retirees.

Let me make it clear also that civilian workers in the national Government can also expect new adjustments in their allowances, also effective in 1994, pending the passage by Congress of a new Salary Standardization Bill, which is now being pursued in both houses of Congress. I say to our partners in the legislature, let us pass the Salary Standardization Amendment as soon as possible—the sooner the better.

These modest increases for the uniformed services are but a token of what they deserve. We hope we can add a little more decency to their lives and ease the burden of poverty for many of them, especially those with big families. It is the least that a grateful nation can do for the men and women in the ranks, on whom we rely in times of crisis, calamity and conflict.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.