A renewed relationship

In the name of the Filipino people and Mrs. Ramos, allow me to extend with utmost fraternal affection the warmest welcome to your majesties.

That your majesties have come to celebrate with us this first centennial of our independence is a reaffirmation of our common will, firmly cemented during our exchange of visits in nineteen ninety-four and nineteen ninety-five, to revitalize our relations founded on the deep and indelible historical-cultural ties that have united us for almost four centuries.

I am deeply honored to welcome their Majesties King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofia of Spain on this visit during the celebration of our nation’s centennial.

Your Majesties, more than one hundred years ago, our fledgling nation fought a war of independence against your country—a war that brought enormous pain and anguish to families of both our peoples. A war where many Filipino and Spanish lives, in the flower of their youth, fought valiantly and died for the distinct ideals that our two nations then espoused.

Today, while we remember the heroism of our two peoples, we also enter into the beginnings of a renewed relationship. A relationship that is marked by mutual understanding and genuine friendship. A close bond that empowers and enriches the lives of two peoples who value freedom, justice and democracy. A relationship that is based on equality, trust and fraternity based on centuries of shared history.

Allow me, your Majesties, to highlight the indelible contributions of Spain to the development of a distinct Filipino culture, one that is at once European and Asian in character and unique in this part of the world. Your nation’s contributions run in our blood and edify our daily lives.

Recalling Spain’s legacy to our country

In the Philippines, the mention of Spain conjures up so many things, the most important of which is our predominant faith. Brought to our shores by the Spanish missionaries and the conquistadores, Christianity has defined for us a way of life unique in Asia.

The Spanish language has also permeated our national tongue and many of the dialects of our country. Our national hero Dr. Jose Rizal, who furthered his education in Spain, wrote his best works in the beautiful Spanish language. We feel that his statue, which now stands at the Parque Santander in Madrid, is a symbol of Spain’s recognition of his greatness, his heroism and his contribution to Spanish literature.

Even in the most mundane of matters such as the culinary arts, visitors immediately appreciate Spain’s effect on our cuisine. Such influences in Philippine culture are part of Spain’s legacy to our national identity. They are also manifests of Spain’s greatness and magnanimity.

The lessons of history

The Philippines’ celebration of its centennial is a once-in-a lifetime opportunity for us, and for Spain, also, to open the pages of history for the lessons they may provide.

Indeed, when the centennial celebrations were conceived, there was not a doubt that Spain’s participation in a big way would be both appropriate and meaningful. For how can we celebrate the history of this young nation without the greatest part of it? The more than three centuries of shared history have made Spain and the Philippines bound together for all time, like a permanent bridge that spans our two peoples.

The Philippine centennial, therefore, is not a celebration of battles won or lost, but of heritage and patriotism. It is a celebration of our culture and our ties. It is an opportunity to recall and reflect on the past so that we can chart the direction of our future relations.

Your Majesties, let us take this centennial celebration as an opportunity to foster better understanding between our two nations. Let us create new linkages that will bring the West closer to the East and vice versa. Let us explore new avenues for cooperation in the fields of knowledge and education, technology and business, democracy and governance, and strengthen the cultural links that entwine our two nations. Let our relations reach new heights and cover new dimensions.

Invitation to a toast

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen:

On this note, may I invite all of you to raise your glasses to the health and happiness of their Majesties King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofia, to the well-being of the Spanish people, to closer Philippine-Spain relations and to the joyous celebration of the Philippine centennial.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1998). The continuity of freedom : a democratic and reformist society is our unique competitive advantage. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.