Empowering our barangays

THE LAST TIME I spoke to you as a group was during the Barangay Awards last year, when we honored and gave recognition to the outstanding Punong Barangays and Barangay Kagawad of the Philippines. At that time I emphasized the crucial role of the barangays in our drive toward political stability, peace and order, poverty alleviation and progress, and the goals of “Philippines 2000.”

Today, I reiterate to you my belief that our national vision of Philippines 2000 can only be realized by first attaining peace and progress in our barangays—the smallest political units of our government and the ones nearest and closest to our people’s hearts and minds.

Local autonomy and decentralization

The Local Government Code, now in its third year of implementation, directs you to enforce the laws, maintain public order, ensure the delivery of basic services and promote the general welfare. Your Sanggunian can raise revenues, build and maintain barangay facilities and infrastructure, draw up your budget and authorize expenditures, among others.

The powers of the barangay today under the Code are actually so large, and incomes have dramatically increased that many barangays now have more income than some municipalities. I hear that many city and municipal councilors are in fact not running anymore for re-election; instead they would rather run as Punong Barangay in the next round.

Indeed, the estimate of the total share of the barangays from the internal revenue allotment for this year is P15.2 billion. That is a lot of money in your collective hands. And that means a lot of power to do good—or evil.

Local autonomy and decentralization shall be meaningless and futile unless the barangays themselves use their new powers, responsibilities and resources to solve their own problems, deliver the services to their constituents and respond to their communities’ hopes and aspirations.

Our vision of a peaceful and progressive Philippines calls for unleashing the productive energy of every Filipino, wherever and whoever he is, and mobilizing this energy for local welfare and national progress. And this requires that the barangay government be strengthened and enhanced; meaningful autonomy and decentralization should prevail; and government power be shared, dispensed and exercised out there in the fields and in the streets of every neighborhood.

People empowerment at the barangay

In this assembly, therefore, I urge you to reflect on how you can empower our people in the barangay to help realize my Administration’s vision to improve our quality of life, ensure a better future for our children and restore our beloved Philippines to a prosperous, respected status—which is its rightful place—in the community of nations.

Empowering our people requires that we give the masses a greater voice in the way their local communities and their country are run. It also means giving ordinary Filipinos a bigger share in the tasks of achieving political stability, poverty alleviation, peace and order, progress—the whole range of our national development plans.

People empowerment requires three things.

One, communities must have access to natural, physical and financial resources.

Two, communities must demonstrate their ability to use these resources judiciously and productively so that they can develop their own potentials to the fullest, particularly in the protection, conservation and wise use of our environment.

And three, the capability of communities to organize and manage themselves must be enhanced. Capability building means firming up the community’s social infrastructure—upgrading people’s technical skills and ability to cooperatively manage its own affairs, and to develop its democratic institutions—all these in consonance with our national policies and goals.

In other words, people empowerment means the reorientation and training of ordinary citizens, providing them with the means to be productive and competent participants in our nation’s development over the long term.

Greater responsibility and accountability

As I have talked of your powers and resources, let us not forget that the more power the law vests in you, the greater responsibility and accountability you must possess.

Exercise your power with fairness, with prudence, with competence, with the highest ethical standards and with utmost fidelity to the people’s trust.

The last thing we need in our country is abusive, incompetent and corrupt barangay officials. I have been receiving complaints that some have become petty tyrants and small warlords in their communities. Let me say this as fatherly advice and as Presidential guidance—we will not allow this to happen and we will punish offenders.

As we become unrelenting in our campaign to make our officials more responsible and accountable to their constituencies, so will we continue to support and reward those who have remained true to their duties and commitments.

Being aware that many barangays are still too poor to carry out their basic functions, I hereby direct the Department of Interior and Local Government, in coordination with the Liga ng mga Barangay, to draw up a comprehensive program of assistance to help develop the capabilities of the poorest and most backward barangays.

I also direct Secretary Alunan to coordinate with other Government agencies and submit to my office an action program on this matter within 30 days.

Administration initiatives for the barangays

Let me now announce my Administration’s initiatives for the barangays.

This morning we launch the Piltel-Liga ng mga Barangay telephone program in response to the top problem identified by your league, which is the inadequacy in information dissemination.

Through this nationwide barangay telephone program, residents of our rural areas may soon avail themselves of cellular phones in barangay halls or barangay chairmen’s homes to link up with the rest of the nation.

Recently, I launched the Employment Generation Through Countryside Development Program, a multiagency plan under the Department of Interior and Local Government. This program seeks to generate two million jobs nationwide within the next three years, and create more economic development opportunities in the rural areas. I shall formally inaugurate it countrywide on January 22 in Balayan, Batangas.

Very soon the Community-based Physical Fitness and Sports Program will be kicked off. The plans are being drawn up by the Philippine Sports Commission and the DILG, and the implementation will be done by you in the barangays and the other Local Government units under the coordinating umbrella of the DILG. Through this program, we will ensure that physical fitness, sports development and the spirit of competitiveness become an integral part of every Filipino’s life.

Lastly, I want your sincere participation in the recently announced “Clean and Green” contest for 1994. This is an important means of measuring your ability to mobilize your constituencies so as to make your neighborhoods pleasant places to live in and an attraction to visitors. This is also a gauge of the effectiveness of your support of our Government’s programs, which will serve as a basis for future national assistance in more projects for your communities.

I wish to remind you of your crucial role in our community and national peace and order campaign. Promote unity, solidarity and teamwork among the citizenry, enhance their respect for the law, prevent and deter crime, and support higher authorities in the collection of loose firearms.

Philippines 2000 our battle cry

In summary, my ardent appeal to all of you is that from hereon, all of you should focus your efforts, your minds and your energies on the actualization of our programs toward Philippines 2000.

Philippines 2000 is our battle cry to rally all Filipinos behind the vision and strategy of development and collectively work toward the goals of an improved quality of life for all Filipinos by the year 2000. It is a program to attain political stability and national unity, a positive work ethic by our people, and the commitment of our economic and political elite to the common good. It is a strategy to achieve global competitiveness and people empowerment.

Its goal is to alleviate our individual, family, community and national poverty so that we can truly achieve our shared vision of becoming a newly industrialized country by the turn of the century.

Finally, I congratulate the leadership of the Liga on the ratification of your constitution and by-laws, which I am told you have crafted well. I hope that your Liga will become truly the leadership group and mouthpiece of the barangay—your national advocate for programs for the benefit of your constituents and for the common good. And above all, I want it to become our most active and most effective partner in community development and nation building, leading the march, shoulder to shoulder, with the citizenry: Onward to Philippines 2000!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.