Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines During the Cabinet Strategic Planning Workshop

[Delivered at Heroes’ Hall, Malacañang, December 28, 1993]

Time for takeoff

THIS WORKSHOP comes at a time when we must look forward not just to the beginning of another year but, perhaps more significantly, to the start of the second quarter of my Administration. Thus, although in the course of the day you took stock of what the Government has accomplished during the past year, our looking back to guide us where we are going should really extend to the past one year and a half as the first quarter of my term as President.

By this reckoning, it means we have gone one-fourth of the way and this leaves us three-fourths more to achieve our goals for our country and people.

Laying the building blocks for development

In this initial quarter, we have laid in place the building blocks necessary for sustainable development.

We have restored political stability, and the best manifestation of this is the bright prospect for lasting peace. As we have brought various rebel groups to talk rather than fight, we have in effect created the atmosphere that is most essential for economic growth: reconciliation and unity among our people, and stability in the eyes of international observers.

We have formulated our economic vision and initiated the reforms that should set our country in that direction. We must pursue our priority legislative proposals in close collaboration with Congress. The package of fiscal measures we seek should lead to recovery, if firmly implemented. Industrial centers are rising around the country, and the economy is geared toward regional and global competitiveness.

We have built a national consensus for reform as we have reached out to the legislature for closer working relationships and to the sectors of society for setting national priorities. At the same time, we have been strengthening our democracy as we continue to develop “people empowerment” in both the economic and political sense.

All these have restored optimism in our people and it is our duty to sustain that hope for the future.

Gearing up for an economic surge

Expectations are high that a surge in the economy will take place next year because of the constancy of indicators necessary for steady growth.

We have stabilized the monetary and fiscal situation. Proof of this is the renewed international business and financial confidence as shown by increased actual and prospective investments, as well as an oversubscribed international bond flotation. We may even claim that the Philippine stock market is probably the most bullish in Asia.

We have substantially solved the crippling power crisis and eliminated brownouts that have brought about untold miseries. And our political situation has never been as stable — the rebel groups are coming to the negotiating table.

In order to fulfill the expectations of our people, we must be aggressive and innovative in finding timely measures that prevent as well as solve problems. Let us husband our scarce resources so as to invest adequately in physical and human infrastructure.

We can increase the Government’s resource base by collecting the right taxes on time, particularly from individuals and corporations that have been the most notorious tax evaders. In fact, this can be the most feasible and most practical of all possible solutions. In doing so, we will also send to every citizen the clearest signal about the Ramos Administration’s determination to enforce the law without fear or favor.

Let me enumerate now the main thrusts that we should follow if we want to seize the opportunity for a surge in the economy next year.

Indicative agenda for 1994

First, we have to sustain the gains achieved in the peace process so that we can put an end to our internal armed conflict and in the campaign to uphold the rule of law so that we can reduce to the minimum, if not totally eliminate, corruption and criminality.

Second, we have to attain greater discipline in the management of our fiscal resources, through better coordination of policies, programs and projects and the proper and timely implementation of flagship development plans, streamlining of Government operations, enhanced private-sector participation through various build-operate-transfer schemes, privatization of Government projects and facilities, and further improvements in the overall effort. We also have to encourage more private investments by continuing the policy reforms we have started, and making our export products and services more globally competitive.

Third, we have to upgrade or provide vital infrastructure support in order to mobilize private-sector participation and investments. In this way, we will be able to shift resources for the timely delivery of basic services and for direct intervention in poverty alleviation.

Fourth, we will continue to intensify our environmental protection and conservation programs to ensure that our development is sustainable for future generations.

Fifth and last, we will continue to make the bureaucracy more responsive in terms of service and transparency. Besides streamlining our operations and providing for better conditions, we have to improve the salaries of our employees to boost their morale and increase productivity and efficiency. We have to carry out the devolution program by synchronizing Local Government efforts, as well as its revenue and expenditure programs, with those of the national Government. At the same time, we must enforce stronger accountability of Government officials to include a more vigorous campaign against graft and corruption. We also have to ensure the implementation of reforms in the Government corporate sector.

I have listened with keen interest to the list of priorities each cluster has drawn up. Let me tell you this early that it is against this list that I will measure the performance of every one of you next December.

Still, I expect all of you to continue making your own set of “must-do” tasks throughout the year that are aligned with the top priorities we have set to assure you of getting good marks.

The serious business you engaged in today might have dampened your holiday spirit; but we really do not have much choice. The tasks ahead of us cannot wait and we must set our minds on how best we can perform those tasks before the New Year sets in.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.