Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines On Ulat sa Bayan on the First Quarter of the Presidency

[ Delivered at the Ceremonial Hall, Malacañang, January 3, 1994 ]

Springboard for 1994

SINCE the beginning of my term, I have set my vision for a better life for the ordinary Filipino and a dignified place for our beloved Philippines in the community of nations.

Toward this vision I placed the highest priority on putting our house in order. Together we formulated a social pact to speed up development—one that would enable us to enter the coming millennium as Asia’s next newly industrialized country. I initiated programs and reforms in five critical areas to set our course toward that direction.

First of all, we had to establish political stability. We had to create the atmosphere conducive to economic growth: cooperation and teamwork at the level of the national leadership; reconciliation and unity among our people; peace and order; and internal security nationwide.

Laying a firm political foundation

Today, we can claim that we have laid down a firm political foundation for sustained socioeconomic development through our accomplishments in four areas: the peace process, a social pact for development, tough actions against warlordism and criminality, and the reimposition of the death penalty.

The prospects for a comprehensive and lasting peace have never been so bright as now since the secessionist movement and the Communist insurgency began a quarter century ago.

The series of talks between the Government and the Moro National Liberation Front has resulted in the temporary cessation of hostilities in the South. With the resumption of the negotiations in Sulu recently, I am optimistic that this will lead to a mutually agreeable settlement so we can finally have peace and unity in Mindanao.

Our talks with the military rebels have progressed to the substantive phase. I am confident that this trend shall continue and the issues raised by both sides will be resolved to the satisfaction of all.

Government’s initiatives toward the Communist guerrillas have also progressed, although many substantive issues remain to be resolved. But both sides are in constant touch, working out the preliminaries for formal negotiations.

A national consensus for reform and unity

By reaching out to the legislature for closer and better working relationships, and to the sectors of society for setting national priorities, we have built a national consensus for reform and political unity. Our dialogues and consultations ailminated in the holding of a multisectoral People’s Economic Summit and the forging of a Social Pact for Empowered Economic Development (SPEED). The closer-than-usual cooperation between the executive and the legislature resulted in the passage of 12 out of 19 priority Administration measures needed to push the country forward.

At the same time that we were talking peace and building consensus, we initiated bolder moves against criminality.

Through the Presidential Anti-Crime Commission under Vice-President Joseph Estrada, we succeeded in breaking up many notorious syndicates involved in murder, kidnap for ransom, bank robbery and carnapping.

Under “Oplan Paglalansag,” we disbanded some 450 private armed groups and collected more than 24,000 loose firearms, most of them still serviceable.

Our drive against criminality also netted several abusive officials who flouted the law with their money, goons and influence. Some mayors who had become local tyrants, as well as some high-ranking military and police officials, have been haled to court to account for their misdeeds.

More than anything else, the restoration of political stability has enhanced the economic climate. Today the Philippines is perceived to be back on its feet, back in business, at the gateway to Asia and the Pacific.

Renewed confidence in the economy

Interest, inflation and foreign-exchange rates have remained stable. We have regained the confidence of the international finance community as evidenced by oversubscribed international bond floats by the Government and private sectors. According to Cable News Network (CNN), the Philippine stock market is now the most bullish in Asia with a performance of more than 150 percent. The signs that our financial stability has been restored have been recognized by the World Bank and financial and investment firms such as Salomon Brothers and Merrill Lynch.

Advance reports point to real GNP growth in 1993 of 2.5 percent, and still going up.

Despite a record 32 destructive typhoons in 1993, agriculture and fishery production established a growth rate of 4.7 percent. And there was a decline in the country’s unemployment rate from 10.2 percent during the first seven months of 1992 to 9.4 percent for the same period in 1993.

The improvement in the economy last year can be attributed to a number of factors.

We established an independent monetary authority, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, and pursued liberalization of the financial sector and our banking policies.

We achieved functional unification of the Manila and Makati stock exchanges under the Philippine Stock Exchange, making available large sums of capital funds for investment.

We broadened the tax effort while reorganizing and computerizing the Bureau of Internal Revenue to improve its operational efficiency.

We aggressively pursued the development of regional growth centers nationwide, led by Subic Bay’s well-preserved industrial infrastructure and ecology and highly skilled volunteer workers, and promoted economic growth in the countryside, outside Metro Manila.

We encouraged small and medium enterprises and livelihood projects by cooperatives, and provided credit support for the little entrepreneurs through the Land Bank of the Philippines and the Small Business Guarantee and Finance Corporation, thus fueling business activity at the family and community level.

We pursued a policy of diplomacy for economic development in order to promote Philippine products and services, and to mobilize external resources for investment, trade and tourism. The East ASEAN growth area, centered in Davao City, is the result of our joint endeavors with our ASEAN neighbors.

Resolved power crisis and other infrastructure inadequacies

Perhaps the single most important factor that contributed to our economic recovery is the substantial easing of the power crisis.

We will continue installing new power capacity for our long-term requirements and speed up the development of indigenous power sources, especially geothermal, coal, hydroelectric and natural gas, so as to lower eventually the cost of power to consumers.

Similarly, we carried out the infrastructure program, which provides access to regional growth centers, tourism development sites and agro-industrial areas.

We opened up the telecommunications sector through Executive Order 59, which requires interconnection among backbone and local operators, and Executive Order 109, which mandates new players in the industry to provide local telephone services, even in remote areas.

We built or improved some 1,000 kilometers of national roads, 10,440 meters of bridges and 115 roadways. We started the improvement of arterial roads connecting the growth centers in Mindanao and the Metro Manila skyways project, to include the return of the management of the Metro Manila toll roads to the Philippine National Construction Company for more efficient maintenance and operations.

We started the upgrading of our rail transport through the PNR mainline rehabilitation and commuter line projects. We pursued the implementation of the Light Rail Transit 3 project to alleviate traffic congestion in Metro Manila.

We completed the development of facilities in 24 provincial ports and installed 25 additional lighthouses nationwide to ensure safety of sea travel. We speeded up the modernization of our air navigational facilities in Subic, Cebu, Davao, Zamboanga and the Ninoy Aquino International Airport.

Enhanced and protected environment

In line with the Philippine strategy for sustainable development and our commitments under Agenda 21 of the 1992 Rio Summit, we institutionalized mechanisms for environmental conservation and protection.

Our efforts against environmental degradation were bold and unprecedented. We closed Smokey Mountain as a garbage dumpsite and adopted a national plan for waste management to guide Local Government units in preparing and carrying out their programs.

We initiated a Clean and Green campaign, to be highlighted by a nationwide contest to determine the cleanest—and dirtiest—Local Government units in 1994. We started cleaning up the Pasig River and the Laguna Lake area, heightened awareness on zero waste management in our cities and capital towns, and encouraged the use of lead-free gasoline toward cleaner air.

We adopted the National Integrated Protected Areas system to conserve and protect our ecologically important areas, especially watersheds, mangroves, coastal and bay marine preserves and national parks.

We pioneered the conversion of expired timber license agreements into community-run reforestation cooperatives, as in Eastern Mindanao. We intensified efforts to prosecute illegal loggers and to reforest denuded areas. So far the lives of some 222,000 upland dwellers have been uplifted through integrated social forestry programs.

We have started to develop some 450 agrarian reform communities and pushed agrarian reform at a pace faster than that of the two previous administrations combined.

Streamlined bureaucracy for greater responsiveness

The bureaucracy’s organization and operations were continually streamlined to make it more responsive to the needs of the people and serve as an effective machinery for development. The measures we have carried out reduced the available positions in the national Government by 4 percent, or roughly 42,000 positions, a reversal of the 9 percent natural historical growth rate a year. The strict implementation of the attrition law generated savings from personal services amounting to almost P2.0 billion.

The Local Government Code devolved powers and functions to Local Government units, including personnel, materials, funds and other assets. The Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao changed hands through relatively peaceful elections and is now geared toward development and reform.

The fact-finding committee on behest loans under the Presidential Commission on Good Government completed the investigation of 419 cases, of which 133 were classified as having a positive basis for eventual prosecution. Of these, 75 have been transmitted to the Ombudsman for preliminary investigation.

At the bottom line of all our efforts was this paramount concern: improving the lives of our people.

Bottom line: poverty alleviation

Our poverty alleviation programs focused on protecting our people from material deprivation while generating jobs and assuring steady incomes in the countryside.

We gave special attention to the depressed communities and the 19 poorest provinces through the Presidential Council for Countryside Development. Of equal importance is the Presidential Commission to Fight Poverty, which promotes opportunity and self-reliance among neighborhood groups, households, families and the marginalized sectors that are among the poorest of the poor.

We used the President’s Social Fund to support 700 priority projects in depressed areas worth P350 million. This went to schoolbuildings, potable water systems, livelihood projects and training programs.

We emphasized credit delivery in the countryside, primarily through cooperatives, and encouraged Grameen-type lending programs. With the cooperation of most of the members of Congress, we pursued the implementation of the Land Bank’s “5-25-70” program to retain and leverage more funds for countryside projects.

To address the issue of the housing shortage, the Government’s shelter program made a commitment to build 1.2 million units by 1998, with financial assistance for developers from the private sector. A determined move was started to relocate squatters into more wholesome resettlement areas. A dramatic example of political will was the transfer out of the PNB-GSIS financial area on Roxas Boulevard of more than 34,000 squatters to the Paliparan resettlement site in Dasmariñas, Cavite.

We have carried out high-impact and innovative national health-care programs with special emphasis on disease-prevention such as national immunization against common diseases, and the accessing of micronutrients to enrich the common tao ‘s diet.

Global competitiveness

To make our products globally competitive and our workforce more productive, we carried out reforms to open the economy further, allowing productive forces to develop fully, and democratizing structures and systems.

We took measures to liberalize and deregulate such critical areas as telecommunications, foreign-exchange transactions, finance and banking, education, and industry. Government’s role was minimized in areas that could be more effectively handled by the private sector.

We pursued privatization aggressively, resulting in the sale of large Government assets of their substantial components such as PHILSECO and Petron. We have intensified the campaign to dismantle monopolies and cartels injurious to consumer welfare in manufacturing, in the financial system, in the service industries and wherever else they are found.

We prepared our industries for global competition by realigning our foreign-policy thrusts toward economic growth. Similarly, we initiated the progressive reduction of tariffs and quantitative restrictions on imports, the liberalization of the entry of foreign investments and the creation of a more liberal trade regime as reflected in our support for the ASEAN Free Trade Area and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

All of the foreign visits I made to our neighbors in Asia and the Pacific, to include the United States, served to recapture the strategic role of the Philippines as a gateway to this dynamic and fast-growing region. These visits strengthened bilateral relations comprehensively, with special attention to increasing levels of bilateral trade and investment.

Let me outline now the main thrust that I intend to push in 1994, so as to seize the opportunity for a sustained surge in the economy in the years ahead. This year, Government operations will be characterized by building, peace-making and modernizing. On the other hand, action, problem-solving and innovation will be the yardsticks I hereby set for Government performance at all levels, in all departments and agencies.

Five major commitments the Government will fulfill in 1994:

Indicative agenda for 1994

First, we will protect the gains achieved in the peace process toward insurgents so that we can finally put an end to internal armed conflict. As a parallel effort, we will intensify the campaign to uphold the rule of law so that we can reduce to the minimum criminality and corruption, with those in officialdom—the scalawags in uniform and rogue officials—as priority targets.

We will maintain industrial peace and take better care of our overseas contract workers.

Second, we will impose greater discipline on the management of our fiscal resources, through better coordination of policies, programs and projects. We will focus on the thorough and timely implementation of flagship programs and projects, the streamlining of Government operations, the enhancement of private-sector participation by way of various build-operate-transfer schemes and privatization of Government projects and facilities, and the further improvement of our tax effort. We will encourage more private investments by continuing the structural reforms we have started, and make our exports and other industries more globally competitive.

Third, we will provide vital infrastructure support in order to mobilize private-sector investment. In this way, we will be able to shift more Government resources toward the provision of basic services and direct intervention in the reduction of poverty. For this purpose, I once more appeal to Congress to give priority attention to the proposed new banking law, the amendments to the build-operate-transfer law to authorize direct negotiation for large infrastructure projects, and the liberalization of the Foreign Investments Act to open up new investment areas.

Fourth, we will continue to carry out our environmental enhancement, conservation and protection programs to ensure that our development will be sustainable for the benefit of future generations. The programs will encompass our land, sea and air environment as well as our biodiverse ecology.

The flagship system: effective use of resources

Fifth, we will continue to make the bureaucracy more responsive, more transparent and more service-oriented. Besides streamlining our operations, we will upgrade morale and welfare programs for public servants to increase their productivity and efficiency. We will firmly carry out the devolution program under the Local Government Code by synchronizing Local Government efforts, as well as its revenue and expenditure programs, with those of the national Government. At the same time, we will enforce greater accountability and self-reliant performance by Government officials at all levels. We will ensure the implementation of reforms in Government corporations.

One final word about our 1994 program.

To actualize, at the least expense, our shared goals as determined in our recent multisectoral People’s Economic Summit, the executive branch has devised a new system whereby public expenditures will be given priority so that our scarce resources will be devoted to programs and projects that will have the most favorable impact on the economy, on the alleviation of poverty and on the delivery of basic services.

I refer to the “flagship” system which the Cabinet adopted during its year-end deliberations on our social services and economic mobilization thrusts for 1994, particularly the Core Public Investment Program (CPIP).

We will select projects from this program, based on certain key criteria, that should be completed ahead of the others. These projects will be given full budgetary support in 1994 to ensure their expeditious implementation.

Necessarily, the flagship projects we will champion are those that are “doable,” with the highest impact and widest public need for their completion. These could be in housing, communications, schoolbuildings, transportation, water conservation and supply, highways, power, agricultural productivity, irrigation, environmental protection and other high-priority activities in the social sector. Flagship projects are considered the “first among equals” of the 400 or so projects under the CPIP.

Flagship projects

From all key indications, we can expect a significant upturn of the economy of 2.5 percent GNP growth for 1993. That should be enough to set the stage for more solid growth of at least 4.5 percent by the end of 1994. We expect this growth to pick up steadily year after year as we approach the year 2000.

I have listed the following as flagship projects, among others:

North and South Expressways to include skyways and supporting Light Rail Transit and railroad systems,

Metro Manila tollways, including the C-5 circumferential road,

Metro Manila-Clark-Subic expressways,

Development of Subic and Clark bases,

Batangas City port,

Northern Luzon development area and connecting highways, seaports and airports,

Marikina-Infanta (Quezon) corridor,

Angat-Umiray transbasin water project,

Pampanga floodway project,

Bicol tourism projects,

Eastern Visayas rural air service,

Leyte geothermal power interconnections to other islands,

Cebu-Bohol integrated area development,

Panay Agro-Industrial Center,

Integrated steel mill project in Northern Mindanao,

Mindanao arterial roads, to include the Marawi City-Cotabato City highway,

Zamboanga industrial estate and,

The East ASEAN growth area centered along the Davao-South Cotabato-General Santos corridor.

In the first quarter of my term, we put in place the elements necessary for national development to take off. Because of these, expectations are high that a surge in the economy will take place this year.

We have gone one-fourth of the way and we still have three-fourths more to go in our uphill marathon. Many pitfalls will have to be overcome. But I am confident that our collective accomplishments and reforms during the past year and a half have restored optimism and pride in the Filipino. It is our common duty now to work together to realize that vision and hope in the near future.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library