Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines On the launching of the Department of Agriculture’s Medium-term Development Plan

[Released on May 3, 1993]

Agriculture 2000

THIS is an opportune time for me to reiterate to you our vision to be a newly industrializing country by the turn of the century. My recent visits to our more prosperous neighbors in Asia confirm my belief that we should vigorously pursue that vision through the seven growth strategies that these economic dragons have followed.

First is the commitment to a “planned free-market economy”; second is giving the people a stake in development; third is industrializing from a base of agricultural productivity; fourth is encouraging a high saving rate; fifth is developing an educated workforce; sixth is fostering export industries; and seventh is building a solid infrastructure.

Two pillars of industrialization

Each of these seven strategic keys of our Medium-term Development Plan is included in the theme of your celebration of Farmers’ and Fishermen’s Month. We all know that the two pillars of successful industrialization are trade and agriculture.

The theme of your celebration, “Kalakalan at Sakahan: Lakas ng Sambayanan” , confirms this seven-point strategy I have just enumerated. This shows the Government’s commitment to the welfare of the farmers and fishermen.

We will help you increase your capacity to produce in a way that would ensure higher incomes for you and your families to strike a balance between abundant supply of goods and the resultant decline in market prices.

The Medium-term Agricultural Development Plan

I am very happy that besides today’s scheduled dialogue, we are also launching here the Medium-term Agricultural Development Plan. Guided by this vision toward a stable and prosperous nation, we aim to push agricultural development as fast as we can. Because we are aware of the needs and potentials of the regions, we have developed the concept of key development areas.

I congratulate the Department of Agriculture for this innovative approach that we are carrying out for the first time.

In each key development area we have determined what type of produce is best suited to the soil, climate, culture and markets there. Following this program, I am sure that our farms and fisheries will be more productive. With an increase in productivity, we will assure our countrymen not only of their basic necessities but also of surplus products for export. These products will be competitive in their quality and market price abroad.

Following these plans, especially that of the Grains Production Enhancement Program, we believe that approximately 1.9 million hectares of rice and corn will be sufficient to meet the needs of our people. At present about 5 million hectares are devoted to rice and corn. Hence, with this program, we will be able to revert about 3.1 million hectares of land as pasture or as land that can be used for export products or for industry.

The Medium-term Livestock Development Program

Another concern of ours is the Medium-term Livestock Development Program, which will be carried out in the “key livestock development areas” of 37 provinces. This program aims to stop the decrease in our population of cows and carabaos, and to stimulate their growth. At the same time, we would like to boost the dairy and meat-processing industries, as well as increase the production of pigs, chickens, goats and sheep.

In fishing, we also have our “key fisheries development areas.” The Department of Agriculture, through its fisheries sector program, will rehabilitate and revitalize these fishing areas, especially on our coasts. The program aims to lessen the burden of our fishermen, improve their productivity, conserve our maritime natural resources and assure our countrymen of a continuous and progressive fishing industry.

Let’s work together

These plans and programs all look good. But we will not succeed without cooperation.

The primary responsibility of the Department of Agriculture is the empowerment of our farmers, following the people empowerment philosophy of my Administration. I would like to empower you, our farmers and fishermen, through my support to cooperatives and farmers’ organizations. We hope that by these means, your capabilities will be strengthened for acquiring sufficient capital, markets and facilities for storage, processing and farm-to-market delivery.

Before we begin the open forum, may I again request your cooperation and participation in our programs. Together, let us move agriculture forward and achieve our dream of a progressive, prosperous and stable society.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1993). A call to duty : citizenship and civic responsibility in a third world democracy. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.