Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At the Ninety-sixth Anniversary and the Gawad Mabini Award ceremony of the Department of Foreign Affairs

[Delivered in Malacañang, Manila, July 11, 1994]

In the frontline of peace

THE FOREIGN SERVICE has required the best of the Filipino, and could count the best Filipinos among its ranks.

No better proof of this exists than the fact that, in spite of Secretary Romulo’s protestations, I have pirated half a dozen of you to work for me.

I continue to count on the Department of Foreign Affairs to carry on with the work of the nation’s diplomacy with the energy, vibrancy and vitality that are demanded in today’s conduct of international relations.

Old alliances, new friends

I have made our shared vision of “Philippines 2000” the driving force of my Administration. Its success will depend largely on how well we can seize the challenges and opportunities that confront our nation in this fast-changing world—a dynamic world increasingly and rapidly being transformed by free, open and competitive economic forces.

Thus I have pursued a vigorous program of economic diplomacy, to gain for us the goodwill and the support of new friends the world over, while revitalizing old and historic alliances.

You, the men and women of the foreign service, have a crucial role to play in ensuring our success. The Filipino people look to you to bring to our friends and neighbors around the world the news that the Philippines is back in business in the part of the Asia-Pacific region.

Our people rely on your creative intellect to craft the responsive strategies to safeguard our nation and bring stability in our region in these uncertain but hopeful times.

The Gawad Mabini is a symbol of our country’s gratitude in recognition of the men and women who have rendered distinguished service to the Republic of the Philippines in international relations. Today I have just conferred the rank of Dakilang Kamanong on four of your illustrious leaders who are worthy of emulation and from whom we can find inspiration in their achievements, their self-sacrifice, their love of country and their dedication to Government service.

Sterling examples

In former President Diosdado Macapagal, a man who rose from humble beginnings, you shall find the character of eloquence, integrity and astuteness, characteristics which you, being the primary negotiators for our country’s international agreements, must imbibe.

From former Secretary of Foreign Affairs Narciso R. Ramos’s example, whose vision and significant contributions to the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, as one of its founding fathers, continue to guide us in forging closer ties with our neighbors to this day, should inculcate in you an acute sensitivity to the needs of our beloved Philippines.

The sterling examples of Ambassadors Hortencio Brillantes and Narciso G. Reyes, who consistently led the cause of Third World political and economic interests at various United Nations forums in Geneva and New York, should motivate you to pursue the highest standards of excellence in the conduct of Philippine diplomacy.

With these high expectations, you must continue to work harder than you ever have—for the best is yet to come. You must persist in giving your best wherever you may be.

I know that you have to perform difficult, sometimes back-breaking, sometimes even risky missions, often over long hours, with little material reward.

Our brethren who find themselves in alien lands put their trust in you to protect and assist them at all times. As they look to the outside world, the Filipino people depend on you for help, comfort and guidance.

The tasks within

At the same time, you will need to perform many tasks within the Department Foreign Affairs to ensure a consistently high quality of service and performance.

This will require, for example, our insistence on fairness in foreign posting and assignments, for all kinds of personnel and appointees.

We may also need to reorient and update our thinking, to uphold our new priorities in development diplomacy. As we emphasize economics and science and technology, among other things, we should ensure that the DFA’s best qualified people are assigned to these concerns.

The training programs of the Foreign Service Institute should focus on tools and networks, and not just on facts which can be self-taught.

In other words, the DFA should reflect in its programs and policies our most urgent priorities and concerns, if we are to claim our rightful place in the community and progressive nations, where the Filipino should hold his head high.

The award of the Gawad Mabini , as I have said, is given to deserving officers and employees of the Department of Foreign Affairs, as well as to Filipinos who have rendered distinguished service or promoted our country’s interests at home or abroad. This year’s awardees deserve our deepest appreciation and gratitude.

To all others in the DFA, I say: as well as you have done your jobs, I have no doubt that you can do better and do more.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1995). From growth to modernization : raising the political capacity and strengthening the social commitments of the Philippine State. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.