Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At the “Galing Pook” awarding ceremonies sponsored by the Asian Institute of Management in cooperation with the Local Government Academy (LGU-DILG), the Ford Foundation, the Canada Fund and the Asia Foundation

[Delivered in Malacañang, Manila, July 17, 1996]

Rewarding excellence in local governance

SINCE ITS INCEPTION in 1993, the “Galing Pook” program has evolved into a coveted and prestigious award for excellence in local governance. It has challenged each Local Government unit (LGU) to initiate programs that improve the quality of life of its constituents.

This year, we are gathered once more to pay tribute to the paragons of performance and resourcefulness at the local level. I am of course referring to the winners of the Galing Pook program. Now on its third year, it singles out programs and projects of LGUs that demonstrate creative use of the powers devolved to them through the Local Government Code of 1991.

Five Ds of the Administration

The 40 winners over the past two years have received national and international recognition for their effectiveness and resourcefulness. Some of you may recall that during the 1995 Galing Pook awards, I defined the five Ds of the Ramos Administration to lift our people and the nation to a higher quality of life as follows—deregulation, decentralization, devolution, democratization and development.

Today may be an appropriate occasion to take stock of where we are now concerning these five Ds, just as another set of outstanding LGU programs are accorded the distinction of being among the best in local administration. Their achievements convey the essence of the Local Government Code, which is genuine local autonomy.

Local autonomy is working in the Philippines. I have seen how our efforts at the grassroots to bring Government closer to the people has resulted in faster countrywide development. Also our five Ds have provided an increasingly favorable profile of the Philippines in the international community. One of the key attractions drawing investors to the Philippines is our empowered local communities.

Breaking the shackles of the past

I have seen how the outlook of many of our Local Government units has widened beyond parochial and narrow concerns. Some of them have set their sights in finding a niche in the international market, strongly supporting one of the key pillars of “Philippines 2000” which calls for people’s economic and social empowerment and our competitiveness in the international arena.

This is what the peace process in the southern Philippines is all about. To empower ordinary Filipinos—not just Christians, not just Muslims, not just indigenous people, but especially the poor, regardless of religion, ethnic origin, political affiliation and ideology. The varied opinions on this strategic program for peace to ensure a brighter future reflect the centrality and complexity of the problem we face in Mindanao. Indeed, I appreciate the depth of feeling of those who have expressed concern about the change dawning on our southern regions.

But I also fervently believe we have now a historic opportunity to achieve peace in our southern regions, to mold lasting unity among our people, and to ensure our nation’s sustainable development. For the first time in four hundred years, we have the chance to turn our collective talents and energies to the work of peace and sustained progress.

All of us should strive to seize this opportunity—to break the shackles of the past and create new hope for the future.

Much that is being said against the agreement (the so-called Davao points of consensus) arises from misunderstanding or inadequate information of what it explicitly provides for and envisions. Part of this opposition is also being fed by preconceived biases or hidden fears owing to ethnic or religious differences.

The main remedy to the situation is accurate and timely information leading to better understanding of the issues.

Let me therefore briefly bring to your attention exactly what the agreement states and provides for.

As described in the document arising from the eighth meeting of representatives of our Government and representatives of the Moro National Liberation Front at Davao City on June 21-23, 1996, the panels reached key “points of consensus” for a peaceful settlement of the conflict. The agreement in the eighth meeting calls for implementation in two phases. During Phase 1, the primary points of consensus are the following:

What the agreement provides

First, the agreement calls for the establishment of a Southern Philippines Council for Peace and Development—a council that will principally promote, monitor and coordinate peace and development efforts in the South.

The Council will be composed of a chairman, a vice chairman, and three deputies representing the Muslims, the Christians and the lumad , or indigenous peoples—all of whom will be appointed by the President. This Council is not a political governing authority; it has no police power or law-enforcement authority; it has no separate juridical personality; it is a transitory administrative entity under the control and supervision of the President of the Republic of the Philippines.

Second, the agreement calls for the establishment of a consultative assembly—a forum for consultation on issues and the recommendation of policies and programs to the President. The assembly is not a lawmaking body.

The assembly will be made up of 81 members, composed of the Council chairman, the governor and the vice governor of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), the 14 governors and all the city mayors in the area, 44 members from the MNLF, and 10 members from various sectors recommended by non-Government organizations and people’s organizations. The tenure of the Council and the assembly is three years.

Third, the Local Government units in the area, including the ARMM, shall continue to exist and exercise their functions in accordance with existing laws. Thus, the functions, powers and responsibilities of Local Government units and their officials will not be prejudiced, and their local autonomy under the Local Government Code of 1991 will not be diminished.

A zone of peace and development

Fourth, there shall be established a special zone of peace and development in southern Philippines in the 14 provinces and all the cities therein covered by the Tripoli Agreement. Within the next three years, these areas shall be the focus of intensive peace and development efforts. Public and private investments shall be channeled to such areas to spur economic activities, enhance social equity and uplift the conditions of the people therein. It is to be noted here that no new area of autonomy is declared in the document. No new autonomous government is formed or established, but only a description of an area where peace and development efforts will be focused and given priority.

Phase 2 provides for the establishment of a new autonomous government:

First, through an act of Congress amending or repealing the ARMM Organic Act of 1989 (R. A. 6734), a new plan for regional autonomy will be submitted for approval by the people in the affected provinces and cities within two years from the establishment of the Council. The area of autonomy shall then consist of the provinces and cities that vote to join the new autonomous region.

Second, a regional security force for the autonomous regional government will be established as provided by the amendatory law. This organization will be composed of the existing Philippine National Police units in the area of autonomy, qualified MNLF elements, and other residents in the area who may be recruited into the force.

A rush of comment

These are the key provisions. The rest of the text concerns definitions of the powers of instrumentalities created, and details on the implementation of initiatives.

I would like to underline one more point that has often been forgotten in the rush of comment on the agreement. The powers and functions of the Council and the consultative assembly are explicitly defined as “derivative and extensions of the powers of the President”

This means that the powers or functions to be exercised by the Council and the assembly are only those that could be within the authority of the President to give. Otherwise stated, these bodies cannot possess a power or function that is beyond the authority of the President to delegate, or which only Congress by law can grant to an agency.

Necessarily, to reach this accord, both sides had to accept the spirit of reconciliation and of give-and-take. Without such accommodation—as we know well from all negotiations to end protracted conflict, here at home and around the world, no end to strife is possible.

The idea of autonomy for certain parts of our country has for some time now been recognized by our people. It is embodied in the Constitution. And it has been tested, on one hand, in the creation of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao and on the other hand in the rejection of the proposed autonomy of the Cordilleras in Northern Luzon.

What is specifically new in this agreement is, first, the platform for democratic pluralism under which citizens in the affected areas will choose or not choose to be part of a future autonomous region.

A confidence-building period

The second new element is the transition phase of three years, which calls for the establishment of the Council before the holding of a plebiscite on inclusion in or exclusion from the proposed autonomous region and the creation of a new ARMM. This transition phase is essentially a confidence-building period for the MNLF, for Muslims, for Christians and for lumad in consonance with our democratic system.

The Council and this transition period are what some find objectionable and disturbing. Many reckless things have been said—such as that the Government has installed Mr. Nur Misuari and the MNLF as virtual overlords of the provinces and cities covered by the agreement; that the Council is a provisional government; that existing Local Governments will henceforth be under its control.

None of these things are true. They exist neither in the letter nor in the spirit of the transitory accord. To repeat, the Council will serve as a coordinating arm for peace and development efforts in the affected areas. Its powers and functions derive from—and are extensions of—the powers of the President.

As for the consultative assembly, which the accord also envisions, it will be a forum for the discussion of issues affecting the region. It will have no power to legislate or to make laws that Local Governments must follow.

Some would prefer, of course, that no Council, no consultative assembly, no transition period for autonomous government are established at all. But this is the prescription of the status quo and therefore of inaction and continued tension and poverty. The preachers of the status quo would prefer the certainties of conflict now—to the possibilities of peace and development in the not-too-distant future.

I increasingly note Local Governments beginning to compete among themselves, striving to become more entrepreneurial, entering into partnerships with the private sector through build-operate-transfer arrangements, and even floating bonds to improve their capacities to deliver basic services to the people.

This proves that they are now developing a new ethos, a new face—Local Governments that are more responsive and proactive, and certainly innovative. These are some of the qualities that distinguish the Galing Pook winners whom we honor today.

A new ethos for Local Governments

The sustained implementation of the Local Government Code of 1991 depends on the consistent efforts of Local Government units—the executives, legislators and their staff—to build their capabilities and strengthen their institutions.

Galing Pook gives impetus to the empowerment of Local Government units. It opens to them avenues of improving and introducing programs within the framework of the Local Government Code. Winners of the Galing Pook program are exemplars of effective local government. They demonstrate to the nation the best practices being done at the local level. Let us look at these programs:

– Sustainable Food Security in the province of Davao del Norte, headed by Gov. Prospero Amatong . This program provides food and education on the techniques of increasing crop productivity. The program equips farmers with the skills to manage their businesses, trains them in new technologies, gives them access to equipment and facilities for the processing and storage of crops. It has improved irrigation, flood control, reforestation and watershed development, road and drainage systems construction and pest management.

– Municipal Infirmary and Health Assistance Program of San Miguel Bohol, led by Mayor Segundino Hencianos . San Miguel’s infirmary has a 10-bed capacity and is equipped with modern hospital facilities and a laboratory. It serves an average of 100 patients from the town each month. Moreover, the municipality provides financial assistance to residents with impaired health.

– Oplan Linis of Puerto Princesa City, initiated by Mayor Edward Hagedorn . This program has earned for the city the distinction of being the cleanest and greenest in the country for the past two consecutive years. Oplan Linis has enhanced Puerto Princesa City’s attraction to visitors and tourists.

– Agora Mobile Street School for Street Children, Mayor Pablo Magtajas of Cagayan de Oro City . This initiative has reduced the number of street children in the city. Children who used to wander the streets in search of income have been able to rise above poverty through education.

– Lote Para sa Mahirap, Mayor Rogelio Debulgado of San Carlos City . This unusual housing program aims to provide squatter residents of San Carlos City with affordable lots that have access to basic utilities. The lots can be acquired on five-year installment.

– Eco-Walk of Baguio City,Mayor Mauricio Domogan . This innovative learning program, originally designed for children, has also attracted the participation of adults. It is a cost-efficient program that promotes value formation directed at arresting environmental decay. It takes advantage of local culture— muyong — to further its objectives, and promotes volunteerism. It also encourages genuine partnership between the Government and the private sector.

– Marine Conservation of San Salvador Island, Mayor Jesus Edora of Masinloc, Zambales . The town of Masinloc has carried out an effective marine resource management plan on San Salvador Island by developing institutional capabilities and encouraging community development. It initiated an erosion-control project that was replicated in neighboring fishing communities.

– Naga City Computerization Program, promulgated by Mayor Jesse Robredo . This capability-building program answers the need for streamlined operations within the city government, a dependable database that fosters more effective decision-making and a more responsive and competitive city administration.

– Alay Paglingap, Gov. Roberto Pagdanganan of the province of Bulacan . This is an effort to upgrade and promote public service and community cooperation through bayanihan . It focuses on providing solutions to problems in health and nutrition, population and institution building.

– Santa Maria Ecological Waste Management of Santa Maria, Bulacan, initiated by Mayor Renila Nicolas . This program features a unified effort among the sectors of the town aimed at ensuring a safer and cleaner environment at reasonable cost. The program focuses on the reduction, recovery and proper disposal of waste. The town set up a self-sustaining waste processing and recycling plant which processes waste to produce fertilizer. The program promotes agricultural productivity, soil conditioning and organic farming in the town.

Raising the quality of life

These programs respond to the basic thrust of the Social Reform Agenda, which is to empower the basic sectors. In all instances, leadership, cooperation, empowerment and determination are the essential elements needed to raise the people’s quality of life.

I commend Galing Pook for paying tribute to outstanding programs of the Local Government units and consider it a worthy endeavor that must be continued. I am therefore proud to announce that the Office of the President supports the establishment of a Galing Pook Foundation and will contribute generously to the endowment fund to sustain the momentum of the program.

I commend the organizers of the Galing Pook awards program—the Local Government Academy of the Department of the Interior and Local Government, which drew up the Integrated Capability Building Program (ICBP) for Local Government units. You will recall that I issued Proclamation 284 in 1994 adopting the ICBP. The Galing Pook awards program has now become a key feature of the ICBP.

I also thank the Asian Institute of Management for doing such a professional job in managing the selection process. I have been briefed about the tremendous amount of work that goes behind the rigorous selection process. The Institute deserves our appreciation for lending its professionalism and prestige to the program.

On our way to a better Philippines

The national selection committee and the screeners who work as volunteers should also be commended for an excellent job and the long hours they have devoted to the selection process. In particular, I commend former Congressman and also peace process adviser Ka Oca Santos, who himself visited many of the Galing Pook entries to validate and see for himself the local innovations. I am happy that the father of the Local Government Code of 1991, former Senator Aquilino Pimentel, remains a key figure in the national search for excellence among LGUs. Let us also not forget to acknowledge the support of our international partners such as the Ford Foundation, the Canada Fund and the Asia Foundation.

Finally, I thank all our Local Governments, and you, the winners, whom we honor today for fulfilling your role—that of proving, through our five Ds of decentralization: deregulation, decentralization, devolution, democratization and development, that we are well on our way to a better Philippines!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1997). Leadership for the 21st century : our labors today will shape our country’s future. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.