A new spirit, a new unity

Our gathering this morning is a symbol of our unity and solidarity with all Filipino workers both here and abroad.

The difference from past celebrations is noticeable in our collective commemoration of Labor Day this year.

Perhaps, for the first time, we are not focused solely on the bundle of benefits that workers usually demand, which the Government then addresses in return.

Although we do not completely dismiss this tradition, our occasion today centers on the efforts and initiatives launched with the full trust of workers as their contribution to our “Philippines 2000.”

It can be said that the workers’ new trust in their own capabilities is well-founded. Throughout my term of the past twenty-two months, we have diligently and tirelessly built the foundations for the continuous development and progress of the country.

It is with this realization that yesterday I signed a proclamation declaring the first week of May Labor Week. The week shall be highlighted by activities supportive of worker empowerment, farmers’ and fishers’ cooperatives, and industrial peace.

The necessary economic and institutional reforms were also undertaken and will continue to be implemented—such as privatization, liberalization of trade, more progressive and effective tax measures, dismantling of monopolies, tighter control over government spending, price stabilization, strengthening of cooperatives, and bureaucratic responsiveness.

In addition, we also focused on physical and social infrastructure. We have resolved the power crisis. Likewise, we launched health reforms and increased social and welfare benefits.

A national jobs program

We have also adopted a national jobs program. Along with it, we will continue to strengthen training and counseling services—including technical assistance to promote livelihood and self-employment.

The plan aims to create jobs at the rate of 1.1 million yearly. It intends to reduce unemployment from 9.3 percent to 6.3 percent; and underemployment from 19.3 percent to 13.8 percent by 1998.

With the reforms already in place and our continuing commitment to work even harder, our economy should grow by at least 4.5 percent this year and by around 6 percent by 1995.

Our people are sought out as skilled workers by foreign countries. All over the world, Filipino workers are preferred for their skills and discipline in the workplace, as well as for their good manners and unusually quick and good-natured integration into their host communities.

The Filipino overseas worker has become one of the true heroes of economic recovery and national development. Your contributions help lift our troubled economy and lay the foundation for future growth.

The Filipino overseas worker is absolutely critical to Philippine development. Because you are a most valuable national resource, we shall go to all lengths to protect your rights and advance your interests. Our Government will stand by you. This is my pledge to our more than one million overseas workers.

But between now and “Philippines 2000,” we have a long arduous way to go. Given our diverse wills and objectives, success depends on how we can attain effective political unity.

Political unity—indeed—as a continuing challenge not only to the labor movement but also to the entire Filipino nation.

For us to achieve lasting political unity, we must deliver ourselves from the vicious habit of divisiveness. Unions must not only cultivate a tolerance of others but build bridges to ensure a peaceful, dynamic and productive coexistence.

A new cooperative owned and run by workers

Later this morning, the ground-breaking ceremonies will be held for a new cooperative to be owned and operated entirely by workers. This cooperative is based on the time tested principle of self-help—and picks up from the unity displayed by the Federation of Free Workers, Trade Union Congress of the Philippines and the Lakas Manggagawa Labor Center in 1990, when they established a workers’ fund.

This fund shall now finance the operations of this new cooperative, which we shall call simply the “Workers’ Mart.”

Workers’ Mart is a market of modest stocks but ambitious intentions. It will sell the staples, including rice and sugar our brothers in the countryside have just harvested. These staples it will sell to workers at lower prices than those prevailing in commercial markets—because the stocks are to be drawn directly from producers.

As we celebrate Labor Day, our first Workers’ Mart should be an appropriate metaphor for the kind of dynamic unity and strength the labor movement must forge to remain relevant in a market-driven world.

My fellow workers:

Our pluralist democracy is founded on the principle of people empowerment in political diversity. We cannot expect—we do not expect—our labor movement to be unified on ideological grounds.

But our labor movement can certainly transcend its ideological differences—particularly now that the Age of Ideology is over. It can be politically unified by a shared vision, a common goal—because political unity is nothing more than a consensus to work together, independent of ideological motives, toward the social well-being of the Filipinos and the economic progress of the Filipino nation, including and especially its workers.

What Government is prepared to do

As part of your aspirations, the Government will strive to further strengthen the ranks of workers and we will give high value and respect to the reasonable exercise of the right to organize.

Government shall ensure that labor standards are humane, decent and adequate. Here and now, I pledge to you, the representatives and leaders of our working people, that:

To this, my Administration and I are committed: to advance workers’ rights as well as labor standards as our economy develops.

Government shall also ensure that all workers receive decent and affordable housing. Again, the Workers’ Fund can be used for this purpose.

I was informed of your strong desire to find “raw land” to be used as a “Workers’ Village.”

In connection with this, I direct the Housing and Urban Development Coordinating Council to formulate an integrated housing master plan—within three months—that will allocate a portion for a Workers’ Village on government land in Moonwalk, Parañaque.

I also instructed the Council to expand its housing program—the “guarantee facility” for housing projects of workers employed in major industrial estates or “growth areas.”

This will address not only the housing problem of workers in industrial zones. It may also reduce or prevent the problem of transportation and “squatting.”

Labor justice shall not be delayed

Meanwhile, I direct the National Home Mortgage and Finance Corporation to expedite the processing of applications filed by workers so that their acquisition of their own land and housing will also be expedited.

I also direct the Department of Budget and Management to promptly release the P127 million fund allocated for the Workers’ Organization and Development Program. In connection with this, the Department of Labor and Employment will provide the following amounts from the aforementioned fund: P6 million for KAMPI to be used for training towards the formation and development of cooperatives and businesses; and P3 million for the National Coordinator of Domestic Workers to expand its cooperatives and other livelihood projects.

Government shall further ensure that the dispensation of labor justice is not delayed. To expedite the disposition of labor cases, I sign today a new law amending the Labor Code which vests concurrent jurisdiction in the first, second, and the divisions of the National Labor Relations Commission.

Last year I directed the Commission to reduce its case backlog by 60 percent—by December. Now I am told the Commission should achieve zero backlog by the end of this year.

Government shall also continue to promote a harmonious industrial climate. We shall insist on maximum restraint in the use of lockouts and strikes—and on bilateral and tripartite consensus. And I assure you, labor shall continue to have an effective voice—not just in Congress but also in the various policy-making boards. To this end, I announce that there shall be labor representatives in all NEDA board committees.

Acknowledgment of labor cooperation

At this point, I would like to recognize and appreciate the continued and increasing readiness of the organized sector to formulate and incorporate “social pacts.”

Likewise, I commend your active participation in tripartite forums. In connection with this, I expect your enthusiastic participation in the National Tripartite Conference to be held in mid-July, to finally complete the comprehensive review and revision of the Labor Code.

I also acknowledge the participation of organized labor in the consultations that resolved the petitions for wage increases and the rollback of oil prices.

I ask you to continue to take an active part in forming and implementing the national development agenda that supports structural reforms—particularly the liberalization of trade, investment and fiscal policies, and full-scale development of our human resources.

The way ahead will be long and hard.

But for as long as we share the sacrifices equitably—spreading safety nets for the most vulnerable social groups—then we will endure and prevail as a united people.

The union movement must share with its social partners the burden of retraining workers who may be displaced by structural reforms.

Relevant to this, I recently signed into law the Dual-Tech Program, which will combine in-plant with in-social training for all our young people who take up vocational and technical education.

In connection with social welfare and safety nets, I also sign into law today the bill allowing the portability of GSIS and SSS benefits.

I am pleased to approve also the recommendation of the Social Security Commission increasing by five percent across the board the monthly pensions of Social Security pensioners. This increase, which takes effect today, should help ameliorate the economic difficulties our pensioners may be facing. It will require no increase in the rate of contribution, and will come entirely out of the Social Security Fund.

I am also awaiting the proposed bills from the Department of Labor and Employment regarding the Unemployment Assistance Program and a National Health Insurance Program so that I may certify them to Congress.

Industrial and political stability

I also ask you, the leaders of the trade-union movement, to continue supporting the peace process—especially in the context of promoting industrial and political stability.

Above any sectoral interest of labor, political stability is the single, most important precondition for us to attract investments and generate more job opportunities for our workpeople. Without political stability, the labor movement can achieve neither real economic empowerment nor lasting unity.

Let me sum up my message to you on this May Day of 1994.

I am happy at the new spirit, the new sense of unity that you in the labor movement have forged for yourselves. This new unity will enable labor to speak with a more authoritative voice in our tripartite councils.

Because you are stronger, reciprocity—which is the essence of the industrial peace—should be easier for us to organize and achieve. Because you will be more self-confident, I expect you will also accept compromise with greater grace.

Reciprocity and compromise are the components of our tripartite social pact, which we shall need to renew—if the promise our economy has begun to show is to be fulfilled. Only by such Social Pacts for Empowered Economic Development can democracies like ours make their way toward newly industrializing country status.

Discarded formulas

Some people continue to insist that a liberal democracy is not the appropriate political system for our country. They wrongly believe we Filipinos need authoritarian because we are an undisciplined and socially irresponsible people.

Others preach that only the fire of revolution will cleanse us of our historical flaws.

I disagree with these discarded formulas, which our people have found unacceptable.

I would like to emphasize that the fruits of democracy in our country cannot flourish through the suppression of rights, or be achieved through bloodshed.

Only men of peace—through the implements of peace—can achieve true democracy.

We will gain nothing from disunity and division. Unity is the only way to quickly achieve the dreams and aspirations of our people.

You have formulated the new form of association. Now, lead the way to our success.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library