Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines During the launching of the Tax Information Campaign

[Delivered at the Heroes’ Hall, Malacañang, January 21, 1994]

A culture of honesty

WE LAUNCH a nationwide tax information campaign today to maximize our revenue collection before the April 15 deadline for the filing of income-tax returns.

This year it has become crucial, more than ever, that we succeed in this endeavor. For beyond the tremendous material boost that increased revenue collection will give to national development, it will also prove a basic truth that many seem to have forgotten.

And that truth is this: that honest taxpayers and honest revenue officials abound among us, and that their combined efforts can and will uplift this country to the progress it deserves.

Over the past few weeks, this issue of honesty in Government has been drawing critical attention in the media, and within Government itself.

Let the corrupt beware

Although it may have proved embarrassing to a few people who were caught off guard, I see no reason why we should not face the question squarely.

It was I, you may recall, who raised the matters of ostentatious lifestyles on the part of Government men and women—particularly in offices such as the revenue and law-enforcement agencies.

I have been acting on reports that had reached me, indicating that some Government officials were engaged in rampant graft and corruption, and were flaunting their ill-gotten wealth in open defiance of the law.

This I can not, and will not, condone. Among other measures, I have already established a new Presidential Commission Against Graft and Corruption to act on administrative cases to ensure that offenders are speedily brought to justice.

Our new death-penalty law also provides for capital punishment in cases of plunder involving the amount of more than P50 million.

Should there be a corrupt official out there who is wondering now just how serious we are about carrying out that provision of law, let me say to him: If we catch you—and we will—you may just be among the first examples we need to prove our point. You will make history in a way you may never have expected.

And indeed, I am thankful to the media for having pursued the issue, because this public clamor for higher standards of integrity can only strengthen my hand in ridding the civil service of its most undesirable elements.

Taxes are a public trust

I must impress on all of us that honesty in government is not a sometime thing. It is not even a matter that we should leave for the media alone to dwell upon.

It should be a civic virtue that we must nourish from within, and defend against all temptation, because, in the very end— and whatever else we do—it is the best thing that can be said for any one of us: “He was an honest man.”

And speaking of our revenue, customs and law-enforcement services, the need for honesty is even more paramount, because our people have entrusted to you their economic lifeblood.

Each tax peso that you collect is a citizen’s investment in good government and a better future. You hold this wealth— and those hopes—in trust.

And surely we must realize that honesty in government will make better government possible.

We need increased revenue collection, because the demands of poverty alleviation and national development are rising formidably. We need a greater tax effort by more effective collection and by broadening the base of taxpayers among us.

We have chosen the path of aggressive and enduring growth, toward “Philippines 2000.” It will be an expensive—but doubtless worthwhile—community and national endeavor.

A crucial juncture

Today we stand at a crucial juncture on that road to sustained progress.

We have just begun to emerge from a brief but difficult period marked by devastating natural calamities, crippling power shortages and political consolidation.

The year 1994 has started with the most encouraging economic indicators we have had in years. Objective—and even previously critical—observers of our economy were united in saying that we had, at last, begun to achieve a turnaround.

Our 2.5 percent growth in gross national product in 1993 may seem modest—but it was a significant achievement in the context of what had gone before and what we had to face.

This time we are out to achieve a target for 1994 of at least 4.5 percent growth in GNP. This we are determined to accomplish by protecting our gains in the previous year while working together more effectively to increase our national productivity—which includes a stronger tax effort.

From our experience in the past several years, we now know that the power crisis was indeed the most debilitating factor in our regular life. This year, with many new regular base-load power projects coming onstream, that problem will be solved in mid-1994—once and for all.

Still, we need other forms of infrastructure and agro-industrial support mechanisms to sustain what we have so painstakingly gained. These include farm-to-market roads, postharvest facilities, schools, housing, water conservation structures, environmental protection measures and other public facilities.

We have put in place policy reforms that will push sustained economic growth. Among these are the liberalization of foreign-exchange transactions, new incentives for investment and vital monetary policies to keep inflation and interest rates within manageable limits, and to energize private capital for productive endeavors.

We are broadening the coverage of our policy of deregulation even further so as to free private enterprises from bureaucratic controls. And we will speed up the privatization of disposable Government assets.

Thus we are handing over to the private sector greater responsibilities in helping us attain the status of a newly industrialized country by the turn of the century.

Fiscal support from the people

But this also means that now, more than ever, we must rely on the fiscal support that comes directly from the people.

Support must come in more concrete terms than favorable opinion polls. Such support must be able to fund our priority socioeconomic programs. Such support must be capable of being translated into equally concrete social services and physical infrastructures that can trigger an economic boom, sustain massive agro-industrial development, create jobs, increase family incomes and reduce poverty.

Such funds, as expressions of public support, should therefore come not only from foreign sources when they could be obtained from us ourselves.

Rather, all Filipinos and resident foreigners who are privileged to earn a decent income in this country should contribute to national development by paying their taxes promptly and honestly.

We cannot continue to howl over the issue of debt servicing or complain about poor delivery of public services if we refuse to do and give our share for community development and nation building.

If we expect good government, then we should pay for it. If the Government fails to deliver, then whoever is at fault should be removed from office and made to pay for his failure.

For more responsible taxpayers

To help carry out this commitment contract you have just presented, the executive branch is giving its all-out support to the Bureau of Internal Revenue in its drive to make Filipinos become responsible and timely taxpayers.

In the light of our current situation and our strategic objectives under our shared vision of Philippines 2000, each responsible taxpayer can be no less than a new hero who, despite the difficulties we now face, continues to meet his civic obligations diligently and religiously.

I am also declaring 1994 as National Tax Consciousness Year.

Its objectives will apply both to the public and to all the branches of government itself. I intend to make it known where the people’s taxes go, to hold Government officials more accountable and responsible for their disbursements and applications of the same. By virtue of this commitment of the Government, I encourage greater fiscal support from the taxpaying public.

I am also making available to Internal Revenue Commissioner Liwayway Vinzons-Chato, within legal bounds, the resources of the executive branch for the pursuit of the Bureau’s goals. The same commitment goes to all other agencies involved in collection and enforcement.

Commissioner Chato has shown that the Government’s tax collection can be made a success only by doing something out of the ordinary, something that had only been done halfheartedly in the past: the strict implementation of tax laws.

A right to share

The people should know they have as much right to have a share in development as they are duty bound to support it.

On the part of Government, we will ensure that every centavo of a taxpayer’s money is spent on his behalf, moving us more resolutely toward Philippines 2000.

At the same time, our people must be reminded that they, too, must be part of this culture of honesty we seek to promote.

Graft and corruption are a two-way street, and as often as not, I am sure that financial inducements from unscrupulous individuals have led many a public official to betray his oath of service.

Thus, even as we police our ranks, the people, too, must recognize their responsibility in this mission. Every peso that is paid as a bribe is a peso taken out of the welfare benefit fund of families and children.

But ultimately, it is for us who have been entrusted by the people with their taxes who must set the example.

This is our commitment, and we must go beyond easy platitudes to observe it. As a noted writer once said, “I am afraid we must make the world honest before we can honestly say to our children that honesty is the best policy.”

That world begins, ladies and gentlemen, at our doorsteps.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.