Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At The Economist Second Round Table Conference with the Government of the Philippines

[Delivered at the EDSA Plaza Hotel, Shangri-La Plaza, January 26, 1994]

Join our march to progress

IN MY REPORT to the nation last January 3 on my first 500 days in office, which is one quarter of my six-year term, I said that the elements necessary for national development are now mostly in place, such that expectations are high that a surge in the economy will take place in 1994.

Interest, inflation and foreign-exchange rates have remained stable and they will continue to be so. We have regained the confidence of the international finance community as evidenced by oversubscribed international bond floats by the Government and the private sector.

The most bullish stock market in Asia

The Philippine stock market was the most bullish and the best performer in Asia with a performance of more than 150 percent and still going up. The signs that our financial stability has been restored have been recognized by the World Bank and prestigious financial and investment firms in the international arena. In the same vein, the International Monetary Fund has expressed growing confidence in the Philippines.

Advance reports confirm a real GNP growth in 1993 of 2.5 percent and this year we are aiming for 4.5 percent at the least. This goal we will attain, I assure you.

Despite a record 32 destructive typhoons last year, agriculture and fishery production established a growth rate of 4.7 percent. And there was a decline in the country’s unemployment rate from 10.2 percent during the first seven months of 1992 to 9.4 percent for the same period in 1993.

The improvement in our economy last year gives me pride and confidence to face you again this year, and I thank Peter Wallace for this opportunity.

But what we have accomplished is not enough. I know we have much yet to do. And I am sure you can help us achieve many of our goals.

Where we stand

Let me state again where I stand, where my Government stands.

We believe in an open, fair market; in an outward-oriented policy that integrates us with ASEAN, the Asia-Pacific region and the world.

We believe in a democratic transparent government, one you can confidently deal with; one you can rely on for stable, consistent laws and policies.

Tonight we start two and a half days of enlightenment on the realities of doing business in the Philippines. Although the perception of some of you about the Philippines is not that good, such mindset I would want to correct, and in this I hope the participants in this conference will help correct.

Let me give you two examples of corrective—structured, even—trends taking place.

First, the electric-power situation.

Last year I told you that we were forcefully addressing the challenge of the shortage of electric power and promised you “light at the end of the tunnel” before long.

I am pleased to report to you that by December last year, we had that light, we were down to zero brownouts in our households in Metro Manila. Within 1994 some 800 megawatts of new baseload power supply will be switched on. Between now and June 1994, we can expect an average of just five hours brownouts a month in the Luzon grid and, thereafter, an average of two hours of brownouts a month for the rest of the year. There has been no problem of electric-power supply in Mindanao and the Visayas since mid-1993.

Once we have the major baseload plants in place, and these are being set up according to schedule, we will have the continuing reliability and capacity to guarantee all the power needed by all industries.

Second, a survey done here by The Economist intelligence unit of its multinational clients showed very attractive results in 1993: net income after tax (properly paid taxes, I am pleased to note) of 10 percent of sales, return on investment of 37.7 percent, and favorable labor relations and labor productivity.

Proof of the pudding

To promote industrial peace, productivity and competitiveness, the national tripartite conference, consisting of leaders of labor, business and Government, agreed a week ago to structural adjustments unprecedented in our economic life.

The proof of the pudding is in the eating, and it seems our pudding is tasty.

In 1991 we opened up investment in manufacturing to 100-percent foreign ownership. Now we allow 75-year leases of land and I hope to be able to offer you soon “condominium ownership” in industrial estates. We have deregulated foreign exchange and have always allowed full remittance of profits and repatriation of capital.

We are rationalizing and reducing tariffs, as well as removing quantitative restrictions on imports. And we are fully supporting the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement and the forthcoming policies coming from the successful termination of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

This month the Senate is concluding deliberations to allow us to open up the banking sector (the House has already passed a bill on this), and we will expand the liberalization process for investments, infrastructure development, trading services and the economy as a whole. These thrusts are embodied in an agreed and prioritized legislative-executive agenda for the next three months.

Among the top priority bills agreed to be moved through Congress at this time concern improvements of our laws and policies on build-operate-transfer, foreign banking, foreign investments, alien legalization and citizenship, higher education, science and technology, training in dual technology, development of geothermal energy, housing (National Shelter Act), national health insurance, value-added tax, antipilferage, jurisdiction of lower courts, social security and population stabilization.

We have instituted many other areas of liberalization, such as the accelerated privatization of State assets, and these will be detailed to you in the next few days.

Political stability and security

One area I would like to focus on—because I had been deeply involved in it since our people power revolution of February 1986 and even before—is the enhancement of our political stability and security, and our social cohesion.

Peter Wallace tells me he has now scaled down his coup possibility factor to 0.5 percent. He used to have it hovering around 70 percent. I guess this best reflects our more stable situation now.

We had a smooth, peaceful transition of government power in 1992. We have barangay, or village, elections scheduled this year, and these too will be done in a credible and orderly manner. Constitutional and legal processes, although often hotly debated in Congress and the media, are the rule in our national life. This is our guarantee to you of continuity, predictability and long-term growth under a democratic government.

As we move to the year 2000 and into the new millennium, I see the realization of our country’s sustained development as surely as the sun rises in the east every morning.

Perhaps of greater significance to you now is the excellent reputation we have earned for honoring our commitments. If you invested under specific conditions in the past, we will not change those conditions for you. Our laws are prospective, and ex-post facto implementation does not apply.

On your personal safety and security, I want to state categorically that Metro Manila is as safe a city as any of the major cities of the world—if you keep away and avoid the risky districts and situations that every city has. If you still read about sporadic kidnapping cases, I say the days of the criminal syndicates are already numbered—ask my Vice President, Joseph Estrada, for confirmation.

As far as the insurgents are concerned, I am happy to report that they are now being brought to the mainstream of society to become more productive and law-abiding citizens.

The military rebels have agreed to negotiate a peaceful return to society. The Communist Party of the Philippines is now in disarray, split with several squabbling factions that confuse their rapidly thinning adherents. The leaders of the Moro National Liberation Front are talking with Government in peaceful negotiation under an interim cease-fire agreement, and the talks are going well.

Our most valuable resource: the people

With the improved energy and security situations, let me now emphasize one other advantage we have that should further encourage you to our shores: that one concern which is most important for any investor and manager—people.

We can claim with pride that the Philippines has a large skilled, competent and dedicated labor force. You will have little difficulty not only in hiring the people you need but also in keeping them. Besides, English is spoken here, and all over.

We are strengthening this advantage through the dual training system and establishing or supporting more technical and vocational schools. So we will have more engineers than lawyers.

You even have a licensed civil engineer at the top, who dabbled briefly in law studies, but opted for a master’s degree in management—that’s me. So you can guess where my support lies.

As early as this first month of 1994, you could already glean from our 1994 flagship programs the direction and the determination with which we aim to achieve the expected surge in our economy. The empowerment of our people to make them more capable and productive, and global excellence leading to global competitiveness are our guiding principles.

Now’s the time to invest

Last week, we launched a nationwide tax-consciousness campaign not only to maximize our revenue collection and broaden the tax effort, but also to respond to the public clamor for higher standards of integrity in the bureaucracy. I have constituted a Presidential Commission Against Graft and Corruption, under a no-nonsense chairman, to reinforce this drive.

And only last Saturday, we launched “ Kabuhayan (Livelihood) 2000,” which should generate some two million jobs all over the country in the next three years, particularly in the underground economy and in the underemployed sector. We are developing 15 growth centers in our 15 territorial regions that should be able to absorb our manpower and thereby reduce congestion of our cities and stem the flow of migration of our workers overseas.

Your time to invest in the Philippines has never been better and brighter than now. Take a good look—check your observations with those who have kept faith with us over the years, the old investors and the foreign chambers of commerce. I encourage you to seize the opportunity before others do!

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.