Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At the presentation of the first anniversary accomplishment report by the National Youth Commission

[Delivered in Malacañang, Manila,  August 16, 1996]

Meeting the challenge of Jose Rizal

AS WE WORK to realize our dream of attaining a decent quality of life for all our people and a respected place in the family of nations, it becomes even more imperative for Government to give serious consideration and attention to the development of the youth sector.

The reason is obvious and clear—only the youth can provide the kind of historical continuity that development programs of any great magnitude require. It must be realized that even if it meets its fundamental goals within our time, Philippines 2000″ is a multigenerational project. Its long-term benefits—and its continuing success—will be for the next generation to achieve. We, the leaders of today, will not live forever—and so we will need you to pick up where we shall leave off. As Benjamin Disraeli so aptly put it, “The youth of a nation are the trustees of posterity.”

The Administration’s program for youth development

In the light of these facts, and recognizing the potentials of our youth as Government’s partner in the realization of our national goals, the Ramos Administration has adopted measures to advance the interests and improve the condition of our young citizens.

The passage of Republic Act 8044—which created the National Youth Commission and established a comprehensive and coordinated program on youth development—was a landmark achievement of the Ninth Congress. R. A. 8044 strengthened Government support for the youth and ushered in a new era for young Filipinos.

The creation of the Sangguniang Kabataan ensured significant and vital youth participation in government processes. The Sangguniang Kabataan has been our most fertile training ground for future legislators. It has added a new dimension to our democratic system, a concern important enough to merit the release of P33 million in additional funds from the Office of the President for the Sangguniang Kabataan registration and elections held last May.

Insulating our youth from traditional politics

In spite of the clamor in Congress to synchronize the Sangguniang Kabataan elections with the local elections, we took measures to insulate our young from the negative influences of traditional politics, to allow them to come into their own political maturity while keeping their idealism intact.

The establishment of the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority and the Commission on Higher Education manifests our desire to expand and to improve our training and educational system as a means to bring our youth into the circle of global competitiveness which we are fostering in our society and our economy

We are also studying and will soon be carrying out other ways to safeguard our young from moral degradation, drug abuse, violence, criminality, illiteracy, unemployment, environmental hazards and other social ills, and mold them into responsible, intelligent, morally upright and vigorous citizens.

I ask all of you through the National Youth Commission and the Sangguniang Kabataan to help us win these battles. They are being fought at a crucial juncture of our nation’s history—not only because we can look back on a century of struggling for our freedom, but because we can look forward to another century of unprecedented peace and prosperity

This is also why we are fighting vigorously for peace in Mindanao, for genuine and lasting unity among all our people, so that we can turn our energies toward the attainment of our goals of economic growth with social equity

Peace and development are the objects of last June’s Davao City consensus that Government reached with the Moro National Liberation Front.

That agreement envisions 14 southern provinces and its cities to be brought together and made into a special zone of peace and development—with Southern Philippines Council for Peace and Development to promote it.

Development cannot be an exclusionary process. If the nation is to progress, it must do so as a whole—and to do so as a whole, it must think and act as a whole, as Filipinos, and not just as Christians or Muslims or lumad or other individuals of varying backgrounds or beliefs.

‘If a Filipino wills, he can ’

This is what the zone of peace and development stands for—an opportunity with a precious time advantage during which all of us can work together without serious interruptions or disturbances to hasten community development and nation building.

Let us remember what Jose Rizal, the greatest of all young Filipino leaders and patriots—whose centennial we celebrate this year—said in this respect. In a speech he delivered in Madrid 105 years ago, Rizal spoke of the need for self-sacrifice and for unity in the service of the nation.

“Gentlemen,” he said, “let us maintain firmly union and solidarity among us; let the good of the mother country be our only cause; and let us prove to everyone and make it clear— that if a Filipino wills, he can. These words are as true today as they had been then. We have it in our power to achieve the peace, prosperity and greatness our nation has not seen in a hundred years. And you in the youth sector can wield that power to great effect.

The ten-year accomplishment report on youth development delivered by Chairman Amina Bernardo during the tenth anniversary of the International Youth Year in the United Nations last year spoke well of our efforts in youth development. I direct you of the National Youth Commission to ensure with commitment and conviction that such efforts shall have indeed borne fruit by the year 2000.

Two years from now, we shall be celebrating the centennial of our independence. It is worth remembering that this centennial will celebrate the Filipino youth’s courage and idealism without which we could never have gained our independence.

Your best gift to this nation

The most recent victories in our national life such as that symbolized in the Olympic silver medal won by Mansueto “Onyok” Velasco Jr. were gained by youths like you.

Last week, I received here in Malacañang Sarah Balabagan, who was convicted of killing her employer and who was later released from prison. Her release strengthens the brotherly ties between our country and the United Arab Emirates and proves what cooperation and compassion can achieve.

But while we may rejoice at her release from prison and at her escape from death, we should remain deeply concerned with why she left our country in the first place—at so early an age, risking life and honor, in pursuit of a better future for her family.

The best gift you can give to the nation on its centennial birthday in 1998 could very well be a deeper resolve to help keep our Sarahs adequately schooled and decently employed here in our homeland—and to produce more young Filipinos with the talent and the grit only you can give. While we may rejoice in our accomplishments, let us bear in mm still so much work to be done. As your President, I will need your help, and I call upon the National Youth Commission to continue to develop and guide programs that will truly empower the youth.

At this point, let me also formally launch the Sapasap Antidrug Abuse Movement created in memory of Nino Thor Sapasap, who was killed on the eve of his chairmanship of the Sangguniang Kabataan in his barangay in Tondo. I commend and thank the members of the Sapasap Movement for helping to unify youth efforts in combating abuse of dangerous drug and substances.

An antidrug abuse movement

Nino Thor did not die in vain. His death has rekindled hope in all of us, and a new determination to root out the causes of evil and despair in our communities.

In his time, Rizal had wondered, ”Where are the youth? Where are they?”

I have the highest hopes that the Filipino youth—many of the best of whom are with us today—will prove themselves worthy of Rizal’s example.

In his final moments, he wrote in Mi Ultimo Adios:

“When my death is forgotten, my grave unmarked, let the plow turn the earth where I lie. May my dust make fertile the fields. Where the grass grows thickly, there I dwell.

“When night comes and my grave in darkness lies, break not the peace, kneel before the mystery. If you hear the sound of music, be not afraid. It is I.”

Let us tell Jose Rizal: We, your grateful people, have not forgotten your sacrifice. We now use the plow to turn the earth of your legacy, so that enduring peace and sustained development may reign in our beloved land. We hear your music, which inspires us and strengthens us in our labors.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1997). Leadership for the 21st century : our labors today will shape our country’s future. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.