Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At the 25th Anniversary Conference of the Fund for Assistance to Private Education

[Delivered at the PICC, January 20, 1994]

The knowledge frontier

I HAVE a sentimental attachment to the Fund for Assistance to Private Education because my late father, then-Secretary of Foreign Affairs Narciso Ramos, helped in its establishment in 1969. As a legislator, he served as chairman of the Committee on Education in the National Assembly before World War II.

In fact I have been surrounded by educators and teachers all my life. My mother, my mother-in-law, my sister Letty, many aunts and uncles and grandfathers from both sides of the family were all teachers, mostly in public schools but many also in private education. And when it was time for me to marry, I of course chose a teacher.

Importance of human capital

The more I learn about our country, our people and our world community, and what we must do to develop our beloved Philippines, the more deeply I am convinced that education is the most important tool for our advancement and progress.

Two years ago I had the singular honor to address this prestigious group of educators during the series of dialogues with the “Presidentiables” that the Fund organized on the eve of the 1992 elections. I remember explaining to you then my educational platform. Thinking back to that forum at Adamson University, I believe what I advocated for education then has now become integral to my Administration’s development plan for our country. Education is essential to achieve our shared vision of “Philippines 2000.”

In this blueprint, my Administration aims to attain, by the end of my term in 1998, newly industrialized country status for the Philippines, where even the less privileged will have adequate food, clothing and shelter, and the chance to lead meaningful and productive lives worthy of their dignity as human beings.

We expect every Filipino to feel secure in his person, his income and in the street. We envision annual per-capita income to increase to at least US$1,000 during my term, the economy to grow by at least 6 percent to 8 percent, and the incidence of poverty to decline to 30 percent of the population from the present 50 percent.

A good in itself

A vision, however, is not just a wish list or a slogan or a political plan. To achieve it requires strategic goals, direction, priorities and action programs. In our development strategy and action programs for Philippines 2000, education has an important and central role.

We must always remember that education is an end in itself—a good in itself. Education does not require justification in terms of contribution to personal welfare for the person to seek it. Today the evidence that education promotes economic growth is incontrovertible.

According to the World Bank in its World Development Report of 1992, after two United Nations decades of development, the evidence is clear that education does not only support development but puts other goals of development more easily within reach. A one-year increase in schooling could augment wages by more than 10 percent. In family-owned enterprises in many countries, education appears to be more critical than physical capital. And education can make all the difference between a country’s achieving development or not. Let me quote from the World Bank Report on this point:

Education affects productivity and growth through several channels. A better-educated person absorbs new information faster and applies unfamiliar inputs and new processes more effectively. When a new product or process is introduced, much needs to be learned about how it works and how it applies to specific circumstances and environments. In the dynamic and uncertain environment of technological change, more highly educated workers have a big advantage.

Japan’s rapid industrialization after the Meiji Restoration was fueled by its aggressive accumulation of technical skills, which in turn was based on its already high level of literacy and a strong commitment to education. Korea’s relatively strong base of human capital in the early 1960s speeded its own industrialization.

Given our people’s attachment to education, this is the position we would have been in as early as the 1970s, were it not for misguided Government policies and corrupt political leadership.

Now that we have begun to put our house in order, this is the cutting edge we must strive to achieve again.

Role of private education

I shall not speak here of what we are doing in public education, for this is not what the occasion calls for. I will focus only on the role of private education in our drive to recover our competitive advantage as a nation.

I am convinced that we cannot attain our goals without a dynamic private school system. Public education can do much in terms of basic education. But when it comes to higher education, private schools must lead the way.

As things stand, private education already performs an indispensable role in our education system. It accounts for 6 percent of total enrollment in the elementary level, 40 percent in high school and 85 percent in higher education.

The Government cannot replace your sector, particularly when one also considers the strong spiritual thrust of private education. There are so many members of religious groups here—Catholics, Protestants and our Muslim brothers in Mindanao—who attach great importance to value formation. This thrust has always been a strength, not a weakness, of Philippine education.

For the Philippines to advance and attain the status of a newly industrialized country, we must work together—you in the private sector and we in the public sector—to improve the quality of education, eradicate illiteracy and provide the economy with a manpower base—and a woman power base—a people power base—to support accelerated development.

Historical commitment

That human power base has always been our advantage when compared to our Southeast Asian neighbors, with the possible exception of Singapore. Because of our historical commitment to education and culture even during the Spanish colonial era, but particularly since the beginning of the century, we had a head start. In this area, you have been producing millions of highly qualified people.

Today our focus must be on improving on what we are already doing well and on correcting those where there has been a decline in quality. Because of our rapid rise in population and sluggish economy, our educational facilities and capabilities have not been able to keep up with this demand. The quality of training and teaching has declined.

We must address this need with the utmost urgency and concern, because education—I repeat—is our one comparative advantage in the race for development.

Obviously, we can only do this by redoubling our commitment to education—both private and public. Public education must do its work and private education must do its part. Government must take care to harmonize activities so that we move in the same direction, not along different paths.

You in private education are one of the two key pillars of our education system—the public schools being the other. If our private schools, for instance, were to close down simultaneously overnight, no less than 1.5 million college students would be dislocated; half a million teachers would be displaced, and 300,000 nonacademic employees would become jobless. No less than our Constitution provides for government support to private education.

Many complain that, in real terms, government support for private education has been limited, when compared to the substantial support it extends to other industries. I realize the problem, but let me stress that my Administration is committed to effecting improvements in the implementation of Republic Act 6728, or the Subsidy Law, which was one of the major accomplishments of Government during the term of my distinguished predecessor, President Cory Aquino.

Policy of liberalization

Furthermore, to enable private education to grow and develop, the Government is prepared to set aside executive policies and seek revision of laws that stifle the creativity of private schools and curb their flexibility and autonomy. Already our Department of Education, Culture and Sports has addressed this issue by adopting a policy of liberalization that is highly beneficial to private education. Among other things, we have liberalized tuition and lifted the moratorium on the opening of new programs, both of which should lead to increased enrollment in higher education.

A very recent step I have taken in support of private education has been to issue Executive Order 150 amending the Fund’s charter. The former veto power of the Secretary of Education, Culture and Sports over the decisions of the Fund’s board has been removed, and its decisions will now be based on simple majority rule, thus permitting it to function as a representative group. This liberalization of the Fund was undertaken at the instance of Secretary Fabella himself.

It is the promotion of greater investments in private education that must answer the problem of means and financial support, and not the provision of Government subsidies. Government’s greater role lies in helping private schools by improving the environment in which they operate and by aiding them to achieve reasonable profitability so that they can expand and serve more effectively.

One way to do this is to think of education as an industry itself—as vital to national development as transportation, power, telecommunications, manufacturing and agriculture.

Conventional minds are not used to thinking about education this way, but many countries today hold this view.

The knowledge industry

Indeed, it has been fashionable over the past ten years to talk about the knowledge industry—meaning all activities that have to do with providing information and enhancing knowledge, and these include schools and even the media of communications.

In our age of information, knowledge is truly power. Knowledge is what drives modern industries today. And to compete in the world, we must turn to what we have always valued most—education.

We cannot compete on this frontier if we are still a society battling at the onset of each school year over the slightest rise intuition.

We cannot compete effectively by offering dilapidated schools, even if the teaching force is of high quality.

We cannot compete effectively by offering facilities and instructors not in tune with what is being taught in the advanced world.

In this effort to align our education system with the fast-moving wave of modernization, the Government will lead in mobilizing resources. Because it does not have the resources to invest in a massive way, it will convince private capital to move into education as a winner industry.

This is why once a week, every Wednesday, the leaders of both chambers of Congress, members of the Cabinet and I meet as a task force for resource mobilization—to address the basic need to generate a larger pool of financial and material resources for the nation’s priority needs.

I have instructed the Cabinet to move more aggressively into the information and knowledge industry.

It might seem shocking at first, but the future of Philippine education may well lie in opening some aspects of it more and more to market forces, to the play of investments and profits. We may fill the needs of the economy and the country better—not by altruism and Government largess, which are always inadequate—but by the dynamic play of market forces, of capital and gain.

In this scenario, private schools, which dominate higher education, must produce skilled graduates in areas that fill the demands of our national and the world economy. Private schools must offer the programs that are very much in demand in the labor market, both locally and internationally, and are needed to propel the development of our regional growth centers and our winner export industries.

Where the needs are

Our Asian neighbors achieved newly industrialized country status because, more than any other factor, they developed an adequate manpower capability in science and technology. The development of their industry sectors was propelled by a strong workforce of scientists, technologists and technicians. In much the same way, to create the critical mass needed by our country, our schools must develop and expand science literacy and competence at all levels of the education system.

We must do this not because I say so, or Government says so, but because this is where the needs are. This is what our people want to study so that they can gain well-paying jobs and participate in profitable enterprises. And this is where you can expect fair returns for your own investments of time, effort and dedication.

To become a newly industrialized country by the turn of the century, according to one estimate, we need to produce every year a total of 10,000 engineers of various disciplines, 5,000 agriculturists and another 5,000 professionals in other scientific disciplines, hi contrast, the need is much smaller for lawyers, accountants and commerce graduates, who represent three of the most crowded fields at present here and abroad.

As long as we educate according to need, we will never be off track. Education thus will move in tandem with our shared vision of Philippines 2000.

Timeless ideal

To return to the theme with which I began: education is a good in itself. But it is also a fact that it can be a great liberator of men and societies. For knowledge enhances people’s ability to meet their wants and those of their families by enhancing their productivity. And in enhancing human productivity, education builds dynamic and progressive societies.

This is the timeless ideal we honor today at this silver anniversary of the Fund for Assistance to Private Education. And I have no greater wish than that the Fund will honor our country with many, many more anniversaries of service to our people. In all of this, my Administration will always support you.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1994). Time for takeoff : the Philippines is ready for competitive performance in the Asia-Pacific. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.