Speech of His Excellency Fidel V. Ramos President of the Philippines At the launching of Edelmiro A. Amante Sr.’s 35 Poems and Essays

[Held at the Manila Hotel, August 8, 1996]

Poetry and governance

THERE ARE interesting parallels between poetry and governance. In poetry, we speak of rhyme, rhythm and style. But these things are often attributes assigned to governance. Thus, from the time of kings and emperors to the sweep of democratic leaders, governments have accorded special places to poets and their poems, and poets have often departed from their usual themes to sing praises to their eras.

In England, for instance, we find some of the giants in English literature as poet laureates celebrating major strides in English history. In the United States, especially during the time of the Kennedys, we saw their national poets regale the country with immortal poems that celebrate America’s best features. The poets attempted to project into the national consciousness values that make America great.

Making time for things that last

It is the lot of poets and national leaders to have to bear with critics. Some critics who often profess to know more than the targets of their attention deny the latter’s value; others, perhaps knowing no better, sing hosannas to their talent and their achievements. Shakespeare had his share of critics. So did Winston Churchill.

At this stage in our national development, it warms my heart that amid the criticism lodged against politicians for various real or imagined sins as ineptitude, lack of achievement and inability to appreciate the finer things in life, we find Edel Amante, politician and former bureaucrat, making time for things that really last—poems and essays.

It is said that poetry, like music, soothes the savage breast. At other times too, poems inspire achievements in various fields and not infrequently shake the foundations of societies and countries.

The rhyme and reason of our dreams

Most of us are not as gifted as Amante in writing and could not hope to match his literary talent so ably demonstrated in this book which is now being launched. My best output during the past four years is a large volume of HWIs, or “handwritten instructions.”

But having been privileged to assume positions of leadership in my career, I pride myself on being able to plumb the rhyme and reason of the Filipinos’ dreams for a better tomorrow, their hopes for peace, security and development after decades of turmoil and poverty.

At this juncture of our history, the poet like Amante and the leader like myself responsible for the nation’s performance, come together and find common cause in articulating our people’s determination to find a higher place for themselves and for our country in the community of nations.

Let me note that Amante’s poetry and prose and the most recent signals of the Ramos Administration for enduring peace and development for our beloved Philippines emanate from the South—from Mindanao.

We need to change old outlooks, strive harder to realize worthy goals, and our concern about the future of Mindanao all the more presses home this need. Where there is indifference, there should be commitment. Where there is stagnation, there should be acceleration. Where there is strife, there should be time to reason.

Where there is tension, there should be cooperation. Where there is ethnic conflict, there should be opportunity for reconciliation. And where there is clinging to the unproductive past, there should be the spirit of accommodation and innovation. For we must move on.

Our hopes for sustained peace and development in Mindanao require us to adopt such approaches and discard those that have not worked well before. Our initiatives in Mindanao show that we are creating. We are innovating. We are determined, for we are departing from a past that has brought discord and irrational divergences.

Like Mindanaoans—Christians, Muslims, lumad alike—we are all Filipinos. We should build together, instead of bringing damage to each other. We should unite in the building of a better Philippines for all, despite diversities in our society. We should celebrate the eternal verities, as Edel Amante has celebrated them in his poetry and his prose.

Worth reading and remembering

This is what I meant when I said rhyme and rhythm are also the province of governance.

Amante’s poems and prose are worth reading. They are also worth remembering, for they awaken us to the fact that tribulations produce perseverance, and perseverance molds character. And it is character that can take us beyond the trying moments of this time into an era when there can be a celebration of peace and plenty for all.

So I ask you to join me in congratulating Edel Amante for this great effort and the equally great results. May there be more such efforts and results in the near future so that young and old can drink from his fountain of experience, insight and wisdom.

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Ramos, F. V. (1997). Leadership for the 21st century : our labors today will shape our country’s future. [Manila] : Friends of Steady Eddie.