MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 422

AMENDING PARAGRAPHS ONE, FOUR, THIRTEEN, FOURTEEN AND TWENTY-SEVEN OF EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 303, DATED SEPTEMBER 26, 1940, ENTITLED “PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE APPOINTMENT AND SUPERVISION OF GOVERNMENT PENSIONADOS”

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby amend paragraphs one, four, thirteen, fourteen and twenty-seven of Executive Order No. 303, dated September 26, 1940, to read as follows:

“1. Qualifications. — Each applicant must be of good moral character and of sound health and must be a person of experience who has proved himself able and efficient in his-position in the government service as substantiated by available records.”

“4. Competitive examinations. —Except as provided in paragraph 5 hereof, the selection of pensionados to study in the United States or in foreign countries shall be based on competitive examinations to be conducted by the Bureau of Civil Service under the direction of the Office of the President.”

“13. Refund of expenses incurred by reason of scholarship. —Pensionados, upon their return to the Philippines, shall refund to the Government an amount not less than 25 per cent of the total expenditures for their scholarships. This amount shall be automatically deducted from their monthly salaries at the rate of 5 per cent thereof. However, no deductions, shall be made from those whose salaries are ₱2,400 per annum or less until they receive at least a one-grade promotion.

“Should a pensionado refuse to serve the Government when his services are needed, he shall reimburse the Government in an amount equivalent to the total expenditures for his scholarship.”

“14. Contract period. —The term of scholarship of a pensionado shall begin on the day he leaves Manila and shall be effective until the date of his return to Manila, unless specifically provided in the agreement.”

“27. Pensionados returning via Europe. —Pensionados permitted to return via Europe shall be given the same allowance for transportation that is given to pensionados returning tourist class, via the Pacific. Pensionados will not be permitted to return via Europe except upon prior authority from the Office of the President, and shall be allowed only two months time for that purpose. Any extra time shall be charged against leave, or shall be without pay, as the case may be.”

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one-, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 422 : Amending Paragraphs one, four, thirteen, fourteen and twenty-seven of Executive Order No. 303, dated September 26, 1940, entitled “Promulgating Rules and Regulations Governing the Appointment and Supervision of Government Pensionados”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (3), 1063.