MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 504

PROHIBITING THE EXPORTATION OR RE-EXPORTATION OF WAR MATERIALS, ARMS, AMMUNITION AND OTHER STRATEGIC MATERIALS AND CRITICAL ITEMS FROM THE PHILIPPINES EXCEPT IN CERTAIN CASES.

WHEREAS, as far as the Philippines is concerned, the state of war with some of the enemy countries during World War II has not as yet ended and due to the troubled international situation, all nations are stock-piling strategic materials and critical items and are engaged in a struggle for the possession of said materials and items;

WHEREAS, our supply of these materials and items so critical to our needs would be depleted through their exportation and channeling to Communist-held territory if their outward flow is left unhampered and unimpeded;

WHEREAS, the Philippines is presently engaged in armed conflict with the subverters of the Government within and with their sympathizers without;

WHEREAS, the interest of national security and public welfare require that the exportation of strategic materials and critical items be subject to control and regulations;

NOW, THEREFORE, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby prohibit until further orders the exportation or re-exportation of war materials, arms, ammunition and implements of war, except in meritorious cases where the overall economic and military requirements of the country will not be prejudiced, to be determined in each case by the Secretary of National Defense and the Administrator of Economic Coordination.

For the purpose of this Order the articles listed below are considered arms, ammunition and implements of war:

CATEGORY I.— Small arms and Machine guns

Rifles, carbines, revolvers, pistols, machine pistols and machine pistols and guns (using ammunition of caliber .22 or over); barrels, mounts breach mechanisms and stocks therefor.

CATEGORY II.— Artillery an d Projections

Guns, howitzers, cannons, mortars, and rocket launchers (of all calibers), military flame throwers, military smoke, gas, or pyrotechnic projectors; barrels, mounts and other components thereof.

CATEGORY III.— Ammunition

Ammunition of caliber .22 or over for the arms enumerated under (I) and (II) above; cartridge cases, powder bags, bullets, jackets, cores, shells (excluding shotgun); projectiles and other missiles; percussion caps, fuses, primers and other detonating devices for such ammunition.

CATEGORY IV.— Bombs, Torpedoes and Rockets

Bombs, torpedoes, grenades, rockets, mines, guided missiles depth charges, and components thereof; apparatus and devices for the handling, control, discharge, detonation or detection thereof.

CATEGORY V.— Fire Control Equipment and Range finders

Fire control equipment, range, position and height finders, spotting instruments, aiming devices (gyroscopic, optic, acoustic, atmospheric or flash), bombsights, gun sights and periscopes for the arms, ammunition and implements of war enumerated in this order.

CATEGORY VI.— Tanks and Ordnance vehicles

Tanks, armed or armored vehicles, armored trains, artillery and small arms repair trucks, military half tracks, tank recovery vehicles, tank destroyers, armor plate, turrets, tank engines, tank tread shoes, tank bogie wheels and idlers therefor.

CATEGORY VII.— Poison gases and, Toxicological agents

All military toxicological and lethal agents and gases; military equipment for the dissemination and detection thereof and defense therefrom.

CATEGORY VIII.— Propellants and Explosives

Propellants for the articles enumerated in Categories III, IV, and VII; military high explosives.

CATEGORY IX.— Vessels of war

Vessels of war of all kinds, including amphibious craft, landing craft, naval tenders, naval transport and naval patrol craft, armor plate and turrets therefor; submarine batteries and nets, and equipment for the laying, detection, and detonation of mines.

CATEGORY X.— Aircraft

Aircraft; components, parts and accessories therefor.

CATEGORY XI.— Miscellaneous equipment

(a) Military radar equipment, including components thereof, radar countermeasures and radar jamming equipments; (b) Military stereoscopic plotting and photo interpretation equipment; (c) Military photo-theodolites, telemetering and Doepplerequipment; (d) Military superhigh speed ballistic cameras; (e) Military radiosondes; (f) Military interference suppression equipment; (g) Military electronic computing devices; (h) Military miniature and miniature vacuum tubes and photoemissive tubes; (i) Military armor plates; (j) Military steel helmets; (k) Military pyrotechnics; (l) Synthetic training devices for military equipment; (m ). Military ultra-sonic generators; (n) All other material used in warfare which is classified from the standpoint of military security.

War materials whose shipment and exportation is prohibited include cranes, bulldozers, tractors, weapon carriers and others of like categories.

The exportation of the following products, merchandise, articles, materials and supplies is likewise hereby prohibited.

Done in San Fernando, La Union, this 29th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1952). Executive Order No. 504 : Prohibiting the exportation or re-exportation of war materials, arms, ammunition and other strategic materials and critical items from the Philippines except in certain cases. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 48 (5), 1682.