MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 285

CREATING A PERMANENT COMMITTEE TO EXAMINE, COUNT AND DESTROY BY BURNING POSTAL SAVINGS BANK STAMP CARDS RECEIVED AS DEPOSITS AND DAMAGED AND UNSERVICEABLE POSTAGE STAMPS.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications, I Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby create a permament Committee to examine, count and destroy Postal Savings Bank stamp cards filled with thrift stamps which have been received as deposits in accordance with section 2013 of the Revised Administrative Code, and also to examine and dispose of damaged and unserviceable postage stamps which may be presented to it by the accountable officers concerned for disposition. The Committee shall be composed of the following:

The Committee shall, at the call of the Chairman, meet once every quarter in the Bureau of Posts and there examine, count and make an inventory of all Postal Savings Bank stamp cards received as deposits. The stamp cards shall be destroyed by burning at a place to be designated by the Auditor General, in the presence of the Committee. The Committee shall also then and there investigate and fix the responsibility for the condition of all unserviceable and damaged postage stamps, stamped envelopes, postal cards, etc., presented to it for disposition and is hereby authorized to destroy such part of the property as it finds unfit for use or sale by burning at a place to be designated by the Auditor General, in the presence of the Committee.

The Committee shall report without unnecessary delay its quarterly transaction in writing to the Auditor General and the Director of Posts, the report to be sworn to by each member of the Committee.

This Order supersedes all previous Orders on the same subject.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 285 : Creating a permanent committee to examine, count and destroy by burning postal savings bank stamp cards received as deposits and damaged and unserviceable postage stamps. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (10), 4233-4234.