MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 219

DEFINING THE BOUNDARY LINE BETWEEN THE MUNICIPALITIES OF PARANG AND NULING, PROVINCE OF COTABATO

WHEREAS, a question exists as to the extent of the territorial jurisdiction of the municipalities of Nuling and Parang, both of the Province of Cotabato;

WHEREAS, Executive Order No. 82, series of 1947, creating, among others, the municipalities of Nuling and Parang, has not specifically described the boundary line between them, and evidently, this question arises principally because of the absence of such boundary description in said Executive Order No. 82 and in any other order or law;

WHEREAS, the Provincial Board of Cotabato, under its resolution No. 61, series of 1948, among other things, has proposed to terminate the question by fixing as the boundary line between the municipalities of Nuling and Parang the line which it believes to be the one known to, and recognized as such by, the local authorities up to the time of the organization of Nuling and Parang into municipalities under Executive Order No. 82, series of 1947;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the boundary line between the municipalities of Parang and Nuling, both of the Province of Cotabato, is hereby defined and fixed as follows:

From a point, at the center of the mouth of the Simuay River, approximately one kilometer north of the sitio of Simuay, in the municipality of Nuling, on the seashore, following the course of this river upstream and meandering in a general easterly direction to the source Thereof somewhere north of and adjacent to the sitio of Pingping, municipality of Nuling, on the boundary between the former municipal district of Balut, now a part of the municipality of Nuling and the former municipal district of Buldun, now a part of the municipality of Parang; thence southeasterly in a straight line, following the same Balut-Buldun boundary until its intersection with the Manuangan River somewhere south of the sitio of Migkato, municipality of Parang. (Reference used in this description: Bureau of Public Works Road Map of Cotabato Province, Scale 1:250.000.)

This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 219 : Defining the boundary line between the municipalities of Parang and Nuling, Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 45 (5), 1974-1975.