MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 208

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF TUBOD, PROVINCE OF LANAO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF LALA, WITH THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT AT THE BARRIO OF LALA.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized, in the Province of Lanao, out of a certain portion of the territory of the municipality of Tubod, a municipality to be known as Lala, with the seat of government at the barrio of Lala, whose territorial jurisdiction is more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the northeast, from the mouth of Rawaan River following upstream to the intersection of the river with the boundary line survey of cases 1 and 2 of Pls-13 Kolambugan subdivision at BLLM No. 8, Bureau of Lands, from there following the common boundary line of cases 1 and 2, Pls-13 running due east direction until BLLM No. 17; on the east, from BLLM No. 17 by the common boundary line survey of cases 1 and 2, Pls-13, running generally due south direction until it intersects the Cabuyao River at BLLM No. 62; on the southwest, from the intersection of the Cabuyao River at BLLM No. 62 of the eastern boundary following down stream to the intersection of Cabuyao and Maranding Rivers. From there it follows the Marauding River down stream up to its mouth intersecting the shoreline of Panguil Bay; and on the northwest, from the mouth of the Maranding River following the boundaries of the municipal waters which the municipality of Lala shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, to the point of origin of the northeast boundary at the mouth of the Rawan River.

The municipality of Lala shall have the following barrios:

1. Barrio of Rawaan which consists of the sitios of Sambulawan, Andil, Magpatao and Camayog;

2. Barrio Gumagamut, which consists of the sitios of San Isidro, Cabasagan Dacu, Pinamparan, and Sumalig;

3. Barrio of Lala, the poblacion, which consists of the sitios of Tuna-an, Calisig, Matampay, and San lsidro;

4. Barrio of Simpak, which consists of the sitios of Pinuyak, and Masolon;

5. Barrio of Daromawang, which consists of the sitios of Margot and Cogon;

6. Barrio of Abagan, which consists of the sitios of Rebe, Panguil, and Balimbing-Maranding Crossing; and

7. Barrio Lanipao, which consists of the sitios of Pindolunan, Cabasagan Gamay, and Badac.

The municipality of Lala shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 22nd day of March, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd . ) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 208 : Organizing a certain portion of the municipality of Tubod, province of Lanao, into an independent municipality under the name of Lala, with the seat of government at the barrio of Lala. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (3), 1130-1131.