MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 482

AMENDING EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 453, DATED JUNE 19, 1951, ENTITLED “ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS TO CONTROL, CURTAIL, REGULATE AND/OR PROHIBIT THE EXPORTATION OR RE-EXPORTATION OF CERTAIN ITEMS FROM THE PHILIPPINES, TO IMPLEMENT REPUBLIC ACT NO. 613”

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by section 3 of Republic Act No. 613, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, I do hereby order:

Sections 2 and 14 of Executive Order No. 453, dated June 19, 1951, entitled “Establishing rules and regulations to control, curtail, regulate and/or prohibit the exportation or re-exportion of certain items from the Philippines, to implement Republic Act No. 613,” are hereby amended to read as follows:

“SEC. 2. The exportation of all articles included in the list marked Annex A, hereto attached as an integral part of this Order, is absolutely prohibited: Provided, however, That in exceptionally meritorious cases and where the Committee is fully satisfied that the overall economic and military requirements of the country are not prejudiced, such exportation may be allowed subject to the provisions of section 4 of this Order.”

“SEC. 14. Charging of fees. —The Committee shall charge a nominal fee of ₱5 for each application for export permit and each request for clearance submitted. A service fee of not exceeding one-half of one per cent of the value of the exportation shall be charged for every application approved. The funds accruing from the nominal and service fees shall, subject to the provisions of the Budget Act, be used to defray the expenses of the Committee in carrying out the provisions of Republic Act No. 613, provided that any unexpended balance shall revert to the General Fund of the National government.”

Annex A , II, of Executive Order No. 453, dated June 19, 1951, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“II. Ferrous and Non-Ferrous scrap metals, Ingots, and articles convertible into scrap.”

Annex A, III, A, 14 and 15, are hereby amended to read as follows:

“14. Meat, fish, poultry, and dairy products.” “15. Canned fruits, beans, vegetables and other farm products preparations.”

Annex A, III, A, is hereby amended by adding the following items:

“18. Pharmaceutical products.” “19. Textiles.”

Annex A, III, B, is hereby amended by adding the following item:

“6. Raw Rubber.”

Annex A, IV, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“IV. Imported Machinery (light and heavy), mechanical, electrical, agricultural, construction, engineering, and transportation equipment of all types, including surplus equipment, spare parts, accessories, wires and other allied articles, except those already approved by the Bureau of Customs or NICA or other government agencies as well as license covered in section 2 herein.”

Annex C, 9, is hereby amended to read as follows:

“9. Crude glycerine (locally produced).”

Done in the City of Manila, this 31st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 482 : Amending Executive Order No. 453, dated June 19, 1951, entitled “Establishing rules and regulations to control, curtail, regulate and/or prohibit the exportation or re-exportation of certain items from the Philippines, to implement Republic Act No. 613”. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 47 (10), 5039-5040.