MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 362

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF DIMATALING, ZAMBOANGA, INTO A MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF DINAS, AND ANNEXING TO THE MUNICIPALITY OF DIMATALING SITIOS GUILISAN, SALOAGAN AND MAGAHIS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MARGOSATUBIG, SAME PROVINCE

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized in the Province of Zamboanga a municipality to be known as the municipality of Dinas, whose territory shall consist of the northern part of the municipality of Dimataling and is separated from the said municipality by the following boundary:

From the mouth of Locuban River at the Sambulawan Bay following its course upstream to the source of this river, and from the said source to the summit of Mt. Buga in an imaginary line to be drawn in such a way as to leave the barrio of Tiniguangan in the municipality of Dimataling and the barrio of Bacawan in the municipality of Dinas.

As herein organized the municipality of Dinas has the following barrios: Dinas, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, to consist of the sitios of Nangka, (lower), Toludan, Binuatan, Dapuñgan, Tinicul and Pulatos; Migpulao, to consist of the sitio of Tagaluboc and other continuous places; Mirapao, to consist of the sitios of Dongos, Pantad, Sumuyak, Lubalan, Limunan and Mati; Legarda, to consist of the sitios of Legarda 1 and 2, Biray, Guinacap, Betinan and Duminsalao; Libuganan, to consist of the sitios of Maclob, Laperian, Dao-an and Bulawan; Kapamanoc, to consist of the sitios of Calilañgan, Camañga, Guiniculalay, Cundum, Pañgapong and Pao; San Pablo, to consist of the sitios of Culasian, Tandubuay, Tiniapan, Pantad and Malubog; Calipapa, to consist of the sitios of Tamburo, Ticala Islands, Tarakan, Dansalan, Buton and Bubual; Pisaan to consist of the Pisaan Island; Sibul, to consist of the sitios of Mandag, Igaboy, Linisuan and Calcalan; Bacawan, to consist of the sitios of Sumputan, Upper Dimaya, and other contiguous places; and Ludiong, to consist of the sitios of Locuban.

The sitios of Guilisan, Saloagan, and Magahis of the municipality of Margosatubig are hereby segregated from this municipality and annexed to the municipality of Dimataling, and are hereby organized as barrios under the same names in the municipality of Dimataling.

The municipality of Dimataling shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Dinas, plus the area comprised in the sitios of Guilisan, Saloagan, and Magahis of the municipality of Margosatubig.

The municipality of Margosatubig shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof comprised in the sitios of Guilisan, Saloagan, and Magahis.

The organization and annexation herein made shall take effect on November 10, 1950.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 362 : Organizing a portion of the municipality of Dimataling, Zamboanga, into a municipality under the name of Dinas, and annexing to the municipality of Dimataling sitios Guilisan, Saloagan and Magahis of the municipality of Margosatubig, same province. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (11), 5285-5287.