MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 620

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF NAUJAN, PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF VICTORIA

Pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Oriental Mindoro a municipality to be known as the municipality of Victoria, which shall consist of the southern portion of the municipality of Naujan, more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the north, by the course of the Macatoc River from its mouth at Naujan Lake to Macatoc River Bridge at Kilometer 30.35 on the Calapan South National Road and thence a straight 2 line south 90° 00′ west a distance of approximately 10.7 kilometers until it intersects Magasawang Tubig River;

On the west, by the course of the Magasawang Tubig River southerly upstream until it intersects the Naujan-Sablayan boundary line;

On the south, by the Naujan-Sablayan and the Naujan-Pola boundary lines; and

On the east, by the west shore line of Naujan Lake.

Data used in this description: Those shown by Acting District Engineer Laurena on map of Naujan, Oriental Mindoro, scale; 1:100,000, submitted by the said official.)

The municipality of Victoria contains the sitios, which hereafter be known as barrios, of Borboclon, which shall be the seat of government, Old Macatoc, Babaganan, New Macatoc-Townsite, Ordovilla, San Narciso, Malayas, Buliran, Pakias, Gusay, Bambang, and Merrit.

The municipality of Naujan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Victoria.

The municipality of Victoria shall begin to exist upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance or the Provincial Treasurer of Oriental Mindoro that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 18th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 620 : Organizing a portion of the Municipality of Naujan, Province of Oriental Mindoro, into an independent municipality under the name of Victoria. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (9), 3766-3767.