MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 369

FIXING THE CEILING PRICES OF COMMODITIES AND OTHER PURPOSES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by section 3 of Republic Act No. 509, entitled “An Act declaring national policy, authorizing the President of the Philippines for a limited period to fix ceiling prices of commodities and to promulgate rules and regulations regarding prices of commodities to effectuate such policy, and authorizing the appropriation of a certain sum for the purpose,” and upon the recommendation of the Price Administration Board, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The following essential commodities shall not be sold at more than the maximum selling prices for importers, wholesalers and retailers set opposite each:

FOODSTUFFS (IMPORTED)

Retail ceiling price

Rosebowl Sardines Oval in tomato sauce

48/15-oz.

P0.51/tin

Golden State powdered skimmed milk

Golden State powdered skimmed milk

Darigold powder skimmed milk

Darigold powdered skimmed milk

Dari-X powdered skimmed milk

“Our Mother” Brand powdered Cocoa

SEC. 2. Any commodity not included in any previous Executive Order fixing ceiling prices and issued by authority of Republic Act No. 509 or in this Order, the size and specification of which are the same as those of the foregoing, shall have the same ceiling price.

SEC. 3. This Order shall take effect five days after its promulgation.

Done in the City of Manila, this 13th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 370 : Amending Executive Order Numbered Three Hundred and Thirty-One, Executive Order Numbered Three Hundred and forty-Three and Executive Order Numbered Three Hundred Fifty-Three and for other purposes. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46 (11), 5312-5314.