MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 192

ON THE CONTROL OF EXPORTS FROM THE PHILIPPINES

By virtue of the powers vested in me by ;the Constitution and of the Emergency Powers Law, and in order to secure an adequate supply at reasonable prices of articles that are vitally needed in the country and to fulfill the commitments of the Republic of the Philippines under the International Emergency Food Council and the Agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and the United States of America on surplus war property, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The exportation of the following products, merchandise, articles, materials and supplies is hereby prohibited, until further orders:

SEC. 2. The exportation of copra shall be allowed through export permits issued in accordance with the commitments of the Republic of the Philippines under the International Emergency Food Council in relation to copra allocations made from time to time by said Council to importing countries.

SEC. 3. The exportation of war surplus properties transferred to the Republic of the Philippines under the Agreement between the Republic and the Government of the United States of America, dated September 11, 1946, shall be permitted only in accordance with said agreement.

SEC. 4. All products, articles, materials, and supplies that are issued export permits shall be subject to the following fees: for every application for an export license, a fee of ₱2 and for every export license, issued, a license fee of ₱5 shall be charged for every ₱1,000 of the declared value of the products, articles, materials, and supplies covered by the license, or fraction of said value amounting to ₱500 or more: Provided, That the license fee for each license issued shall in no case exceed ₱50. The Sugar Quota Office shall issue export permits in accordance with the provisions of this Order and the fees collected for the issuance thereof shall constitute a special fund to be spent by said office for the enforcement of this Order.

SEC 5. Any person, corporation, association, partnership, firm or any other entity found guilty of violation of the Order shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand pesos, or by imprisonment for not more than ten years, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court: Provided, That if the violation is committed by the manager, representative, director, agent or employee of any natural or juridical person in the interest of the latter, the same shall render said natural or juridical person amenable to the penalties herein prescribed, without prejudice to the imposition of said penalties upon such manager, representative, director, agent or employee: and Provided, further, That the principals or employers who are juridical persons shall be amenable to the prescribed pecuniary penalty. Any alien convicted of any violation of the provisions of this Order shall, after service of sentence, be deported and the Court shall so provide in its judgment.

SEC. 6. This Order shall take effect on January 1, 1949.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEDORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 192 : On the control of exports from the Philippines. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44 (12), 4688-4691.