MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 385

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF DAPITAN, ZAMBOANGA, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF RIZAL

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Zamboanga a municipality to be known as “Rizal,” comprising the eastern portion of the municipality of Dapitan, more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the north by the limit of the municipal waters which the municipality of Rizal shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code;

On the east by the Zamboanga-Occidental Misamis provincial boundary;

On the south by the present boundary line of Dapitan and Dipolog; and

On the west by a straight line starting from M.B.M. No. 3, located at the intersection of longitude 123° 30′ E. and latitude 8° 25′ N., established by Survey Party No. 17-B of the Bureau of Lands, running 4° 15′ E. to Calubi point at the intersection of longitude 123° 31′ E. and latitude 8° 38′ N. (Reference used: map of proposed municipality of Rizal, Province of Zamboanga: Scale 1:40,000 submitted by the office of the District Engineer.)

The municipality of Rizal, as herein organized, contains the following barrios: New Tolon, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Mapang, Bongbongan, Tuayon, Sipaon, New Carcar, Singaran, Sacro, Maroc, Mitemos, Nanca-an, Tolon, Marapong Diot, Balatacan, Damasing, Sibaca, Nasipang, Mabunao and Nanka.

The municipality of Dapitan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Rizal.

The municipality of Rizal shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the municipal mayor, the vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 385 : Organizing a portion of the municipality of Dapitan, Zamboanga, into an independent municipality under the name of Rizal. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (12), 5899-5900.