MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 246

ORGANIZING CERTAIN PORTIONS OF THE MUNICIPALITIES OF BALER AND INFANTA, QUEZON PROVINCE, INTO INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITIES, UNDER THE NAMES OF MARIA AURORA AND GENERAL NAKAR, RESPECTIVELY.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of San Jose, Dibucao, Kadayakan, San Joaquin, Diaat, Bazal, Baobo, Diome, Suguit Dialatnan, Dekeldet, Detaelin, Bangko, Cabitucolan and Demonpudso, all of the municipality of Baler, Province of Quezon, and the barrios of Anoling, Banglos, Batangan, Magsikap, Maligaya, Minahan, Katablingan and Pamplona, all of the municipality of Infanta, same province, are hereby organized into independent municipalities, under the names of Maria Aurora and General Nakar, with the seats of government at the barrios of San Jose and Pamplona, respectively.

The municipality of Maria Aurora is bounded on the east by a line running generally north to south in such a way as to separate from the municipality of Baler all the barrios named above comprised in Maria Aurora, on the south by a straight west-to-east line coinciding with North Latitude 15° 40′; and on the west and northwest by the present boundary separating the province of Quezon from the Provinces of Nueva Ecija and Nueva Vizcaya.

The municipality of General Nakar is bounded on the south, by the Agos River from its mouth on the Pacific coast upstream to its southwestern source near the boundary between Quezon and Rizal plus a straight imaginary line running westward to its intersection with the Quezon-Rizal boundary; on the east, by the limits of the municipal waters which General Nakar shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code; on the west, by the present boundary which separates Quezon Province from the Provinces of Rizal and Bulacan; and on the north, by the present boundary between Baler and Infanta.

The municipalities of Baler and Infanta shall have their present territories, minus the respective portions thereof included in the municipalities of Maria Aurora and General Nakar.

The municipalities of Maria Aurora and General Nakar shall each begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEDORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 246 : Organizing certain portions of the municipalities of Baler and Infanta, Quezon Province, into independent municipalities, under the names of Maria Aurora and General Nakar, respectively. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2743-2744.