MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 238

REESTABLISHING THE FORMER MUNICIPALITY OF LAS NAVAS, IN THE PROVINCE OF SAMAR

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the former municipality of Las Navas, now a part of the municipality of Catubig, Samar, is hereby reestablished, with the seat of government at the barrio of Las Navas. As herein organized, the municipality of Las Navas shall have the following barrios: Las Navas, the seat of government, Bukid, Balugo, Geraedo, Inabetenan, Rebong, Camalangday, Caglibas, Matelarag, Cutoto-ogan, Hangi, Bolao, Tagabiran, San Miguel, Del Pilar, Dapdap, Sagod, Cayo, Lomalaug, Tagporo, Camanewan, Lonoy, Geguinta, Bugtosan, Kerjat, Mabini, Rizal, Taylor, Paco, Victory, Poponton, and Avelino. The boundary separating the municipality of Las Navas from the municipality of Catubig shall be:

A line starting from a point on the present Catubig-Pambujan boundary on the west, this point being west of the center of the barrio of Cagmanaba, and running in an easterly direction in such a way as to place within the municipality of Catubig the said barrio of Cagmanaba and in the municipality of Las Navas the barrio of Bukid, until it intersects the creek locally known as Magungon; thence following this creek downstream to where it empties into the Catubig Kiver; thence to the mouth of Inoburan Creek; thence upstream to the source of this creek somewhere between the barrio of Balugo of the municipality of Las Navas and the barrio of Solitan of the municipality of Catubig; thence in a straight line to the source of Hibolo creek, this source being more or less two kilometers from its mouth on Hagbay River; thence following this creek downstream to its mouth on Hagbay River; thence in a straight imaginary line running eastward to the intersection of this line with the present Catubig-Jipapad boundary.

The municipality of Catubig shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Las Navas.

The municipality of Las Navas shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 238 : Reestablishing the former municipality of Las Navas, in the Province of Samar. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2730-2731.