MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 153

PRESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE FOR THE RECEPTION OF FOREIGN PUBLIC VESSELS

By virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following rules governing the reception of foreign public vessels entering Philippine waters and the harbor of Manila:

1. All foreign men-of-war when entering Philippine waters are required to fly the international flag of quarantine, drop their anchor at the quarantine anchorage and wait for the quarantine officer who shall perform the quarantine inspection.

However, upon proper representations of the officials of the foreign government, radio pratique may be granted. The Bureau of Quarantine should be informed through the fastest means possible of the details regarding the existence or non-existence of any infectious disease on board the vessel and the immunization status of the officers and crew. These details should be relayed to the Bureau of Quarantine by a radiogram signed by the medical officer of the vessel. In the event a radio pratique is granted, the vessel will be boarded soon after its docking, for procurement of quarantine data.

2. Government vessels coming from abroad are not subject to the provisions of the customs law. They are, however, subject to the quarantine laws and regulations of the Philippines.

Said vessels which are permitted to call at Manila may safely pass the north or south channel of Corregidor without the need of pilotage service. Upon arrival in Manila and after release by the quarantine authorities, they will be given pilotage service to place them in the anchorage that will be assigned to them by the Bureau of Customs.

3. The Philippine Naval Patrol will return salutes rendered by foreign men-of-war entering Manila Harbor. It is customary for saluting vessels to fire their salute at Lat. 14° 84′ 25″ N. Long. 120° 57′ 17″ E. at the entrance of the south breakwater.

The Headquarters, Philippine Naval Patrol, Dewey Boulevard, Manila, should be notified at least 48 hours in advance of the intention of foreign men-of-war to fire the National salute upon entering the Harbor of Manila.

Done in the City of Manila, this ninth day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 153 : Prescribing the procedure for the reception of foreign public vessels. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (7), 2152-2153.