MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 375

ORGANIZING A PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BALER, PROVINCE OF QUEZON, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF DIPACULAO

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Quezon a municipality under the name of Dipaculao, comprising the northern portion of Baler, more particularly described and bounded as follows:

On the north, by the Quezon-Nueva Vizcaya boundary; on the northeast, by the present Baler-Casiguran boundary; on the east, by the boundary line which the municipality of Dipaculao shall have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code, and on the southwest, by the northeastern boundary of Maria Aurora and northern boundary of Baler. (Reference used in this descriptions: Map of Baler showing the proposed political boundaries of proposed municipality of Dipaculao, scale 1:20,000, prepared in the Bureau of Public Works, Lucena, Quezon.)

The municipality of Dipaculao, as herein organized, shall have the following barrios: Dipaculao, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, Mijares, Ipil, Salay, Bayabas, Mukdol, Buenavista, Diarabasin, Dibutunan, Balongan, Mabiiao-bilao, Dinadiawan, Diamanan, Puange, Lubbot, Toytoyan and Gupa.

The municipality of Baler shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Dipaculao.

The municipality of Dipaculao shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors.

Done in the City of Manila, this 27th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 375 : Organizing a portion of the municipality of Baler, province of Quezon, into an independent municipality under the name of Dipaculao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 46 (11), 5329.