MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 559

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF TAGO, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF CAGWAIT.

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Aras-asan, Bacolod, Bayabas, Bitaugan and Cagwait are hereby segregated from the municipality of Tago, Province of Surigao, and organized into an independent municipality under the name of Cagwait, with the seat of government at the barrio of Cagwait.

The municipality of Cagwait as herein organized shall have the following boundaries:

From a point midway between the northwest and southeast shores of the small bay immediately north of the barrio of Bayabas, southwesterly in a straight imaginary line to the mouth of the Bayabas Eiver, marked point A on the map, somewhere southwest of the poblacion of the barrio of Bayabas, following the course of said river upstream to where it branches into the Cagbuoto Creek; thence following the course of the creek upstream to its source, marked point B; thence straight in a southwesterly direction to Alday Creek, marked point C; thence straight southerly to the source of Mararag Creek and down to where this line intersects the Otieza-Tago boundary line, marked point D; thence following the Otieza-Tago boundary line in a southeasterly direction until it touches the seashore; thence following the boundaries of the municipal waters which the municipality of Cagwait shall nave pursuant to section 2321 of the .Revised Administrative Code, to the point of beginning. (Reference used: Map of the municipality of Tago, Surigao, scale: 1:100,000, prepared by C. G. Sanson, draftsman, verified by Prospero Salas, Highway Inspector, and approved by Ricardo Tancinco, District Engineer of Surigao.)

The municipality of Cagwait shall be organized and begin to exist upon certification by the provincial treasurer that the new municipality possesses the financial capacity to pay its officials and employees the minimum wages and salaries in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 602 and upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of January, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 559 : Organizing a certain portion of the Municipality of Tago, Province of Surigao, into an independent municipality under the name of Cagwait. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (1), 5-6.