MALACAÑANG MANILA

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 345

CREATING THE PEACE FUND CAMPAIGN COMMISSION

WHEREAS, the maintenance of peace and order demands the cooperation of every inhabitant in the task of eradicating elements of the population who are spreading terror, conflict and confusion in outlying communities and seeking to subvert and overthrow the lawfully constituted authority of the Republic of the Philippines;

WHEREAS, the successful accomplishment of this task requires urgently additional funds for the carrying out of the purposes hereinafter stated; and

WHEREAS, responsible elements of the nation have manifested their spirit of adherence and cooperation in this respect and have signified their desire to contribute in the campaign to raise such funds;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Peace Fund Campaign Commission which shall be charged with the responsibility of raising funds from voluntary contributions to carry out the purposes of this Order. Said funds shall be (1) for the purchase of loose firearms and such other arms and equipment, as can be used to resist the violent elements in accordance with the provisions of Republic Acts Nos. 482 and 486; (2) for the compensation of additional members of the Armed Forces to be employed in the peace campaign; (3) for indemnity to the heirs of those who may die or receive injuries in line of duty; (4) for other relief and assistance to civilians who may be engaged in the peace campaign; and (5) for aid in the protection of the civilian population in case of emergency. The amounts collected shall be allotted by authority of the President of the Philippines, upon the recommendation of the Chairman of the Commission, the Treasurer of the Commission and the Commissioner of the Budget. All the contributions and disbursements of the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor General or his representative in accordance with law.

The Commission shall be composed of the following:

The Commission is hereby authorized to create local committees to assist in the performance of its functions and to adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Order. It may secure the services of officers and employees of any department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office or instrumentality of the Government, whose assistance it may require in accomplishing its task.

This Order shall continue in force until the Congress in its next regular or special session shall provide otherwise.

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 345 : Creating the Peace Fund Campaign Commission. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (9), 4075.