MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 224

ANNEXING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE TERRITORY OF THE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF CLAVERIA, MISAMIS ORIENTAL, TO THE MUNICIPALITIES OF LINUGOS, GINGOOG, MEDINA AND TALISAYAN, SAME PROVINCE

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the following described portion of the territory of the municipal district of Claveria in the Province of Misamis Oriental is hereby segregated from said municipal district:

Bounded on the north by the present boundaries between the municipal district of Claveria on one side and the municipalities of Linugos, Gingoog, Medina and Talisayan on the other; on the west, by the municipality of Kinoguitan; on the south, by the line starting from a point on the present Misamis-Agusan boundary, said point being about 8 kilometers from the top of a mountain at which the Binawangan River has its source, and running straight S. 59° 50′ W., a distance of 32 kms. to a point about five kilometers southwest of the sitio of Magatang and approximately six kilometers southeast of the sitio of Walingon; thence N. 89° 00′ W., 24 kms. in a straight line to a point about two kilometers southeast of the sitio of Apo Cayo; thence approximately N. 27° 30′ W. in a straight line to a point where it intersects another straight line drawn from the shore at the barrio of Portulin, municipality of Medina, which is identical to the present Talisayan-Medina boundary and an inland prolongation of this boundary to a distance of 19 kilometers from the shore at Portulin; thence N. 82° 20′ W., 7 kilometers, to the point of intersection of the present boundaries of Kinoguitan, Claveria, and Salay; and on the east, by the present Misamis Oriental-Agusan boundary; and such parts of the above described portion of the territory of Claveria as are contiguous to the municipalities of Linugos, Gingoog, Medina and Talisayan are hereby respectively annexed to these municipalities. The present boundaries between Linugos and Gingoog, between Gingoog and Medina, and between Medina and Talisayan shall be extended as follows:

( a ) Linugos-Gingoog boundary: —From the point where the Binawangan River intersects the present Claveria boundary, following this river upstream to its source in the mountain towards the southeast; thence from this source to the highest point of the said mountain on the present boundary between Misamis Oriental and Agusan.

( b ) Gingoog-Medina boundary: —From the point where the present Gingoog-Medina boundary intersects the present boundary of the municipal district of Claveria southwestward in a straight line running as a continuation of, and following the same direction as, the said present Gingoog-Medina boundary until it intersects the southwest boundary of the portion of the territory of Claveria described above.

( c ) Medina-Talisayan boundary: —From the point where the present Medina-Talisayan boundary intersects the present boundary of the municipal district of Claveria, southwestward in a straight line that runs as a continuation of and follows the same direction as the said present Medina-Talisayan boundary to a point 19 kilometers from the shore.

(These boundary descriptions are based upon data shown in the map of Talisayan, Medina, Gingoog, and Linugos, submitted April 26, 1949, by the District Engineer, and drawn to scale 1:50,000.)

The annexation herein made shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 15th day of June, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 224 : Annexing a certain portion of the territory of the municipal district of Claveria, Misamis Oriental, to the municipalities of Linugos, Gingoog, Medina and Talisayan, same province. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 45 (6), 2387-2388.