MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 186

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF CAUAYAN, NEGROS OCCIDENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF ASIA.

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Asia, Jinuba-an and Colipapa, together with certain portions of the barrio of Bacuyagan, all of the municipality of Cauayan, Province of Negros Occidental, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Asia, with the seat of government at the barrio of Asia.

As herein organized the municipality of Asia shall have the following boundaries as described in Index Map of Cauayan Cadastre B. L. No. 193, Province of Negros Occidental, surveyed June, 1924, to July, 1927, by Cadastral Survey Party No. 20-A, Bureau of Lands:

Beginning from the point where the southern boundary of the municipality of Sipalay touches the shore of Nabulao Bay in the barrio of Bacuyagan, running in a straight west-to-east line until it intersects the present boundary between Cauayan and Hog; thence southwesterly following the said Cauayan-Ilog boundary to M.B.M. No. 6 of Cauayan which is equivalent to P.B.M. No. 13 and M.B.M. No. 3 of Tolong; thence southwest along the provincial boundary of Negros Occidental and Negros Oriental to M.B.M. No. 7 of Cauayan which is equivalent to P.B.M. No. 14 and M.B.M. No. 4 of Tolong; thence following the same provincial boundary to the B.B.M. No. 8 of Cauayan, which is equivalent to B.B.M. No. 15 and M.B.M. No, 3 of Tolong; thence to B.B.M. No. 16 which is equivalent to M.B.M. No. 2 of Tolong; thence to B.B.M, No. 17 which is equal to M.B.M. No. 1 of Tolong at the seashore; thence following the boundary of the municipal waters which the municipality of Asia should have pursuant to the provisions of section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to the point of beginning.

The municipality of Cauayan shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Asia.

The municipality herein organized shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the municipal councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 186 : Organizing certain barrios of the municipality of Cauayan, Negros Occidental, into an independent municipality under the name of Asia. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 44 (11), 4167-4168.