MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 239

APPROPRIATING ADDITIONAL FUNDS FOR THE OPERATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES DURING THE PERIOD FROM JULY 1, 1949 TO JUNE 30, 1950, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

WHEREAS, the First Congress of the Philippines in its Fourth Session failed to pass a General Appropriation Bill for the operation of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines during the period from July 1, 1949 to June 30, 1950;

WHEREAS, the General Appropriation Act for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1949 (Republic Act No. 320), which is continued in force by Executive Order No. 225, current series, for the same purposes, services and activities for the fiscal year 1950, provides no funds for the continuation of the operation and maintenance of international air communications, navigation services and radio aids; for the continuation of the operation and maintenance of weather stations; and for the continuation of the health and quarantine activities, all of which are to be turned over to the Philippine Government by the agencies of the United States operating them in accordance with the provisions of the agreements entered into between the Governments of the Philippines and the United States under the terms of the Philippine Rehabilitation Act of 1946; and

WHEREAS, the absence of the corresponding appropriations will paralyze all the said work and activities;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and existing laws, particularly Commonwealth Act No. 671, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The sum of Eight hundred seventy-five thousands pesos, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated out of any funds in the Philippine Treasury not otherwise appropriated for the following purposes:

SEC. 2. The motor vehicles which are to be transferred by the agencies concerned of the United States to the Republic of the Philippines and which are used by the Bureau of Health and the Bureau of Quarantine Service for health, sanitation and quarantine work for the prevention and control of epedimics, shall continue to be operated and maintained for the same purposes by said Bureaus.

SEC. 3. The special and general provisions of Republic Act No. 320 are hereby made applicable to the appropriations provided in this Executive Order.

SEC. 4. This Order shall take effect as of July 1, 1949.

Done in the City of Manila, this 8th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fourth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 239 : Appropriating additional funds for the operation of the government of the Republic of the Philippines during the period from July 1, 1949 to June 30, 1950, and for other purposes. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 45 (7), 2731-2732.