MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 472

CREATING A NATIONAL ADVISORY BOARD ON VOCATIONAL EDUCATION

WHEREAS, the national program of mechanized agriculture and industrialization cannot be carried out effectively without sufficient skilled labor and technical know-how;

WHEREAS, the public and private vocational schools aim to give to the youth and adults of this country occupational training which will prepare them to engage in occupations and occupy appropriate places in the national industrialization program;

WHEREAS, it is essential that the training courses offered in the vocational schools be such as will give specific vocational efficiency; that the equipment and facilities of such schools be adequate to meet the requirements of practical training; and that the projects and other means of instruction be suitable to commercial needs with respect to kind, quality of workmanship, methods of production, and materials; and

WHEREAS, it is advisable that there be consultation among representatives of agriculture, business and industry, both government and private, with a view to formulating suggestions and recommendations regarding the selection of the needed technical know-how and the training and employment of skilled workers which may serve as a basis of the vocational educational program.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create a National Advisory Board on Vocational Education, whose function shall be to advise the Secretary of Education on matters pertaining to the selection, training, placement, and progress of workers needed in agriculture, industry and business. The Board shall be composed of one representative from the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, one representative from the Department of Labor, and one representative from the Department of Commerce and Industry, each to be nominated by the Department Secretary concerned, and three private citizens who are eminent in industry, agriculture, and business to be appointed by the President of the Philippines for a term of four years upon the recommendation of the Secretary of Education.

The Secretary of Education, the Director of Public Schools, and the Director of Private Schools shall be ex-officio members of the Board, and the Chief of the Vocational Education Division of the Bureau of Public Schools shall be its Executive Secretary. The members of the Board shall elect their chairman each year and shall meet once a month, or oftener as circumstances may warrant. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services therein.

The Board is hereby authorized to formulate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of this order.

Done in the City of Manila, this 24th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-one, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the sixth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Assistant Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1951). Executive Order No. 472 : Creating a National Advisory Board on Vocational Education. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 47 (8), 3903-3904.