MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 612

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITIES OF BAÑGA AND TUPI IN THE PROVINCE OF COTABATO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Cotabato and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there are hereby created in the Province of Cotabato the municipalities of Bañga and Tupi with their seats of government at the barrios of Bañga and Tupi, respectively.

The municipality of Bañga consists of the territory comprised in the barrios of Bañga, Lampare, Lamian, Lahit, Sapoli and Lampaday, and the sitios of Sinolon, Solkon, Head-Ala, Lamba, Siguil, Tube-Ala, anl Colnomo, all of the municipality of Koronadal, Cotabato, and the sitios of Centrala, Cinco, Kalibo, Katan, Kusan, Libertad, Liwanay, Punong Grande, Rizal and Teresita of the municipality of Dulawan, same province.

The municipality of Tupi consists of the territory comprised in the barrios of Tupi, Palian, Kipalbig, Tampakan, Basack, Polonoling, Beiomala (Rubber Area), Lunen, Kalondatal, and Buntong, and the sitios of Maltana, Liberty, Kablon, Lambayong, Lampitak, Kalkam, Datalbolon, Linan and Cebuano, all of the municipality of Koronadal.

The municipality of Koronadal shall consists of its present territory minus the barrios and sitios enumerated above comprised in the municipalities of Bañga and Tupi.

The municipality of Dulawan shall consists of its present territory less that portion comprised in the cities included in the municipality of Bañga.

The municipalities of Bañga and Tupi shall begin to exist upon the certification by the Provincial Treasurer of Cotabato or the Secretary of Finance that they will be in a position to fully implement the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and upon the appointment and qualification of their respective mayors, vice-mayors and majority of the councilors.

Done in the City of Manila, this 11th day of September, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 612 : Creating the Municipalities of Bañga and Tupi in the Province of Cotabato. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (9), 2108.