MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 624

CREATING THE MUNICIPALITY OF CORTES IN THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-eight of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby created in the Province of Surigao a municipality to be known as the municipality of Cortes to consist of the barrios of Cortes, which shall be the seat of government, Burgos, Tigao and Matho of the municipality of Tandag and the sitios, which shall hereafter be known as the barrios of Madrileño, Tuburan and Capandan, all of the municipality of Lanuza.

The municipalities of Tandag and Lanuza shall have their respective present territories minus the barrios and sitios enumerated above which are included in the municipality of Cortes.

The municipality of Cortes shall begin to exist upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof, and upon the certification by the Secretary of Finance or the Provincial Treasurer of Surigao that said municipality is financially capable of implementing the provisions of the Minimum Wage Law and at the same time providing for all the statutory obligations and ordinary essential services of a regular municipality and that the mother municipalities of Tandag and Lanuza, after the segregation therefrom of the barrios comprised in the municipality of Cortes, can still maintain their municipal governments, meet all statutory obligations, and provide for ordinary essential municipal services.

Done in the City of Manila, this 1st day of October, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the eighth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 624 : Creating the municipality of Cortes in the province of Surigao. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (10), 4232.