MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 228

ORGANIZING CERTAIN BARRIOS OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MANJUYOD, NEGROS ORIENTAL, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF PAYABON

Upon the recommendation of the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, the barrios of Malaga, Pangalaycayan, Cabugan, Piñahan, Batangan, Bulod, Atotes, Nalundan, Salong, Tubod, Canluto, Matobato, Tinaogan, Domolog, Tagaytay, Danao and Payabon and the sitios of Camodlas, Mansehe, and Cabcaban, all of the municipality of Manjuyod, Negros Oriental, are hereby organized into an independent municipality under the name of Payabon, with the seat of government at barrio Payabon.

The territory of the Municipality of Payabon, as herein organized, is bounded on the north, by Manjuyod-Ayungon boundary; on the east, by the east limit in Tañon Strait of the municipal waters that shall now pertain to Payabon pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code; on the south, by a straight line from the mouth of Alawihan River to a monument on the boundary line between the provinces of Negros Occidental and Negros Oriental, located about 625 meters north of the point where the proposed Kabankalan-Bais road intersects with said provincial boundary line; and on the northwest, by the Negros Occidental-Negros Oriental boundary line. (Description based on data shown on map, dated November 2, 1948, of Manjuyod showing proposed municipality of Payabon , submitted by District Engineer, and drawn to scale 1:50,000.)

The municipality of Manjuyod shall consist of its present territory minus the territory comprised in the municipality of Payabon.

The organization of Payabon herein made shall take effect upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor, and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 17th day of June, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the third.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1949). Executive Order No. 228 : Organizing certain barrios of the municipality of Manjuyod, Negros Oriental, into an independent municipality under the name of Payabon. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 45 (6), 2391-2392.