MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 561

ORGANIZING A CERTAIN PORTION OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF CANTILAN, PROVINCE OF SURIGAO, INTO AN INDEPENDENT MUNICIPALITY UNDER THE NAME OF MADRID.

Upon the recommendation of the Provincial Board of Surigao and pursuant to the provisions of section 68 of the Revised Administrative Code, there is hereby organized in the Province of Surigao a municipality to be known as the municipality of Madrid which shall consist of the eastern part of the municipality of Cantilan and more particularly bounded and described by the following boundary lines:

Beginning from a point in Cantilan River near the sea immediately west of the poblacion of the barrio of Union, running southerly in a straight imaginary line to kilometer 126 in the sitio of Tagcoling along the national road; thence southeasterly straight to a point where it first coincides with the lower course of the Sibyoc River somewhere west of the sitio of Labao; thence, following the course of the Sibyoc River upstream until it intersects the Surigao-Agusan boundary in the Diwata Mountains; thence, following the Surigao-Agusan boundary in a northeasterly direction until it reaches the point where the Cantilan-Lanuza boundary meets the Surigao-Agusan boundary; thence, following the Cantilan-Lanuza boundary until it touches the seashore; and thence following the limits of the marine waters which the municipality of Madrid shall have pursuant to section 2321 of the Revised Administrative Code to the point of beginning. (Reference used: Map of the municipality of Cantilan, showing the proposed municipality of Madrid, etc., scale 1:125,000 prepared by Surveyman C A. Cuison, approved and submitted by District Engineer Galo C. Castronuevo.)

The municipality of Madrid, as herein organized, contains the following barrios: Madrid, which shall be the seat of the municipal government, and Union.

The municipality of Cantilan shall have its present territory minus the portion thereof included in the municipality of Madrid.

The municipality of Madrid shall be organized and begin to exist upon certification by the Provincial Treasurer that the new municipality possesses the financial capacity to pay its officials and employees the minimum wages and salaries in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 602 and upon the appointment and qualification of the mayor, vice-mayor and a majority of the councilors thereof.

Done in the City of Manila, this 2nd day of February, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-three, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source: Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1953). Executive Order No. 561 : Organizing a certain portion of the Municipality of Cantilan, Province of Surigao, into an independent municipality under the name of Madrid. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, 49 (2), 417-418.