MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 130

ORGANIZING THE TURTLE ISLANDS IN THE SULU ARCHIPELAGO AS A MUNICIPAL DISTRICT

By virtue of the powers vested in me by law, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order that:

1. The Turtle Islands referred to in Executive Order No. 95, dated October 13,1947, shall hereafter be known as the municipal district of Turtle Islands and governed by article VI, chapter 64, of the Revised Administrative Code.

2. The provincial board of Sulu shall act as council for the municipal district of Turtle Islands.

3. The district officer of Turtle Islands shall hereafter be known as municipal district mayor and possess the same powers and duties which pertain to such official in other municipal districts organized under the provisions of article VI, chapter 64, of the Revised Administrative Code, in addition to those prescribed in the aforementioned Executive Order No. 95 not inconsistent herewith.

4. The chief of police of Turtle Islands shall, in addition to his duties as such and until a regular deputy provincial and municipal district treasurer is appointed under existing laws, perform the duties and functions of deputy provincial and municipal district treasurer, subject to the supervision of the provincial treasurer of Sulu and to the same rules and regulations governing the position, duties and functions of municipal district treasurer.

5. There shall be assigned on regular patrol duty in and around the Turtle Islands a detachment of Constabulary soldiers under the command of a commissioned officer, who shall also act as deputy of the Commissioner of Immigration.

6. The proper authorities shall immediately provide such measures as are necessary towards the immediate conservation, management, or disposition of the turtle products and other natural resources in and around the Turtle Islands.

The provisions of Executive Order No. 95, dated October 13, 1947, inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.

Done in the City of Manila, this 21st day of April, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the second.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) EMILIO ABELLO Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1948). Executive Order No. 130 : Organizing the Turtle Islands in the Sulu Archipelago as a municipal district. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 44 (4), 1118-1119.