MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 383

ABOLISHING THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, TRANSFERRING ITS POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS TO THE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Pursuant to the powers vested in me by Republic Act Numbered Four hundred twenty-two, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. The Department of the Interior is hereby abolished and all the powers, duties and functions conferred upon the Secretary of the Interior by existing laws, rules and regulations are hereby transferred to, vested in, and shall be assumed and exercised by the President.

SEC. 2. All the records, properties and equipment of the Department of the Interior, including the unexpended balances of appropriations therefor provided under Republic Act Numbered Five hundred sixty-three, are hereby transferred to the Office of the President.

SEC. 3. Executive Order No. 167, dated October 8, 1938, revising the instructions and delimiting the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Finance in the supervision and control of the personnel and finances of the provincial, city and municipal governments is hereby modified in the sense that budgets of the provincial and city governments shall hereafter be submitted directly for action by the Department of Finance.

SEC. 4. Any officer or employee of the Department of the Interior who is separated from the service by reason of the abolition of his position by this Order and who is not reappointed to any of the positions to be created in the Office of the President, shall be paid from funds realized from savings in the appropriation for the current fiscal year for the Department of the Interior, a gratuity equivalent to one month salary for every year of continuous satisfactory service rendered, but not exceeding twelve months, on the basis of the last salary received: Provided, That any official or employee who has rendered less than one year of service shall be entitled to a gratuity of one-half of one month’s salary: and Provided, further, That in case of subsequent reinstatement in the government service or in any government-owned or controlled corporation, he shall refund to the National Government the value of the gratuity which he would not yet have received had it been paid to him in monthly installments.

SEC. 5. This Order shall take effect immediately but such personnel of the Department of the Interior who are accountable for the cash and properties thereof and not reappointed in the Office of the President, but whose services are required in connection with the transfer of funds or properties to the latter as herein provided, may continue in their present positions for a period not exceeding two months until their cash and property accountability are duly settled.

Done in the City of Manila, this 20th day of December, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 383 : Abolishing the Department of the Interior, transferring its powers, duties and functions to the Office of the President, and for other purposes. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (12), 5896-5897.