MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 545

APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR URGENT AND ESSENTIAL PUBLIC WORKS

WHEREAS, the Congress in its last special session called for the purpose of providing funds for urgent and essential public works, such as maintenance of public buildings and permanent improvements, river control works, sea protection works, partworks, irrigation systems, airports, waterworks and artesian wells, particularly hospitals, schoolhouses and municipal buildings which need immediate repairs and reconstruction due to damages wrought by recent typhoons and floods or which have been destroyed by other calamities, has utterly failed to approve legislation to provide the urgently needed funds;

WHEREAS, the further abandonment of those projects, especially the reconstruction of school buildings and hospitals, Inns already resulted in the suspension of classes, in the closing of public hospitals, puericulture centers, charity clinics and other public health and sanitary services in typhoon-stricken areas and in the laying off of thousands of laborers, thus aggravating the unemployment problem;

WHEREAS, hundreds of thousands of people who have suffered during the recent typhoons need immediate relief by providing them with opportunities for employment in the public works projects; and

WHEREAS, the resulting emergency has created a situation which renders it absolutely necessary for the Government to take immediate steps to enable it to fulfill its responsibilities and to maintain and enforce its authority;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, ELPIDIO QUIRINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and Commonwealth Act No. 671, known as the Emergency Powers Law, and upon the insistent and strong appeal of the House of Representatives as expressed in its Resolution No. 99, adopted November 8, 1952, do hereby order:

SECTION. 1, The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are hereby appropriated out of the General Fund in the National Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to be allocated by the Secretary of Public Works and Communications and expended under the direction of the Director of Public Works, for the purposes mentioned hereunder:

A. MISCELLANEOUS

B. SANITATION

C. WATERWORKS

D. RIVER CONTROL

E. SHORE PROTECTION

F. IRRIGATION

G. AIR NAVIGATION

H. WATER RIGHTS ADJUDICATION AND HYDROGRAPHIC INVESTIGATIONS

SEC. 2. The following sums or so much thereof as may be necessary, are hereby appropriated out of the “Port Works Fund” that has accrued under Act NO. 3592, as amended, not otherwise appreciated, to be spent by the Director of Public Works, subject to the approval of the Secretary of Public Works and Communications and to the provisions hereinafter set forth, for the purpose mentioned hereunder:

SEC. 3. All sums appropriated under this Order shall be released only after certification by the Fund Release Committee created under Administrative Order No. 129, dated August 8, 11950, to the President of the Philippines that there are sufficient funds delivered from current revenues in excess of authorized appropriations for the ordinary operating expenses of the National Government in the National Treasury to warrant such release.

SEC. 4. This Order shall take effect immediately.

Done in the City of Manila, this 10th day of November, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty-two, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the seventh.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) MARCIANO ROQUE Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1952). [Executive Order Nos. : 488 – 664]. Manila : Presidential Museum and Library.