MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 340

PROMULGATING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ORGANIZATION AND TRAINING OF CIVILIAN EMERGENCY ADMINISTRATION GUARDS

By virtue of the powers in me vested by law, and upon the recommendation of the National Emergency Commission, I, Elpidio Quirino, President of the Philippines, do hereby promulgate the following rules and regulations for the organization and training of Civilian Emergency Administration Guards (CEA Guards).

1. The Mayor of each chartered city, municipality, and/or municipal district shall organize CEA Guards in his respective city, municipality, and/or municipal district. The CEA Guards are empowered to assist in the suppression of espionage and sabotage; to safeguard public utilities, bridges and manufacturing plants engaged in essential industries; to succor, aid and assist the populace in emergencies caused by fires, floods, earthquakes, typhoons, epidemics, air-raids or other forms of local or national disaster in order that injury to persons and property may be prevented. Members of Police, Traffic Control and Guard Duty Units, CEA Guards, during actual emergencies caused by war, sabotage, or during imminence of air-raids, are hereby invested with the powers of police officers in the performance of their duties. The use of the CEA Guards for any other purpose is prohibited.

2. The organization of the CEA Guards units shall be as prescribed herein.

3. The training of the units of the CEA Guards shall be conducted under the general supervision and direction of the Commanding Officer of the Philippine Constabulary and in strict accordance with the program of instruction to be prescribed by him.

4. The Mayor of each city, municipality, and/or municipal district is charged with the duty of, and is responsible for, recruiting an adequate number of men to form at full strength the units of the CEA Guards prescribed for his respective city or municipality, and controlling and operating them.

5. Enrollment in the CEA Guards shall be on a voluntary basis.

6. ( a ) Any able-bodied Filipino citizen, except as noted in ( b ) below, of not less than 18 and not more than 50 years of age, is eligible for enrollment in the CEA Guards.

( b ) The following persons are exempted from enrollment in the CEA Guards:

1. Officers and enlisted men of the regular force and of the reserve forces carried on the rolls of reserve units of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, including officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Constabulary.

2. Members of all regularly organized police forces in provinces, chartered cities, municipalities and/or municipal districts.

3. Members of all regularly organized fire departments in chartered cities, municipalities, and/or municipal districts.

4. Field employees of the Bureau of Health, including District Health Officers, President of Sanitary Divisions, Sanitary Inspectors and Assistant Sanitary Inspectors.

5. Employees of the Bureau of Posts and the Bureau of Telecommunications.

6. Field employees of the Weather Bureau.

7. Personnel of the Coast Guard, Revenue Cutter and Lighthouse Inspection Services.

8. Physicians, nurses and attendants regularly employed in hospitals or puericultural centers.

9. Employees essential in the operation of public utilities, including employees of water supply, electric and telephone systems, and railroad, bus and steamship companies.

10. Field employees of the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) and social workers of the Social Welfare Commission and the President’s Action Committee on Social Amelioration (PACSA).

7. Members of the CEA Guards shall serve without compensation. They shall, however, be entitled to free transportation when such is required in the performance of their duties if called into active service and to free subsistence during such period or periods of active service. Such transportation and subsistence shall be paid for by the chartered city, municipality, and/or municipal district for which the active service was rendered, if funds are available therefor.

8. Enrollment in the CEA Guards shall be for a period of one (1) year from the date of such enrollment, unless terminated sooner by competent authority.

9. At the time of enrollment, each member of the CEA Guards shall undergo physical examination and, if found fit, shall subscribe to the “oath of enrollment.” The form for the oath of enrollment shall be prescribed by the Commanding Officer of the Philippine Constabulary.

10. In chartered cities, municipalities, and/or municipal districts, the organization of the Civilian Emergency Administration Guards (CEA Guards) shall be as follows:

( a ) Police, Traffic Control and Guard Duty Unit. —This unit shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police and shall have a strength based on the ratio of five (5) men for every one thousand (1,000) inhabitants.

( b ) Food and Fuel Administration Unit. —This unit shall be under the supervision of the municipal agricultural Inspector, assisted by the meat inspector and shall have a strength based on the ratio of fifteen (15) men for every one thousand (1,000) inhabitants.

( c ) Communication, Transportation, and Pol Control Unit. —This unit shall be under the supervision of the municipal treasurer assisted by the postmaster, chief operator (or in his absence, by the Operator-in-Charge or postmaster-operator), and shall have a strength on the ratio of five (5) men for every one thousand (1,000) inhabitants.

( d ) Public Welfare and Morale Unit. —This unit shall be under the supervision of the municipal physician assisted by the School Principal and will be organized into the following squads:

( e ) Fire-Fighting Unit. —This unit shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Fire Department. Where regular fire department do not exist, this unit shall be supervised by retired firemen or by civilians who have received special instruction in fire-fighting methods. This unit shall be organized into local squads, each squad being centered near military objectives, such as railway stations, docks, factories, and public buildings. The number of fire-fighting squads shall be determined by local authorities based on local conditions.

11. The duties and functions of the units enumerated in paragraph 10 shall be to help:

A. MOBILIZATION PHASE

( a ) Maintain law and order.

( b ) Control traffic.

( c ) Safeguard from sabotage public utilities, bridges and manufacturing plants engaged in essential industries.

( d ) Prepare and execute in due time the plans of the Director of Communication and Director of Transportation, National Emergency Commission, for the control and use of all communication, transportation and petroleum and oil lubricants (POL) Facilities.

( e ) First Aid Squads. —Establish first aid stations and to train for emergency duties.

( f ) Fire-Fighting Unit. — Establish and equip fire stations and sub-stations and to train for its war or emergency duties.

B. WAR OR EMERGENCY PHASE

( a ) To continue with the duties and functions during the mobilization phase.

( b ) To perform such other duties as the municipal Emergency Committee may direct.

( c ) To cooperate with the Police, Traffic Control and Guard Duty Unit in the preservation of order.

( d ) The Rescue Squad of the Unit. —To rescue persons trapped in fallen building and in debris from such building.

( e ) The Evacuation Squad of the Unit. —To conduct the orderly evacuation of the community to prepared evacuation centers.

( f ) The Demolition and Repair Squads of the Unit. —

1. To clear streets of wreckage and debris.

2. To fill bomb craters.

3. To assist in the repair of damaged utility mains (water, gas, electrical transmission, etc.) and sewers.

4. To cooperate with fire-fighting unit if it becomes necessary to use explosives in the control of a fire.

( g ) To execute the plans for the control and use of communication, transportation and POL Facilities.

( h ) To perform such other duties as the Municipal Emergency Committee may direct.

( i ) First Aid Squads. —To render first aid to injured persons of their respective localities during bombings, shellings, or any other enemy action, and to evacuate to the nearest medical dispensary or hospitals those persons requiring further medical treatment.

( j ) To control and extinguish fires, particularly those caused by incendiary bombs and shells.

12. Members of the CEA Guards assigned to the Police, Traffic Control and Guard Duty Units shall be armed and equipped as follows:

( a ) Those assigned to Police and Traffic Control Duty, with night sticks and police whistles.

( b ) Those assigned to Guard duty protecting public utilities, bridges and manufacturing plants engaged in essential industries shall be furnished police whistles and armed with revolvers or shotguns depending on the availability of such weapons as decided by the Commanding Officer of the Philippine Constabulary.

13. Members of the First Aid Units shall be provided with a white arm-band on which is superimposed a blue cross.

14. The CEA Guard units in municipalities and municipal districts may be called to active duty only by Provincial Governors and in chartered cities only by the mayors thereof. However, when an emergency caused by war, sabotage, fire, flood, earthquake, typhoon, or air-raid is imminent, mayors of municipalities and municipal districts are authorized to call to active duty the Volunteer Guard Units in their respective municipalities or municipal districts the moment such emergency occurs. Whenever the mayor of a municipality or municipal district exercises such authority, he shall, in each instance, render without delay, a report of his action to the Provincial Governor stating his reason or reasons for exercising such authority.

Done in the City of Manila, this 9th day of August, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and fifty, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the fifth.

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Museum and Library

Quirino, E. (1950). Executive Order No. 340 : Promulgating rules and regulations for the organization and training of Civilian Emergency Administration Guards. Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. 46 (8), 3524-3527.