MALACAÑANG MANILA

EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 235

PROVIDING FOR THE COORDINATION OF ALL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES OF THE GOVERNMENT

WHEREAS, it is proper at this time to provide for a central agency to coordinate the intelligence gathering activities of the various branches and instrumentalities of the government;

NOW, THEREFORE, I, ELPIDIO QUIRINO, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the Philippines, do hereby order:

1. A National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA) is hereby created to operate directly under the Office of the President and shall be responsible and accountable only to the President of the Philippines.

2. The National Intelligence Coordinating Agency is hereby charged with the responsibility of coordinating all government activities with respect to national intelligence and preparing intelligence estimates and summaries of both the local and foreign situations to be made available to the President and his policy-making body.

3. The President shall appoint a Coordinator of National Intelligence who shall head the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency.

4. An Intelligence Consultative Committee is hereby established composed of:

Representatives of other agencies concerned with national intelligence may be invited to attend meetings of the Committee when matters affecting their respective agencies are involved.

This Committee shall advise the Coordinator on:

A. The general objectives of National Intelligence;

B. The allocation of collection responsibilities to the various agencies; and

C. The means of establishing and maintaining effective working relations between NICA and the other intelligence agencies in the furtherance of the national interest.

The Coordinator of National Intelligence shall keep the President advised of the findings of the Committee.

5. The Coordinator of National Intelligence is hereby authorized to call upon any department, bureau, office, agency, or instrumentality of the government for such information and assistance as he may require in the performance of his functions.

6. The Coordinator of National Intelligence is further empowered to request the detail to the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency of such trained and qualified personnel from the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Interior, Justice, National Defense, Finance, Labor or other departments, branches or subdivisions of the National Government as he may deem necessary for the proper and efficient operation of his office.

7. This order supersedes Executive Order No. 167, Series of 1948, and shall take effect immediately.

Done in the. City of Manila, this 10th day of July, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-nine, and of the Independence of the Philippines, the

(Sgd.) ELPIDIO QUIRINO President of the Philippines

By the President:

(Sgd.) TEODORO EVANGELISTA Executive Secretary

Source: Malacañang Records Office

Office of the President of the Philippines. (1949). [Executive Order Nos. : 128 – 297]. Manila : Malacañang Records Office.