TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 650

PROVIDING GUIDELINES ON PLACEMENT OF PERSONNEL AFFECTED BY THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE INTEGRATED ORGANIZATION PLAN.

To effectively implement the provisions on placement of personnel of the Integrated Reorganization Plan or modifications thereof and the Letters of Implementation issued pursuant thereto, and to insure compliance with the Memorandum Circular of this Office dated June 30, 1973, in the selection of personnel, the following guidelines are hereby prescribed for the guidance of all concerned:

I. The priorities for placement shall be in the following order:

(1) Permanent employees presently occupying positions with the same or comparable titles and duties and responsibilities as those in the approved staffing patterns, provided that in cases where the number of positions exceed those in the approved staffing pattern, the incumbents shall be compared in terms of relative fitness and the most qualified shall be preferred.

(2) Permanent employees presently occupying higher level positions in the same occupational group as those in the approved staffing pattern being filled who have not yet been placed.

(3) Permanent employees who are presently occupying allied or functionally related positions at higher or comparable levels with those positions in the staffing pattern being considered for filling provided such employees meet all the requirements for appointment thereto.

II. It is expected that appointing authorities shall observe existing Civil Service Law and Rules regarding cases not covered above, including the preferential rights of those already in the service at the time of reorganization, pro­vided that laid-off employees in accordance with Letter of Instruction No. 77 dated May 25, 1973, who meet the requirements for ap­pointment to positions in the approved staffing pattern being considered for filling, shall likewise be considered.

In exceptional cases, upon prior authority of the Office of the President, the appointing authority may choose an outsider for placement to technical positions, provided that said out­sider possesses special or highly technical qualifications necessary for the effective performance of the duties and responsibilities of the position being considered for filling, and provided that the appointing authority shall put in writing his justifications therefor.

For purposes of this Memorandum Circular, highly technical qualification shall refer to the possession of qualifications for a position which exceed those of the qualification standards established by the agency and approved by the Civil Service Commission and which are superior to the qualifications of qualified insiders.

III. Bases for Determining Preferences

Whenever it becomes necessary to compare incumbents of positions in accordance with the priorities established herein, the criteria provided in Rule VIII (Reduction in Force) of the Civil Service Rules shall apply, provided that in determining performance, the performance ratings of the employees concerned for the last two years shall be considered except the ratings for the semester ending June 30, this year.

IV. Preparation of Appointments

(a)   Appointments which do not involve changes in designation and salary shall be made on a plantilla appointment form (see en­closure A) in five (5) copies. The instructions accompanying the plantilla appointment form shall be followed strictly.

(b)   Individual appointments on C.S. Form 33 (Revised) in six (6) copies shall be prepared whenever there are changes in designation or salary

(c)    In both cases, duly accomplished C.S. Form 212 (Revised 73) in two (2) copies shall be furnished the Civil Service Commission.

(d)   The employees appointed pursuant to this Memorandum Circular shall be immediately entitled to the payment of their salaries.

V. Preparation of Plantilla of Personnel

A plantilla of all personnel in accordance with the approved staffing pattern shall be prepared on the attached form (see enclosure B.)

VI. Preparation of Master List Required Under LOI No. 77

A certified list of all permanent employees separated as a result of the implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan shall be prepared indicating therein their respective civil service eligibilities, qualifications, last position held, last performance rating, and copies furnished the Civil Service Commission and the Budget Commission, not later than August 30, 1973. Two (2) copies of C.S. Form 212, Revised, duly accomplished by such employees shall also be submitted.

VII. Salary Rules and Regulations

1. Permanent employees shall continue receiving their actual salaries as of June 30, 1973, under either of the following situations:

(a) Where an employee continues to hold the same position with the same duties and responsibilities, previously exempt from the WAPCO Classification and Pay Plans and whose actual salary is higher than the maximum of the range allocation made by WAPCO.

(b) Where the position occupied by an incumbent is reduced in rank or category on account of the downgrading of the organizational unit under the Integrated Reorganization Plan or modifications thereof.

(c) Where an employee is appointed to a position involving change in designation, duties and responsibilities resulting in a reduction in salary range but in a reduction exceed five (5) ranges.

2. All other appointments not falling under No. 1 (a-c) shall be at the minimum of the range allocation of the position, provided that when the actual salary of the incumbent as of June 30, 1975, is higher than the minimum of the range allocation of the position, he may be allowed a salary within the range but in no case must it exceed the maximum.

3. All original appointments of new civil service entrance shall be at the minimum of the range allocation of the position to be filled.

The appointing authority shall be responsible for the proper implementation of this Memorandum Circular.

Any question that may arise regarding the Memorandum Circular may be directed to the Office of the President.

All heads of departments, bureaus and agencies of the National Government are hereby enjoined to strictly follow the provisions of this Circular.

By order of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 21, 1973

Reference: Instructions on the preparation and submission of plantilla appointments

Source: Presidential Museum and Library