OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 178

REGULATIONS FOR MEETING AND SEEING OFF VIP’S AT THE AIRPORT BY MEMBERS OF THE DIPLOMATIC CORPS.

1. The Department of Foreign Affairs shall issue new passes to each Chief of Mission or Acting Chief of Mission which will entitle said official to move anywhere within the Customs, Immigration and Quarantine area.

2. In appropriate cases, the local ambassador with one assistant say proceed to the ramp to meet his visitor and take him directly to the VIP lounge. Similarly, the local ambassador and one assistant may be allowed to see off a departing passenger at the ramp or planeside. In all cases, their ladies are included.

3. Diplomatic couriers must receive or deliver their diplomatic pouches at the customs clearing area with the exception of diplomatic mail handcarried by couriers who are not allowed by their regulations to disembark from transiting carriers. In the latter case, a duly authorized representative of the mission concerned may take delivery of the said mail subject to advance authorization from appropriate authorities.

4. The aforementioned passes shall also serve as car passes to enable automobiles with said passes to enter the airport gate, provided that only one car call enter with one pass.

5. The use of the VIP lounge or kiosk may be requested through the Office of Protocol in appropriate cases. The use of the VIP kiosk is limited to local ambassadors coming or going and to welcome and see off visiting ministers only.

6. On Saturdays, Sundays and other legal holidays and after office hours, when appropriate clearances from the Office of Protocol is not available, as well as in other emergencies when time does not allow appropriate clearances, direct approach may be made by the persons concerned to the Collector of Customs at the Manila International Airport or his deputy who will liaison with the Offices of Immigration and Quarantine.

7. Embassy staff members who will have occasion to participate in the implementation of those regulations shall be issued an appropriate ID and pin which will identify them as entitled to enter the customs area.

8. An officer of the Government violating these regulations shall be subject to the penalties provided in Republic Act No. 75.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, April 19, 1968

Source: Presidential Management Staff