TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1049

TO: The Secretary of Trade

The Secretary of Industry

The Secretary of Agriculture

The Secretary of Natural Resources

The Chairman, Development Bank of the Philippines

The Secretary of Energy

The Secretary of Public Works, Transportation & Communications

The Secretary of Education and Culture

The Secretary of Tourism

The Governor, Metro Manila Commission

The Director, National Media Production Center

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 3850 approved April 13, 1964, and in order to implement Section 3 of the same, the following agencies are hereby directed to assist the Philippine Inventors Commission in the raising of funds for the Festival of Philippine Inventions:

1. Department of Trade

2. Department of Industry

3. Department of Agriculture

4. Department of Natural Resources

5. Department Bank of the Philippines

6. Department of Public Works Transportation & Communications

7. Department of Energy

8. Department of Education and Culture

9. Department of Tourism

10. Metro Manila Commission

11. National Media Production Center

All the above-mentioned government agencies are hereby required to appropriate out of their respective budgetary allocations under Presidential Decree No. 1250 available funds as their contributions in this undertaking of the Commission. All such agencies are hereby directed to remit their respective contributions in such amount as they may agree among themselves, to the Philippine Inventors Commission (PIC), an agency authorized to accept donations and grants and implement the project authorized herein; Provided , however , that all funds that shall be committed and expended shall be subject to audit by the Commission on Audit.

The Philippine Inventors Commission is hereby authorized to call upon these government agencies to implement the intent and purpose of this Circular.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

By Authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 8, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff