TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 974

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINAR FOR ACTION OFFICERS, THE CHAIRMEN AND MEMBERS OF SPECIAL ACTION COMMITTEES OF ALL GOVERNMENT OFFICES IN THE VISAYAS.

The Complaints and Investigation Office (CIO), Office of the President, will conduct its 5th Seminar for Action Officers of various government offices in the Western, Central, and Eastern Visayas to be held at Cebu City from April 27-29, 1977.

The objectives of the seminar are: to define and acquaint the Action Officers on the objectives, policies and operating procedures that govern their role, functions and responsibilities; to professionalize the work of Action Officers through the development of skills that would guide them in the study of representative problems or cases brought before them, the formulation of solutions and/or procedures in resolving such problems and cases; to exude maximum participation of Action Officers in the establishment of a reform-oriented New Society through prompt, sincere, and impartial public service; and to effect better coordination among the Action Officers in all offices of the government.

All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations within Western, Central and Eastern Visayas are authorized to send two (2) representatives each to the seminar on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and per diems, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of P.D. No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. A seminar fee of ₱350 from each participant is required, likewise chargeable against the appropriation for their respective offices. It is understood that the cost of three meal units corresponding to lunch for the duration, of the three-day seminar, which forms part of the seminar fee, shall be deductible from their per diems and/or allowances.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the seminar within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, April 13, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff