Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1203

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONVOCATION OF CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS JOINTLY SPONSORED BY THE CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE BOARD AND THE CAREER EXECUTIVE SERVICE OFFICERS GUILD.

The Career Executive Service Board and the Career Executive Service Officers Guild, will jointly sponsor a national convocation of career executive service officers on November 26-28, 1980, at the Pamantasan ng Bagong Lipunan (University of Life) on Meralco Avenue, Pasig, Metro Manila, on the theme: “Strengthening the Career Executive Service for National Development.” During the convocation several workshops will be set up to assess CESOs’ performance, to identify the strength, and weaknesses of CESOs; to identify mechanisms for self-policing of CESOs; and to consider how to make CESOs more effective in the delivery of government services to meet the eleven human basic needs.

In view of the importance and relevance of the convocation to the over-all developmental goals of the Government, all heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send to the convocation all the career executive service officers in their respective ministries and offices on official Lime, with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of not more than ₱600.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, tie usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Agencies sending participants to the said convocation shall have identified/generated the 10% savings as mandated under paragraph 1.2 of LOI 981. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to convention fees only. Meals covered by the convention fee shall be deducted from per diems.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizers shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 13, 1980

Source: Presidential Management Staff