Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1221

REITERATING MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 26 DATED JUNE 14, 1963, REQUIRING GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES MAKING OFFICIAL TRIPS TO TRAVEL VIA PHILIPPINE AIR LINES (PAL) PLANES OR THROUGH PAL CONNECTIONS.

Memorandum Circular No. 26 dated June; 14. 1963, as amended by Memorandum Circular No. 36 dated August 7, 1985, is hereby quoted for the information and guidance of all concerned:

“The Philippine Air Lines, Inc., being the national flag carrier, it is but proper that it be patronized by the government.

“For this purpose, it is hereby directed that government officials and employees going on official travels by air, especially abroad, secure plane accommodations, whenever possible, on PAL planes. In cases of trips to foreign places not serviced by PAL planes, arrangements shall, nevertheless, be made with the Philippine Air Lines for accommodations via PAL connections with foreign airports, as long as such arrangements do not involve extra or additional expense over rates offered by other airline companies for direct or similar arrangements for the said foreign places.

“Official air travel not in accordance with the foregoing shall not be allowed except upon certification of non-availability of any such accommodations from the Philippine Air Lines, Inc., within the conditions specified in the preceding paragraph.

“Strict compliance wit this Circular is hereby enjoined.”

In order to help the PAL free itself from a burden imposed on it by the high cost of aviation fuel, it is imperative that full assistance, support and cooperation be extended to the said airline. Accordingly, the strict implementation of the aforequoted Circular by all heads of ministries, bureaus, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations is hereby reiterated.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila. September 29, 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff