Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1224

All Heads of Ministries and Agencies

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE OF COLLEGE UNDERGRADUATES IN ALL MINISTRIES AND AGENCIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IN A CRASH PROGRAM IN PUBLIC AND BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PURSUANT TO LOI 468, LOI 382 AND LOI 395, BEGINNING JANUARY, 1932.

La Salle University, in collaboration with the University of the Philippines, College of Public Administration and the Civil Service Commission, and as approved by the Ministry of Education and Culture, will start conducting a practical crash program for a Bachelor’s Degree in Public and Business Administration starting January, 1982, for college undergraduates holding positions of section chief or equivalent rank and above, including AFP Officers.

The BPBA Course aims to enhance the managerial capability of government officials, develop them for higher responsibility and prepare them for better opportunities after retirement so that they will not become burdens to the government and society.

It will be conducted for a period of two (2) years, least six (6) hours per week, for a fee of four thousand pesos (P4,000.00) per participant, which includes P1,000 cost of materials, the amount to be advanced by the agencies concerned and which may be deducted later through monthly deductions from the salary of the participants. In case the panel is prevented by circumstances beyond hit; control from refunding the said fee thru monthly deduction, the same may be taken from his retirement pay or from any other money due him in the course of his employment. Participants who continually maintain high scholastic record of at least an average of 1.5 for the whole course, shall not be required to refund the money advanced by the agency as a form of recognition for his exemplary academic performance.

The BPBA Course gives accreditation to JET, STREAM, CESO, CGSC and NDCP graduates.

All government agencies are hereby authorized to organize the course as herein provided and make available physical facilities like training room, chairs, tables and black boards, and subject to availability of funds, provide merienda for participants.

Participants shall be required to render service in any branch of government for a period of at least two (2) years for every academic year of scholarship enjoyed by him under this Circular.

At no instance during the course shall the participants be entitled to collect overtime pay for the time spent while in class attendance.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 17, 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff