TGANGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1101

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND REGIONAL AFRO-ASIAN CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATION AND DRAINAGE (ICID).

The Philippine National Committee (PNC) of the International Commission Irrigation and Drainage, will host the Second (ICID) Regional Afro-Asian Conference in Metro Manila on December 4-13, 1978, on the theme: “Rice Production in Afro-Asian Countries.”

The conference is intended to formulate applicable techniques and methods for increasing rice harvest, based on current practices by rice crowing countries in the region, and from the expertise and experience in other countries.

Heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations involved in rice production, irrigation, drainage, flood control and agriculture, are hereby authorized to send not more than three (3) participants each, preferably chiefs of divisions and/or positions with equivalent rank, except the NIA, BPW and MWSS, which may send ton (10) participants each, exclusive of conference officials, to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of not exceeding P375.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular-No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila area shall be entitled to conference fees” and reasonable transportation allowance only. Meals included in the conference fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 22, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff