OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 244

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINARS ON THE CIVIL SERVICE LAW AND RULES SPONSORED BY THE CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

In pursuance or its leadership function in the development of all government personnel at all levels, the Civil Service Commission will conduct a series of seminars on the Civil Service Law and rules in cooperation with the local governments in the Luzon area as hereunder indicated:

Batangas, Batangas – April 16-18, 1969

Province and Cities Included:

Rizal, Cavite, Batangas, Laguna, Quezon, Occidental Mindoro, Oriental Mindoro, Palawan, Marinduque, Lipa City, Cavite City, Tagaytay City, Trece Martires City, San Pablo City, Lucena City, Quezon City, Manila, Caloccan City, and Pasay City.

Naga City – May 28-30, 1969

Provinces and Cities Included:

Camarines Sur, Camarines Norte, Albay, Sorsogon, Naebate, Naga City, and Legazpi City, Catanduanes

Tugegarao, Cagayan – July 9-11, 1969

Provinces and Cities Included:

Batanes, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Abra, La Union, Kalinga-Apayao, Ifugao, Benguet, Cagayan, Mountain Province, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, Baguio City, and Laoag City.

Marlac, Tarlac – August 20-22, 1969

Provinces and Cities Included:

Pangasinan, Tarlac, Pampanga, Nueva Ecija, Bulacan, Zambales, Bataan, Angeles City, Cabanatuan City, Olongapo City, Dagupan City, and San Carlos City.

These seminars are aimed at securing understanding, enlightened appreciation and proper implementations of the Civil Service Law and Rules as well as the New Decentralization Law and the Police Act of 1966, by all officials and employees of the government who are called upon “to insure and promote the constitutional mandate regarding appointments only according to merit and fitness and to provide within tin public service a progressive system personnel administration to insure the maintenance of an honest, efficient, progressive and courteous civil service in the Philippines.

In view of the importance of the objectives of these seminars all local governments (municipal, city, and provincial) and national government agencies and units within the territorial limits of the area where the training program will be conduct are hereby authorized to send not more than three (3) participants each to the seminar, whose participation shall be considered official business, with expenses for transportation, lodging, subsistence, and seminar fees, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Employees who have already participated in the 1968 seminars shall not be eligible for participation in this series.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report of their attendance in the seminar.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, March 19, 1969

Source : Presidential Management Staff