TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1046

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY TASK FORCE TO DEVELOP PLANS AND PROGRAMS ON MINI-HYDRO POWER DEVELOPMENT.

WHEREAS, the government now wishes to take maximum advantage of all available indigenous sources in the production of electric power to reduce the uncertainties of relying on imported sources;

WHEREAS, the government has given high priority to the development of hydro resources, both as part of the rural development program and to supplement its electrification objectives;

WHEREAS, hydro power expansion program that the National Power Corporation is now undertaking, concentrates mostly on the large scale power projects;

WHEREAS, numerous micro-hydro sites all over the country, with a total identified power potential of 200-400 MW, remain undeveloped;

WHEREAS, there is need to institutionalize a government machinery to formulate and to oversee implementation of a national mini-hydro program.

WHEREAS, in view of the aforesaid objectives, there is hereby created a Mini-Hydro Inter-Agency Task Force to study and develop plans and programs for mini-hydro development to be composed of the following members of their designates who will represent their respective agencies in the Task Force:

National Power Corporation

Lead Agency

Mr. Arturo Almeda Corporate Planning Staff

National Electrification Administration

Member

Mr. Philip O. Chan, Proj. Dir.

National Water Resources Council

Member

Mr. Angel A. Alejandrino Executive Director

National Irrigation Administration

Member

Mr. Conrado Mercado Asst. Admn. For Engineering & Operation

Local Water Utilization Administration

Member

Col. Carlos Leano Jr. General Manager

The Inter-Agency Task Force shall be tasked with the following responsibilities:

1. Draw up a comprehensive inventory if sites with mini-hydro potentials in coordination with the National Water Resources Council.

2. Formulate a set of criteria for prioritizing the development of mini-hydro power sites.

3. Develop a 10-year mini-hydro power program detailing work schedules, implementing agencies, physical targets and financial requirements of all the component activities, in accordance with the priority-criteria to be submitted to the Secretary of Energy in 6 months’ time.

4. Study feasibility of and make appropriate recommendations regarding the typing-up of the implementation schedule with the local manufacture, in whole or in part, of medium-size turbine and generator sets for use in the program or exports.

The Task force is given 4 months from date hereof to accomplish the first three tasks and an additional 2 months for the fourth item, after which the Task Force is to be automatically dissolved.

This Circular shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 21, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff