TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (Office of the President of the Philippines)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1024

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE 8TH PHILIPPINE MANAGEMENT CONGRESS.

The Philippine Council of Management (PHILCOMAN) and the Civil Service Commission will co-sponsor the 8th Philippine Management Congress to be held at the Philippine International Convention Center, Cultural Center Complex, Manila, on December 1 to 3, 1977. The theme of the Congress is “Management’s Expanding Commitments and its Changing Milieu.”

Management experts, practitioners, educators, and government leaders from the Philippines and other countries will participate as speakers, discussants and delegates. The 8th Management Congress will explore the role of Management in total development in the light of the rapid political and social changes in the ASEAN region and the new priority areas, well as the growing opportunities and expanding responsibilities of administrators and executives.

The Congress will enable participants to gain new insights to recent trends and developments in business management and public administration.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are therefore hereby enjoined to authorize attendance with expenses for conference fee and reasonable transportation allowance in the Congress of selected participants on official time but not to exceed three (3) from each office.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance with observations and comments on the deliberations in the Congress.

Interested parties may contact the PHILCOMAN Secretariat with offices at the Mezzanine Floor, Hotel Mirador, 1000 San Marcelino St., Ermita, Manila, Telephone Nos. 59-41-72, 57-49-11 local 634/40-13-36/40-24-09/98-60-46 and 46-18-84.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 22, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff