TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 717

CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE ON DEVELOPMENT AND FINANCING OF INDUSTRIES IN AGRARIAN REFORMS AREAS.

Pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 3844, as amended by Presidential Decree Nos. 27, 85, and 251, requiring the Agrarian Reform-Program to provide not merely for the transfer of land to tenant-cultivators, but also the redirection of agricultural capital to industries and increasing the income of farmer-beneficiaries of agrarian reform there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Committee on Development and financing of Industries in Agrarian Reform Areas composed of duly-designated representatives of the following agencies:

1. The inter-agency committee shall be vested with the task of identifying specific projects in agrarian reform areas which would yield optimum benefits to land-owners and farmer-beneficiaries of agrarian reform;

2. The inter-agency committee shall also recommend the organizational set-up, managerial technical and other similar services as may be necessary for ensuring the viability of the projects identified for development by the participating agencies and for subsequent financing by the Land Bank of the Philippines, and assist the Land Bank to recruit, train and field the technicians who would perform such functions for the Bank on the continuing basis;

3. The Committee may, from time to time, send Project Teams composed of members appointed from among the above agencies to the place or places where specific projects are to be studied, organized, or supervised;

4. The expenses to be incurred by the members of the Project Teams sent out to conduct said studies or activities by the respective agencies represented by the members of the team. Incidental expenses outside of those enumerated above shall be shouldered by the Land Bank.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the Government are hereby requested to extend full cooperation and assistance to the inter-agency committee to ensure the accomplishment of its task.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, March 25, 1974

Source: Presidential Museum and Library