O f fice of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 986

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE JOINT ANNUAL CONVENTION OF NUTRITIONISTS AND DIETITIANS.

The Philippine Government Dietitians and Nutritionists, Inc., Dietary Supervisors Association of the Department of Health, Philippine Association of Nutrition and the Dietetic Association of the Philippines, will hold their joint Annual Convention in Manila from June 27 to July 1, 1977, on the theme: “The Philippine Experience in Nutrition: The Need For Integrated Efforts Towards National Development.”

The convention will consist mainly of workshops and scientific meetings on the “Philippine Experience in Nutrition” and lectures of prominent scientists and specialists on recent developments, discoveries and trends in the field of nutrition and dietetics.

Considering that government nutritionists and dietitians are directly involved in the implementation of the “National Nutrition Program,” a priority project of the New Society, the attendance of those whose services can be dispensed with during the duration of the convention is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a registration fee of not exceeding ₱50.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No . 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the convention within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof, likewise, within the same period, the Chairman of the joint convention shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Budget Commission, including a list of participants indicating their respective positions and agencies. The report thereon shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the associations.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, June 8, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff