TANGGAPAN NG PAGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 789

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST REGIONAL CONFERENCE SPONSORED BY THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT CULTURAL ASSOCIATION.

The Philippine Government Cultural Association (PGCA), with the Province of Misamis Oriental and the City of Cagayan de Oro as co-sponsors, will hold its First Regional Conference at Cagayan de Oro City on February 5, 6, 7, 1975, on the theme: National Unity Through Cultural Development.

The conference is the first in a series of regional cultural conferences to be sponsored by the PGCA as a series of bringing the benefits of cultural development directly to the provinces. The choice of Mindanao as the site of the first regional conference is noteworthy and that it is intended to further emphasize one of the major thrusts of the government’s development program.

In view thereof, all heads of provinces and chartered cities in Mindanao, including regional branches of national offices and government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not than five delegates to the conference. Heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations and local governments outside the Mindanao region, that are member agencies of the PGCA, are likewise authorized to send not more than two (2) delegates to the conference: Provided, however , that this limitation as to the number shall not apply to conference officials and members of conference working committees. The attendance of the participants shall be on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation subsistence and lodging and conference fees, all chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. It is understood that the participants residing within the site of the conference shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a report on their attendance in the conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, January 10, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff