Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1073

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE CONVENTION OF THE ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENT CIVIL ENGINEERS (AGCEP)

The Association of Government Civil Engineers will hold its convention in Metro Manila, on October 24-28, 1978 on the theme: “Government Civil Engineers and Human Settlements.”

Considering the relevance of the convention’s objectives to the Human Settlements Program of the government, all heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus, offices, chartered cities and provincial governments, including government–owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than four (4) participants each, exclusive of convention officials, who are all members of the Association to the convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and convention fee per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Budget Commission, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices. The report thereon shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organization.

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. OLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, August 4, 1978