TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1107

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION IN THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THE ASEAN MEDICAL ACUPUNCTURE ASSOCIATION

The Asean Medical Acupuncture Association will hold its First International Conference on January 4-6 1979 at the Manila Peninsula. Host of the world’s experts and , specialists on acupuncture arc expected to attend the conference. Some of the papers or subject matters to be taken up will dwell on “AcupunctureTreatment of Bronchial Asthma, Migraine Headache, Arthritis, Treatment of ‘Incurable’ Retinal Disease and Treatment of Cataract, Glaucoma and Retinal Detachment and many others.”

To enable government physicians to be exposed to the practice of acupuncture, all hoods of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, hospitals and local governments, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each preferably members of the Association, to the Conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of P175.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to transportation and conference fees only. Meals included in the conference fee shall be deducted from their per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 937 dated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, within 30 days after the holding of the convention, the Association shall submit to the Office of the President, a report of evaluation, including a list of participants coming from the government sector with their respective positions and a statement of fees collected and expenditure incurred, duly certified by Certified Public Accountant, a copy of which shall be furnished the Ministry of the Budget.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, December 14, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff