TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 822

AUTHORIZING THE SENDING OF DELEGATES TO THE 14TH NATIONAL CONVENTION OF THE RADIOISOTOPE SOCIETY OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC.

The Radioisotope Society of the Philippines, Inc.(RSP), an organization of nuclear scientists, technologists, engineers and other radiation workers, will hold its 14th Annual Convention at UP Los Baños on May 23-24, 1975, on the theme, “Nuclear Energy is Food and agriculture.”

The main feature of the convention will be the scientific meetings and forums where papers on the use of radioisotopes in food and agriculture will be presented by nuclear scientists and researchers. The scientists will discuss the various studies they have made on how radioisotopes and radiation had helped in hastening agricultural production and enhancing methods and techniques of food preservation on. The presentation of papers and their discussion will contribute immensely to the exchange of information on nuclear energy as it is utilized for national development.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, chartered cities and provincial governments, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send to the convention not more than three (3) of their employees who are members of the RSP. This limitation does not apply to conference officials. The attendance of the delegates shall be on official tine, with reasonable expenses for transportation, subsistence, lodging and conference fees, chargeable against the funds of their respective agencies, subject to the availability thereof and the usual accounting and auditing requirements. The delegates who are stationed in Los Baños, Laguna, shall be entitled to convention fees end reasonable transportation expenses only.

The delegates shall submit a report to their respective agency heads on their participation and attendance in the convention within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, April 17, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff