Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1231

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE WORKSHOP-CONFERENCE ON THE KILUSANG KABUHAYAN AT KAUNLARAN (KKK).

In compliance with its commitment under a memorandum agreement with the Secretary-General of the KKK the Career Executive Service Development Program (CESDP) Alumni Association, in cooperation with the KKK Secretariat, will conduct a two-day work-shop conference at the University of Life, Pasig, Metro Manila, on February 4-5, 1982, to evaluate the progress of the movement, to discuss problems and their solutions, how to improve the participation of the CESDP Alumni and CES incumbents and to formulate action plans for 1982 in order to accelerate its implementation. The Career Executive Service and other matters such as those pertaining to the delivery of public service shall also be taken up.

All alumni of the Career Executive Service Development Program, incumbents of Career Executive Service positions and Regional Action Officers of the KKK, are hereby authorized to attend the conference on official time with expenses for transportation and per diems, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 76, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Letter of Instructions No. 1098, dated January 5, 1981. Participants residing within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable transportation expenses only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, including a list of participants indicating their respective offices.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 27, 1982

Source: Presidential Management Staff