TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 682

PRESCRIBING FOR PURPOSES OF UNIFORMITY AND EASE OF EVALUATION THE FORM OF REPORT REQUIRED UNDER EXECUTIVE ORDER NO. 129, SERIES OF 1968.

Section 18 of Executive Order No. 129, series of 1968, requires every official and employee authorized to travel abroad under Title II of the said Order to submit within thirty (30) days after his return a report with his recommendations, if any, on the conference or seminar attended, examination or investigation conducted, or mission undertaken, to the head of this office, furnishing the department head concerned and the Office of the President with copies thereof. It also provides that in case of participation in an international conferences or convention in which the Philippines is represented by a delegation, a report of the delegation shall be submitted to the President of the Philippines through the Secretary of Foreign Affairs nor later than one month after the meeting, and that any member of the delegation may also submit a supplementary report.

This report requirement has been complied with by almost every official and employee concerned, but it has long been observed that reports vary in form and substance. It is not infrequent that this Office receives copies of one-page or two-page reports, or many others of several pages, which, contents-wise, are of little or no practical value to the government. One reason for requiring the report is to have a written account of the knowledge and experience gained, and recommendations, if any, that can be imparted to others and thus make the trip profitable to as many as possible, particularly to those who share in the burden of running the government but have not had the opportunity to travel abroad officially.

It is, therefore, now deemed necessary that a uniform system of reporting, especially in individual travel cases, be adopted not only to maximize benefits but also to facilitate evaluation and subsequent action by the authorities concerned. For the purpose, the attached form is hereby prescribed as the official report form for travel authorized under Title II of the said Order.

All heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby enjoined to see to it that, henceforth, this Circular is substantially complied with by all concerned.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Assistant Executive Secretary

Manila, November 26, 1973

Source: Presidential Management Staff