TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1090

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SEMINAR-CONVENTION OF THE PHILIPPINE ASSOCIATION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PARTICIPANTS (PATAP).

The Philippine Association of Technical Assistance Participants (PATAP), the alumni association of those who have been award grants for training oversees under various technical assistance programs extended to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines, will hold a seminar-convention on December 6-8, 1978, at the Manila Midtown Ramada Hotel Ermita, Manila in the theme: “TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER REVISED.”

The three day seminar-convention aims to re-examine and assess the policy guidelines and program directions of the bilateral technical assistance program in terms of the cumulative contributions of technology transfer to accelerated socio-economic development. Through a series of dialogues between policy-makers and program implementers the seminar convention shall crystallize suggestions and recommendations for improvement or redirection of existing efforts at technology transfer.

National and local government offices are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each who are grantees of the said program to the seminar-convention on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation per diems and a seminar fee of not more than P400.00 per participants, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in the accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirement as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Meals and snacks included in the seminar fee shall be excluded from the per diems and participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to seminar fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants indicating their respective offices.

The report therein shall include a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the organization.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 12, 1978

Source: House of Representatives, Legislative Library