TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1116

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SECOND WORLD RECYCLING CONGRESS AND EXHIBITION ON NEW AND BETTER USES OF SECONDARY RESOURCES.

The National Science Development Board and the Asian Recycling Association will jointly sponsor the Second World Recycling Congress and Exhibition on New and Better Uses of Secondary Resources, at the Philippine International Convention Center on March 19-22, 1979, which will be attended by scientists and specialists from all over the world and will display what is new in the Recycling Field.

The attendance of not more than two (2) delegates, who are at least chiefs of divisions or are incumbents of equivalent positions, from each government agency mentioned in the attached list is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a congress fee of ₱750.00 per day for each participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Each participant shall attend only a day depending on the subject matter beneficial and relevant to the functions of their respective agencies. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and congress fees only. Meals included in the congress fee shall be deducted from per diems.

Each participant shall submit to his agency head a complete report on his attendance or participation in the congress as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the National Science Development Board and the Asian Recycling Association shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the congress, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 6, 1979

Reference: List of Government Agencies

Source: Presidential Management Staff