TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (Office of the President of the Philippines)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1010

PROVIDING GUIDELINES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PAGLILINGKOD: BAGONG LIPUNAN PROGRAM.

In accordance with Paragraph No. 3 of Letter of Instructions No. 559 dated June 23, 1977, the following officials are hereby designated to constitute the Sub-Cabinet Committee that shall coordinate and individually supervise the implementation of Paglilingkod: Bagong Lipunan in the regions indicated opposite their names:

This chairmanship of the Committee shall initially go to the representative of the Department of Education and Culture and shall be rotated among the members thereof in the order and for the period to be determined by the members themselves.

Each member of the Committee named above shall carry out his functions of supervision in his assigned region through the Presidential Regional Officer for Development (PROD) and the Chairman of the Regional Development Council, with the assistance of all regional directors and heads of offices and local government.

The Committee is hereby empowered to enlist the support of all regional directors, provincial and other local officials as the need arises. The Committee, in aid of its primary function of coordinating the implementation of the Program, shall organize Paglilingkod: Bagong Lipunan Secretaries on the regional, national provincial levels, with the following functions:

National Secretariat

1. Implement general plan, programs and strategies formulated by the Sub-Cabinet Committee.

2. Draw up and maintain a data bank of qualifications, expertise and interest of government officials and employees.

3. Make periodic visitations to various places of the country and report observations undertaken to the National Secretariat.

4. Perform other functions as may be required by the Sub-Cabinet Committee.

Regional Secretariat

1. Make up-to-date inventory of skills and assistance requirements within the region for submission to the National Secretariat.

2. Plan, program coordinate and supervise with the assistance of various political units the activities of government teams fielded within their territorial jurisdictions.

3. Submit periodic reports to the National Secretariat on the accomplishments of the region.

4. Perform other duties as may be assigned to it by the National Secretariat.

Provincial Secretariat

1. Make a pre-determination of skills and assistance requirements for the cities, municipalities and barangays within their territorial jurisdiction.

2. Assist the Regional Secretariat in planning, coordinating and supervising the activities of the Government Teams fielded within their territorial jurisdictions.

3. Evaluate the performance of government teams within their territorial jurisdictions and submit such reports as may be needed by the Regional Secretariat.

4. Perform other functions required by the Regional/National Secretariat:

a. To carry on and bring to the grassroots level the message of change of the New Society and the development programs being undertaken to institute such change;

b. To enable the rural people, especially the farmers to gain greater access to technological improvements and to directly assist them in the application of such technology;

c. To establish a direct link between the government and the people so that the popular needs and demands may be directly transmitted to the government agencies concerned;

d. To get feedback on the sentiments and reactions of the people towards government policies and programs and the effectiveness of such programs and services;

e. To bring to the barangay health, social cultural and other similar services that the people most urgently need.

Guidelines for the Implementation of the Program

In order to ensure accomplishment of the objectives of the Program, the following guidelines are hereby prescribed for the information and guidance of all concerned.

A. Composition of Teams:

The Regional Secretariat or the Provincial or City Secretariat shall endeavor to organize a government team of services to include agriculture, health engineering, land reform, food production, social and other extension services, which shall work on development and community projects of the barangay. A teams shall preferably include:

1. A capable extension worker or technician from the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Agrarian Reform or any of its bureaus or from any other department or agency capable of advising the barangay on food production efforts.

2. A doctor, nurse or midwife from either Department of Health or its because or offices or the hospitals in the region, province or locality, from the Department of Education and Culture, its regions or school division.

If no doctor or nurse is available from these sources, the Municipal Health physician and nurse shall join the teams, and if there are more than one team in the municipality, the doctor or nurse shall divide their time among the teams without necessarily being on the 15-day rural services as this their normal work.

3. A representative of the Department of Social Services and Development or related agencies or whose functions are related with social services.

4. An engineer or representative from the Department of Public Highways, Department of Local Government and Community Development, the Department of Public Works, Transportation and Communications, or any of the infrastructure agencies capable to assist the barangay in their infrastructure programs.

5. A representative or representatives of the Department of Education and Culture, who shall be teachers in the barangay, shall serve as coordinator of the team planning, together with the barangay captain and the Kabataang Barangay discussions on government programs.

The services of the teachers as coordinators for government programs shall be considered as their 15-day rural services.

The Department of Education and Culture shall now assign teachers to work as coordinates for the Paglilingkod: Bagong Lipunan, and the other government programs, and their services as coordinators shall be credited as their 15-day rural services. These assignments to coordinate government programs shall be planned in order that they shall not prejudice their teaching activities.

6. One point should not be overlooked: that the team shall be able to bring the message of the New Society to the Barangay. Hence, a capable communicator from any government office shall be in the team. All members of the team, however, are expected to be capable to communicate the message change of the New Society.

7. The ideal number of people in the team may be at least 12 but not more than 20.

B. DEPLOYMENT

Officials and employees working with the central offices of the national government departments, agencies, bureaus and offices shall serve in a barangay in their hometown, it being expected that because of their familiarity with the place and with the people, they will be more effective in attaining the objectives of the program besides minimizing expenses.

Officials and employees working in the regions, whether national or local, shall serve in any barangay in their regions, unless the regional secretariat believes that it is in the interest of the program and the official or employee that he sent to his barangay, if within the region. If no case will any official or employees be assigned outside the region.

Those in the province or city may be assigned anywhere in the province unless the provincial or city secretariat believes that it is in the interest of the program and the official or employee that he be send to his barangay, if within the province or city. In no case will any official or employees be assigned outside the province or city.

The Metro-Manila area, Region IV, shall be excluded from the selection as to regions by officials and employees working with the central offices of national government departments, agencies, bureaus and offices.

In the event that Region IV-A cannot absorb officials and employees from the central offices of the national government departments, agencies, bureaus and offices, desiring to serve in the region, the national secretariat may assign the excess personnel to work on some special projects of the government.

The Secretary of Health and the Secretary of Education and Culture will work out with the Coordinate of the project in Metro Manila a plan for the deployment of doctors, nurses and other non-administrative or technical personnel, working with hospitals in Metro-Manila, and teachers, teaching in Metro-Manila, respectively.

Non-hospital health officials and employees shall be deployed as prescribed in the first paragraph hereof.

C. Manual Work to be Among Activities:

All members of the team, however, shall render manual work by working on the development projects of the barangay, such as establishing a plant nursery, building or improving an irrigation dam or canal, or improving a barangay road.

8. A team shall be designated and a ranking officer shall be chosen as team leader, who should at least be a JET graduate.

The team leader shall coordinate with the barangay captains and other barangay coordinators of the program. He shall look after the welfare of his team.

D. Responsibility of Specific Agencies of the Government:

The Community development officers shall determine, in consultation with the mayors and the barangay captains, the barangay ready to receive the government workers, and the teams shall be sent to those barangays which are ready with development projects and other relevant activities.

The infrastructure agencies shall support the teams with equipment, including trucks which may be necessary for their road-building, and other similar development projects.

All heads of departments, bureaus and agencies of the government shall issue the orders deemed necessary for the proper guidance of their central and field offices.

The provincial governors, city and municipal mayors and other local officials shall give full support for this program to ensure its implementation.

The Secretary of Health, his directors or other representatives, shall devise a plan which shall make doctors, nurses and other hospital personnel available for this program, without impairing the essential services of the hospitals.

E. Responsibility of the Barangay

The Barangay shall be encouraged to put up a counterpart teams from their community to work with the team, besides organizing class sessions or other types of meetings, and shall prepare work programs for the teams. The organizing and planning group for the Barangay shall be the Barangay Captain, the Kabataang Barangay Chairman and the teacher designated by the Department of Education and Culture.

The deployment of officials and employees for the “Paglilingkod” program shall be so planned by the Heads of Offices that the normal services of the government shall not suffer.

F. These rules are only guidelines, and the officers implementing these programs may modify or adopt plans which will ensure the implementation of the program.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 10, 1977

Source: House of Representatives, Legislative Library