TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 882

CONSTITUTING AN INTER-AGENCY COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR THE ILOCOS NORTE RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT TO DEVELOP A PACKAGE OF PROJECTS IN THE SAID AREA FOR CONSIDERATION BY THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.

As a measure to improve the standard of living in economically-depressed areas in the country, there is a parent need to prosecute rural development projects designed to increase farm productivity and incomes of the mass of farmers.

In order to determine the potentials and develop a package of projects to promote rural development in the provinces of Ilocos Norte, there is hereby created an Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee for the Ilocos Norte Rural Development Project, constituted as follows:

Chairman

Member

“

“

“

In the performance of its functions, the Coordinating Committee shall determine the support services in terms of the necessary manpower for the conduct of specific project studies on continuing basis.

The Coordinating Committee shall be authorized to organize a Technical Study Team to be composed by the representatives from the various agencies herein represented, and call on other relevant government institutions/agencies necessary to accomplish its tasks. The team shall have the following terms of reference:

1. Assess physical infrastructure, land use and land capability, including soil surveys, erosion, geophysical data, flooding and other natural hazards. Physical infrastructure surveys will include the extent of feeder road network, existing and potential irrigation facilities and their effectiveness.

2. Conduct socio-economic surveys in areas where there exist project development possibilities. The survey will include, among others, data relating to crops grown, average yield, use of production inputs, farm credit, kinds of livestock raise, levels of farm technology, warehousing, storage, transport and marketing services.

3. Assess the status of community development in the area, including community organizations, farmers’ organization and service organizations.

The Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee and the Technical Study Teams shall accomplish this task following the requirements set forth by the Asian Development Bank in effecting project loan approval, unless extended or sooner terminated by the National Economic and Development Authority.

This Circular supersedes any and all previous Circulars inconsistent herewith, and shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ROBERTO V. REYES Deputy Executive Secretary

Manila, November 24, 1975

Source: Presidential Management Staff