OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 214

1. One aspect of the Government’s drive against all forms of lawlessness is the curbing of juvenile delinquency. This particular form of misdemeanor is fast becoming a major social problem in certain cities and municipalities thereby necessitating the coordinated actions of the national as well as the local governments.

2. Juvenile Delinquency is primarily an urban problem and statistics indicate that it has reached alarming proportions which, if not dealth with at this stage, would create a fertile situation for future criminals. Accordingly, it has become imperative that a local unit be organized to specifically deal with this problem which will lead to a wholesome relationship between the local law enforcers and the youth in the community.

3. Effective immediately, a JUVENILE CONTROL UNIT shall be organized within the Police Department of Cities and of Municipalities where the rate of juvenile delinquency is high. This Unit shall be charged with development of a’ program designed to prevent the development in youth of emotional conditions that may result in criminal behaviour and to correct unsatisfactory conditions that contribute to the development of such behaviour wherever they exist.

4. The local Juvenile Control Unit shall have the following specific function:

a. To provide the leadership for the eradication of laments that, promote criminal activities among the youth;

b. To discovery of delinquents, near-delinquents and those exposed to high risk situations, arid to initiate action for the treatment of those poorly adjusted;

c. The planning, promotion and direction of group delinquency-prevention activities that will provide wholesome influences among the youth in coordination with socio-civic organizations engaged in crime and delinquency prevention activities; and

d. The operation of a separate detention facility for juvenile offenders where the inmates shall be given correctional guidance activities either by casework, or group work method, and constructive and satisfying activities.

5. In staffing said unit, the authorities concerned are hereby enjoined to select only experienced line officers. Pre-service training should be required to assure adequacy of knowledge and skill needed in this new activity.

6. City and municipal mayors concerned shall take immediate steps to carry out the purposes of this Circular.

7. The Police Commission shall take steps to support and assist all Chiefs of Police concerned in the organization and efficient operations of local Juvenile Delinquency Units. It shall also program and support the training of juvenile control officers.

Done in the City of Manila, this    day of          in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-eight.

(SGD.) FERDINAND E. MARCOS President Republic of the Philippines

Manila, November 7, 1968

By the President: (SGD.) JOSE J. LEIDO, JR. Acting Executive Secretary

Source : Presidential Management Staff