TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 674

In view of the operational requirements of the Monitoring and Operation Center and the Research Staff for the Codification of Philippine Muslim Laws created under Memorandum Order No. 370 under the Presidential Task Force for the Reconstruction and Development of Mindanao created under Executive Order No. 411, Series of 1973, it is necessary to provide for a system of control of its funds.

In this connection, the Executive Assistant to the Executive Secretary shall exercise in behalf of the Executive Secretary, as Chairman of Presidential Task Force, and during the latter’s absence, the following functions:

1. To approve and control the disbursement of all funds of the Monitoring and Operation Center and the Research Staff for the Codification of Philippine Muslim Laws including the ₱1 million released by TW# B-02-99.034 dated September 13, 1973 and ₱.3 million released by TW# B-02-994.003 dated September 10, 1073.

2. To establish a separate account for the funds of the above mentioned offices and to secure the services of an accounting staff either through detail or appointment or through any of the Agencies under this Office whichever is the most practical arrangement.

3. All records of accounts, vouchers and all other accountable forms shall be kept at the Manila Calling Office of the Monitoring and Operation Center under the Management of the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs.

4. The auditing of all funds disbursed and expended by the herein named offices shall be under the Malacañang Auditor, provided, that the MSU auditor or provincial/city auditors may also audit the Field Staff in Muslim Mindanao upon request by the Special Assistant on Muslim Affairs.

5. All special projects to be undertaken by any or all of the Offices and Agencies mentioned herein is subject to the prior approval of this Office.

This shall take effect as of today.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, October 24, 1973

Source: Presidential Management Staff