TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 558

ENJOINING STRICT COMPLIANCE WITH ALL GOVERNMENT SPECIFICATIONS IN THE MANUFACTURE OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL FLAG.

Standardization No. 1602 PRF dated May 16, 1963, issued by the Bureau of Supply, defines and delineates the various specifications of the government in the manufacture of the Philippine National Flag.

The specifications are meant not only to establish uniform standard in the making of our National Colors but also to guarantee the durability of the Flag by the use of quality materials. Henceforth, the requisition and delivery of Philippine National Flags will be governed by the following standard operating procedure:

1. All requisitions for the purchase of the Philippine National Flag must be based on strict compliance with design, color, craftsmandhip and material requirements of the government.

All samples of flags offered for purchase for government use will be evaluated as to design, color and craftsmanship specifications by the Philippine Heraldry Committee, Malacañang, which will stamp approval or disapproval on the canvass reinforcement on the flag sample submitted. The samples will be sent to the Committee by the requisitioning office, not by the flag supplier.

Effective immediately the established policy of submitting only one NIST Laboratory Report to cover all blue, red, yellow and white materials used in the manufacture of the flag will be discontinued. Instead, flag manufacturers will be required as to submit to the Philippines Heraldry Committee separate and individual NIST Laboratory Reports for the blue, red, yellow and white flag materials.

In evaluating strict compliance to material specifications, flag suppliers shall submit to the National Institute of Science and Technology three yards of red, blue, yellow and white material used in the manufacture of the flag.

Individual NIST Laboratory Reports will cover each color of the Flag, The laboratory fee will be paid by the flag supplier.

2. Effective immediately the inspection of deliveries of flag requisitioned by the government shall be taken over by the General Auditing Office.

The Bureau of Supply, the General Auditing Office and other Government offices nay continue sending to the Philippines Heraldry Committee in Malacañang or to the MTST for evaluation, samples of flags picked at random from deliveries of flags of winning bidders to check whether the flags delivered are as per approved sample submitted by flag suppliers.

All government offices concerned oust gee to it that these requirements as embodied in Standardization No- 16-2 FRF dated May 16, 1963 are strictly adhered to.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila,  March 20, 1972

Source: Presidential Management Staff