TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 980

AUTHORIZING THE PARTICIPATION OF THE GRADUATES OF THE JUNIOR EXECUTIVE TRAINING IN THE YCAP-YSTAPHIL SUMMER FLOATING UNIVERSITY.

The State recognizes the vital role of the youth in nation-building.and commits its resources to promote their physical, intellectual and social-well-being. In order to foster in the youth civic consciousness, to prepare them for active involvement in national development, and to awaken in them a spirit of volunteerism, the Department of Education and Culture has organized a Youth Civil Action Program (YCAP).

One of the projects under this program is the “Sumner Floating University” which is being sponsored jointly with the YSTAPHIL for college students from the universities and colleges in Luzon who are either on their third or fourth year of schooling.

Since one of the thrusts’ of this University is to form a Youth Speakers Bureau Corps to discuss and inform the people of the various developmental programs of the government, it has become necessary to seek the cooperation of government personnel to provide direct assistance to the project particularly the graduates of the Junior Executive Training Program. These JET graduates who are Chiefs of Divisions in. their various agencies have themselves been exposed to the knowledge sought to be imparted in the university besides being directly charged with translating into action the policies, plans and programs of the departments they represent. As such, they are in the best position to communicate the objectives and action programs of the government within the context of development.

In view of the foregoing, all heads of departments, Chiefs of bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby authorized to assign to the YCAP-YSTAPHIL Summer Floating University, on full or part-time basis as may be requested by the Department of Education and Culture, division chiefs and other officials of equivalent rank who have successfully completed the Junior Executive Training. The participants shall be entitled to collect honoraria at rates to be determined by the Civil Service Commission, chargeable against the funds of the Department of Education and Culture, subject to the availability thereof and the usual audit.

The YCAP shall submit a report on the participation of these personnel in the program within thirty (30) days from termination of the project to the department and agency heads and to the President.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, April 26, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff