TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 643

CREATING A HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT TEAM TO MEET WITH THE WORLD BANK MISSION ON HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

In view of the importance and significance of the coming of a World Bank mission on Housing and Urban Development in July and October, 1973, there is hereby created a counterpart Team to represent the Government of the Republic of the Philippines composed of the following:

Chairman

Member

Member

Member

Member

Member

The Team shall have the following specific functions:

1. Establish priorities and guidelines in evaluating Housing and Urban Development Projects consistent with the over-all socio-economic development plan;

2. Determine the forms of assistance to Housing and Resettlement Projects to be applied for within the context of the mission;

3. Determine the candidate housing and urban development projects in the Metropolitan Manila Area for possible World Bank financing and for this purpose, establish guidelines to provide the direction to Greater Manila development oriented towards the east.

4. Coordinate the preparation of project feasibility studies pertinent to the mission for submission to the World Bank.

5. Extend to the mission such technical and other forms of assistance as may be necessary for the successful accomplishment of its task.

The Team herein organized shall prepare all the necessary background papers and collect/collate information relevant to the above mentioned task before the World Bank Team arrives on or about the 15 th of July 1973. This should specifically include:

1. A spatial definition of Metropolitan Manila;

2. A list of possible housing and urban development projects for World Bank financing;

3. A paper on public finance and administration as they concern national and local government agencies and their inter-relationships;

4. A paper on the major issues affecting Metropolitan Manila; and

5. A paper on the migration to the Greater Manila area over time.

Definite projects for possible financing by the World Bank, such as the Carmona and Sapang Palay Resettlements, tenement housing, etc. in such form as are required for immediate World Bank evaluation, should be completed not later than one week before the expected date of arrival of the second team which is 1 October 1973.

All heads of departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the Government are hereby requested to extend full cooperation and assistance to the Team to insure the accomplishment of its task.

Memorandum Circular No 640, dated 15 June 1973 creating a Housing and Urban Development Team to meet with the World Bank mission on Housing and Urban Development is hereby revoked.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, 22 June 1973

Source: Presidential Management Staff