Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1204

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 11th PHILIPPINE MANAGEMENT CONGRESS.

The Philippine Council of Management (PHILCOMAN) will sponsor the 11th Philippine Management Congress to be held at the Grand Ballroom of the Hotel Intercontinental, Manila, on November 26-28, 1980, on the theme: “Critical Issues for Consideration in the 1980’s”.

In view of the importance and the significance of the issues for discussion to government operations in the forthcoming Philippine Management Congress all heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than one (1) employee who is a member of the management staff/division unit equivalent rank, to the Congress on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation and a conference fee of not more than ₱500.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds, the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Agencies sending participants to the said Congress shall have identified/generated the 10% savings as mandated under par. 1.2 of LOI 981. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to conference fees only. Meals covered by the conference fee shall be deducted from the per diems.

Participants shall submit to their respective agency heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the said Congress as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices.

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Senior Presidential Assistant

Manila, November 24, 1980

Source: Presidential Management Staff