OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 437

REVISING THE POLICY REGARDING THE GRANTING OF REPRESENTATION ALLOWANCES TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.

To keep abreast with the changing times and to be more practicable and realistic in the appraisal of the need of certain local officials for representation allowances in the exercise of their official functions, the granting to then of such monthly representation allowances shall be in accordance with the rates fixed and subject to the conditions imposed hereunder, to wit:

PROVINCIAL AND CITY GOVERNMENTS

A. For the Cities of Manila, Quezon, Baguio, Pasay and all First and Second Class Provinces and Cities –

B. For Third and Fourth Class Provinces and Cities –

C. For the Fifth to Seventh Class Provinces and Cities –

MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT

A. For municipalities which are provincial capitals.

1. For the municipalities belonging to 1st Class- 1 to 3.

2. For the municipalities belonging to 1st Class- 4 to 6.

3. For the municipalities belonging to 2nd Class- 6th class.

B. For municipalities which are not provincial capitals.

1. For municipalities whose income is ₱1,000,000 or more

2. For municipalities belonging to 1st Class 4 to 6.

3. For the municipalities belonging to 2nd Class 7th class.

The grant of monthly representation allowances at amounts not exceeding the rates fixed above is at the discretion of the local legislative bodies concerned subject to the stability of the local general funds exclusive of the amounts transferred thereto from other local funds earmarked for vital local services, and provided that it shall be strictly on reimbursement basis, provided further that the amount involve shall be included in the determination of the percentage allowable for salaries and wages under the provisions of existing laws; provided still further that the local government concerned have complied and provided for all its statutory and contractual obligations; provided furthermore that no overdraft shall be incurred as a result of the granting of said allowances; an provided finally that the approval by this Office of the granting of representation allowance to local officials not specifically enumerated above shall first be obtained before payment thereof shall be made

Memorandum Circular No. 138, series of 1967, as amended by Memorandum Circular Nos. 255, 270, 273 and 298 dated April 23, 1969, June 30, 1969, July 22, 1969, and November 6, 1969, respectively, of this office is hereby revoked.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, February 22, 1971

Source: Presidential Management Staff