TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 956

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE 8TH ASIAN PACIFIC DENTAL CONGRESS SPONSORED BY THE ASIAN PACIFIC DENTAL FEDERATION.

The Asian Pacific Dental Federation is sponsoring the 8th Asian Pacific Dental Congress to be held on February 7-12, 1977, at the Philippine International Convention Center, on the theme: “Dental Advancements and Problems in the Asian Pacific Region.”

This Congress will feature among others, the presentation of scientific lectures and table clinics by about 70 of the world’s renowned dental professors and experts.

Since this Dental Congress will certainly bring about closer cooperation in the advancement of dental research and practice and closer friendships among those who serve the Asian Pacific Area, all heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices, as well as government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than four (4) delegates who are registered dentists, not more than two (2) of whom shall come from the Greater Manila Area and the other two (2), if any, from the provinces, and a technical Staff of eight (8) from the Bureau of Dental Health Services and five (5) from the Department of Education and Culture, on official tine with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and Congress fee, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

It is understood that the participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and Congress fee only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their attendance in the Congress within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, February 8, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff