TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 748

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE POLLUTION CONTROL SEMINAR SPONSORED BY THE ASSOCIATION OF MANAGEMENT AND INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERS OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC.

WHEREAS, the Association of Management and Industrial Engineers of the Philippines, Inc., an association of management and industrial engineering parctitioners and consultants from both the government and the private sector, will hold a pollution control seminar in Manila on July 30-31 1974 on theme: “Pollution Control — the Role of .the Government and Private Sector;”

WHEREAS, the objectives of this seminar are to underscore the responsibility of all citizens, most especially the individuals concerned both in government and private industrial firms, in protecting, our environment from the hazards of pollution; and discuss means of contriving control devices which would minimize the danger of air, water and marine pollution, as wall as counter-measures which would prevent injury to human health; and,

WHEREAS, the consciousness of our citizens on the need to protect our environment and maintain ecological balance will greatly contribute to the attainment of the goals and objectives of the New Society:

WHEREFORE, all departments, bureaus and offices of the Government, both national and local, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than three representatives to this pollution control seminar; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to members of the AMIEP and seminar officials.

Participants shall attend on official time, with expenses for transportation, subsistence and lodging and seminar fees, all chargeable against the appropriation of their respective agencies in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 23, 1975, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements; and as an exception to the provisions of Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972.

The management of private entities are encouraged and enjoined to avail of this seminar, by allowing qualified personnel to attend and participate therein on official time as part of their personnel training program.

It is understood that participants who are residing or who are stationed within the Greater Manila area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and training fees only.

The participant shall submit to their respective agency heads a written report on their attendance and participation in the seminar, within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

This Circular takes effect immediately.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 2, 1974

Source: Presidential Management Staff