OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1062

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE/WORKSHOP OF THE ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTANTS OF THE PHILIPPINES, INC.

The Association of Government Accountants of the Philippines, Inc. will hold its National Conference/Workshop in Baguio City on June 22-24, 1978, on the theme “Accounting Service-Medium for National Progress”. Among others, the seminar will disseminate budgetary innovations and institutionalize a uniform system of Fiscal Control and Reporting.

All heads of departments, bureaus and offices, both national and local, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants each who are members of the Association to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, conference fee of ₱300 and per diems against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 date November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. The limitation with respect to the number of participants from each office shall not apply to the officers of the Association and members of working committees, provided membership in such committees shall not exceed five (5). Participants residing or stationed within the site of the conference/workshop shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete reports on their attendance or participation in the conference/workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977, furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, within the same period, a report and evaluation of the conference, including a statement of income and expenses duly audited by a certified public accountant not connected with the association, shall submitted to this office.

JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 24, 1978

Source: House of Representatives, Legislative Library