MALACAÑANG Manila

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1014

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE AT THE 1977 WORLD ACUPUNCTURE CONGRESS HOSTED BY THE PHILIPPINE ACUPUNCTURE ASSOCIATION, INC.

On November 2 to 5, 1977 s the 1977 World Acupuncture Congress will hold its Conference in Manila. It is jointly sponsored by the World Academic Society of Acupuncture in Korea, Union Scientifique Mondialo des Sociotes D’ Acupuncture in West Germany, and the International Acupuncture Research Society in the United States; and hosted by the Philippine Acupuncture Association, Inc.

Expected at this international and prestigious gathering are about 2,000 foreign delegates coning from about 34 countries.

Most of the world’s exports and authorities on acupuncture are expected to attend this historic conference. The papers to be read and the seminars to be held will focus on such topics as: Acupuncture treatment of Bronchial Asthma, glaucoma, migraine headache, arthritis and administration of anesthesia by acupuncture and many others.

To a developing country like the Philippines, acupuncture is indeed an interesting field because it can heal ailing persons and provide anesthesia without much expense. This will indeed be of tremendous help in our public health services efforts, especially in the rural areas where the necessary medicine is not available.

All heads of departments, chiefs of bureaus and offices including government owned or controlled corporations, hospitals and local governments are hereby authorized to send not less than two (2) but not more than five (5) doctors as their representative to the conference. Participants shall be on official time and allowed reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems, as well as seminar fees, chargeable against the released appropriations of their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973 as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

It is understood that participants residing or stationed within the Greater Manila Area shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and conference fees only.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, October 21, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff