OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 123

Subject:

Establishment of the Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Foreign Economic Policy.

For the information and guidance of all concerned, quoted hereunder is the text of Administrative Order No. 59 signed by the President on May 28, 1967:

“WHEREAS, in the conduct of foreign economic relations, the Philippine Government regularly encounters problems involving both the different government agencies and the private sector;

“WHEREAS, there is necessity for a specific agency to coordinate and consult with government agencies and the private sector to insure that their positions and policies are in conformity with established foreign economic policy; and

“WHEREAS, it is necessary for an appropriate agency to make thorough and continuing studies of problems affecting the country in its economic intercourse with other countries and to recommend the Philippine position in international economic negotiations;

“NOW, THEREFORE, I, FERDINAND E. MARCOS, President of the Philippine, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby create the Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Foreign Economic Policy which shall serve as the government body responsible for conducting studies and research work on matters pertaining to Philippine foreign economic relations, recommending the Philippine position in international economic negotiations in consultation with other government agencies and the private business sector concerned, and recommending to the President such other policies, of an economic character as would most effectively advance the national interest.

“The Inter-Agency Technical Committee on Foreign, Economic Policy shall be composed of a Chairman from the Department of Foreign Affairs and a representative each from the Department of Commerce and Industry, the Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources, the Department of Finance, the National Economic Council, the Presidential Economic Staff, the Central Bank of the Philippines, and the Tariff Commission, to be designated by the respective office heads.

“The Inter-Agency Technical Committee is hereby authorized to call any officer or employee of any Department, bureau, or agency of the Government and to form such Sub-Committee as may be needed to assist the Inter-Agency Committee in roper discharge of its functions.

“Done in the City of Manila, this 28th day of May, in the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-seven.”

Pursuant to this order, all government offices concerned are enjoined to cooperate with the Committee in the performance of its functions. It is further enjoined that any position proper or report or participation in international negotiations or conference and problems relating to foreign economic policy and relations should be submitted to the Committee for assessment, study and recommendation to the President.

All Philippine delegations to economic negotiations or conferences are henceforth required to submit position papers for the approval of the President it least a week before departure or participation at such negotiations or conferences. No delegation to such negotiations or conferences shall be approved unless the requirements set forth above have been compiled with.

By the authority of the President:

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, July 25, 1967

Source: Presidential Management Staff