OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 48

DIRECTING STRICT COMPLIANCE WITH LAW ON THE BRANDING AND REGISTRATION OF CATTLE, ADAPTATION OF MEASURES AGAINST CATTLE RUSTLING, AND REGULATION TRANSPORT OF THE SAME.

In order to accelerate agricultural production in our country, it is necessary to conserve our work animals. For this purpose, the President has issued Executive Order No. 25 dated May 13, 1966, prohibiting the slaughter of any carabao, male or female, which is 20 years old or below. It is also important that these work animals should be branded, properly documented, and protected from thieves. Effective immediately, the following actions shall be taken by the government officials indicated:

1. Municipal Mayors and Municipal Treasurers shall enforce strictly the provisions of Chapter 22 of the Revised Administrative Code regarding the registration, branding, conveyance and slaughter of cattle, particularly the provisions of Section 515 thereof requiring all large cattle “which have attained the age of two years” to be branded and registered;

2. Barrio Councils shall adopt necessary measures (like the establishment of community corrals, guarding, etc.) for the security of work animals in their barrios.

3. Municipal Mayors and Chiefs of Municipal Police, in coordination with the Barrio Councils, should establish and supervise a system of barrio patrols to discourage and apprehend cattle thieves and other undesirable elements within their jurisdiction.

No cattle may be transported from one province to another except only upon a permit issued by the PC Provincial Commander of the Province of origin; and that such permit will be issued only under the following conditions:

1. That the cattle to be transported is covered by a genuine certificate of ownership of large cattle and/or certificate of transfer of large cattle;

2. That the cattle is free from communicable diseases as certified to by the Provincial/City Veterinarian;

3. That the cattle being transported, if for slaughter purposes, is not covered by Executive Order No. 25 dated May 13, 1966, prohibiting the slaughter of carabaos which are 20 years old or below;

4. That the certificate of ownership of large cattle and/or certificate of transfer or the cattle to be slaughtered is surrendered to the municipal or city treasurer of the municipality or city where the said cattle is slaughtered; and

5. That public conveyance operators should assure themselves that any cattle being transported by then from one province to another are covered by the above-mentioned documents (that is, certificate of ownership/transfer of large cattle, Certificate by the Provincial or City Veterinarian and permit issued by the PC Provincial Commander).

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, June 6, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff