TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1114

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SILVER JUBILEE CONVENTION OF THE ASSOCIATION OF SPECIAL LIBRARIES OF THE PHILIPPINES.

The Association of Special Libraries of the Philippines will hold its Salver Jubilee Convention on February 8-10,1979, at the PNB Lecture Hall and Auditorium, on the theme: “Information Science for National Development.”

The objectives of the convention is to develop and maintain among the participants a strong spirit of dedication in the discharge of their functions and. responsibilities both as a member of the library profession and as a public servant and to enable them to imbibe the benefits of professional growth through exposure to the current trends and techniques in librarianship.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send not more than two (2) participants, who are members of the Association, to the convention an official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a convention fee of ₱250.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitledto reasonable expenses for transportation and convention fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the convention as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, the organizer shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the convention, copy furnished the Ministry of the Budget, including a list of participants from the government sector indicating their respective offices, and a statement of fees collected and expenditures incurred, duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the Association.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 24, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff