OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 33

AUTHORIZING THE HOLDING OF A SEMINAR ON PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN DAVAO CITY.

The Civil Service Commission, with the cooperation of the Public Administration Clubs of Ateneo de Davao and the University of the Mindanao and the Personnel Officers Association of the Philippines, Inc. (POAP), and the technical assistance of the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID), will held a three-day seminar on Public Administration in Davao City on May 10-12, 1966. The theme of the seminar will be: “Developing Executive Skills for Dynamic Management.”

An effective public service can be achieved only through the cooperation of a conscientious and dedicated body of public officials and an enlightened citizenry. Geared towards this objective, the seminar will feature, among others, group discussions on current problems of the executive and the difficulties that he must meet in the face of changes that are now taking place in the reshaping of the national economy.

All offices of the national government, and government-owned or controlled corporations, with branches or units in the Mindanao region as well as provincial, city and municipal governments in Mindanao are hereby authorized to send not more than two of their officials and employees to the seminar who are interested in, and concerned with, more dynamic public administration in this country. The Civil Service Commission is also authorized to send three of its technical men to the seminar. Their attendance shall be on official time and their expenses for transportation, subsistence and seminar fees shall be chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

Delegates shall submit to their respective heads of office a report of their attendance and participation in the seminar.

By authority of the President

(SGD.) RAFAEL M. SALAS Executive Secretary

Manila, April 19, 1966

Source : Presidential Management Staff