Tanggapan ng Pangulo ng Pilipinas (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM ORDER NO. 638

DESCRIBING THE PROCEDURE AND FLOW OF ACTION REGARDING REQUESTS FOR THE REPAIR, REHABILITATION, REPLACEMENT AND/OR CONSTRUCTION OF PRE-FABRICATED SCHOOL BUILDINGS SUBMITTED TO THE PRESIDENTIAL REGIONAL OFFICERS FOR DEVELOPMENT (PRODS).

In order to systematize the actions to be taken and hereby reduce waste in the allocation of government resources, the following procedure and flow shall be observed with regard to requests submitted to the Presidential Regional Officers for Development (PRODs) for the repair, replacement, rehabilitation and/or construction of prefabricated school buildings;

A. Presidential Regional Officer for Development (PROD)

If a request is addressed to or brought to the attention of the PROD, he will classify whether request is for:

(1) repair, rehabilitation or replacement of existing units.

(2) expansion or additional units.

In case (1), all requests are referred to the Public Works District Engineer (PWDE) concerned for investigation and report. The report must be concurred in by the Division Superintendent of Schools.

In case (2), the requests are referred to the Director of Public Schools who determines the merit, necessity and priority of the requested expansion. The Director of Public Schools consolidates these needs and includes them in his integrated program of schoolroom expansion and submits them to the Director of Public Works for inclusion in the annual infrastructure program.

B. Public Works District Engineer (PWDE) and Division Superintendent of Schools (DSS)

Upon receipt of any referral and/or requests relevant to school buildings, the Public Works District Engineer (PWDE) classifies them as in above cases (1) and (2).

In case (1), the Public Works Distinct Engineer (PWDE) makes an Investigation in collaboration with the Division Superintendent of Schools. If found deserving, he prepares a joint report (or certification) with the Division Superintendent of Schools (DSS) and submit same accompanied by pictures, with proper recommendations duly justified to the Director of Public Works, furnishing Infrastructure Operations Center (IOC) a copy thereof.

In case (2), investigation is conducted and report is addressed to the Director of Public Schools.

C. Bureau of Public Works (BPW)

The Director of Public Works, through its Regional Offices, collates these reports and forwards them to IOC, as coordinating office, with appropriate recommendations on allocations and funding.

D. Infrastructure Operations Center (IOC)

Infrastructure Operations Center (IOC) verifies and evaluates BPW recommendations and all deserving cases are recommended for allocations and funding to the Executive Secretary. The following are the priorities for, implementation:

1. Repair of damaged facilities. (When national funds are available, same are recommended for release, otherwise, efforts are exerted for the end-users and civic groups to undertake repairs.)

2. Replacement of totally destroyed, burned down, and dilapidated schools with:

(a) RP-US Bayanihan units

(b) Unerected Marcos-type previously issued on self-help basis

(c) New Marcos type units from Reparations

3. Completion of partly erected self-help units due to lack of funds (national aid fund are allocated only after all efforts have been exhausted to have the school completed through civic action or by local government resources).

4. Regular expansion program.

E. Bureau of Public Schools (BPS)

All requests for additional schools to meet expansion requirements are referred to the Director of Public Schools since he is in the best position to determine the school needs in any given area. The BPS will consolidate these needs and will devise a nationwide program of expansion on an annual basis wherein a system of priorities can be observed for simplified implementation.

Attached is a flow chart indicating the functional and advisory/informational flow in handling such requests.

These procedures shall take effect immediately.

By authority of the President: (Sgd.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, June 5, 1973

Source: Malacañang Records Office