Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1223

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE AT THE NATIONAL SEMINAR-WORKSHOP AND FESTIVAL OF MUSIC AND DANCE OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT CULTURAL ASSOCIATION (PGCA) INC., IN CONJUNCTION WITH THE OBSERVANCE OF ITS 11 th FOUNDATION YEAR.

The Philippine Government Cultural Association (PGCA) Inc., with the Central Bank as co-sponsor, will hold a National Seminar-Workshop and Festival of Music and Dance on the theme: “KARUNUNGAN, KALINANGAN AT KADAKILAAN,” and in observance of its 11 th Foundation Year, present the 1961 presidential Awards to highly deserving men in the field of culture, on December 17-19, 1981, at the Central Bank, Manila.

The seminar-workshop is designed to reawaken cultural consciousness and better understanding of Filipino culture among government personnel in line with the thrusts of promoting dynamic management, cultural uplift and greatness under the New Republic.

In view thereof, all heads of ministries, chiefs of bureaus and offices, including government-owned and controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to send two representatives each to this national seminar-workshop, who are members of the Association or whose work is directly involved in the management of cultural activities of their agencies; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to workshop officials and members; provided, further, that participants from outside Metro Manila may be allowed per diems, transportation and traveling expenses and seminar fee of P300.00 per participant; provided, furthermore, that those coming from the Metro Manila area shall be allowed transportation expenses and seminar fee only, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective agencies.

Participants shall submit a report on the seminar-workshop to their respective agency heads within 30 days after the seminar. Likewise, within 30 days after the termination of the seminar, PGCA shall submit to the Office of the President an evaluation report, including a list of participants and their positions, and a statement of income and expenses incurred duly certified by a Certified Public Accountant, copies of which shall be furnished the Office of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission.

The usual constraints on the availability of funds, and the accounting and auditing requirements shall be observed.

By authority of the president: (Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, November 16, 1981

Source: Presidential Management Staff