OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 375

URGING ATTENDANCE IN THE “EXECUTIVE SEMINAR ON LAND REFORM IN THE 70’S.

The National Land Reform Council will sponsor an executive seminar on the theme, “Land Reform in the 70’s, in connection with the 7th Anniversary of the signing of R.A. 3844, otherwise known as the Agricultural Land Reform Code on August 8, 1970. The first session on August 6 will be held at the Abalos Hall, PTA Building, Diliman, Quezon City. The sessions for August 7 and 8 will be at the Ramon Magsaysay Hall, SSS Building, Diliman, Quezon City.

The Seminar is designed to provide executives involved in the implementation of the program with deeper insights into the factors that influence effective program implementation. Through these insights, thus gained, to focus attention on the problems of the ensuing decade in the light of our current national and international development.

In view of this importance of the land reform program, the Land Authority, the Agricultural Credit Administration, the Cultural Productivity Commission, and the Office of the Agricultural Counsel are hereby authorized to send to the said Seminar three representatives each, two from the Central Office and one from the Regional Office. All the other offices and agencies mentioned in the attached list are likewise authorized to send to the Seminar two participants each, one from the Central Office and another to represent the entire regional office of each agency. Their participation shall be an official business, that is, with reasonable expenses chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, subject to the availability of funds and usual accounting and auditing requirements.

The names of the proposed participants may be sent to the National Land Reform Council, c/c The Secretariat, PTA Building, Quezon City.

By authority of the President: (SGD.) ALEJANDRO MELCHOR Executive Secretary

Manila, July 30, 1970

Reference: Annex A

Source: Presidential Management Staff