Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1237

REQUIRING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE GOVERNMENT, BOTH NATIONAL AND LOCAL, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS THEIR SUBSIDIARIES AND ACQUIRED ASSETS ON OFFICIAL TRIPS TO TRAVEL VIA PHILIPPINE AIRLINES (PAL) OR THROUGH ITS CONNECTIONS.

The Philippine Airlines, being the national flag carrier, should be patronized by the government.

For this purpose, it is hereby directed that all officials and employees of the government, both national and local, and of government-owned or controlled corporations, their subsidiaries and acquired assets, who are authorized to travel by air, especially abroad, on official business or on official time. Including foreign consultants and foreign official guests whose air fares are paid for by the Philippine Government or any of its instrumentalities, shall travel by PAL. In the event that the ultimate destination is not served by PAL, the itinerary shall provide for travel via PAL to a point nearest the destination on condition that this will not result in higher transportation cost of delay in the official itinerary.

Regardless of the airline to be used, PAL tickets and traffic documents shall be used to cover all official travels by government officials and employees. For foreign travel, tickets and traffic documents may be secured from the PAL Government Travel and Ticketing Office (GTTO) at S & L Building, 1500 Roxas Boulevard, Manila. Air Travel not in accordance with this requirement shall not be allowed except upon certification of non-availability of flight or accommodation from a duly authorized official of the PAL GTTO.

Government officials traveling while on approved leave of absence shall be advised to secure plane accommodations on PAL or avail of its reservation and ticketing services.

Travel of scholars and trainees and others who are provided air tickets by their sponsors are not covered by this Circular. However, in cases where the amount corresponding to the air fare is remitted or advanced without specifying a particular carrier, the government official or employee should likewise be advised to travel on or avail of the reservation and ticketing services of PAL.

Air freight paid out of government funds or in connection with government-funded or sponsored projects or travels, shall be shipped by PAL or through its connections.

The payment of air travel and cargo shall be by treasury warrant or check drawn in favor of PAL. Any refund for air fare or air freight paid out of government funds shall be made only to the government office concerned and not to the traveling official or employee or any other individual.

All heads of offices, both national and local, including government-owned or controlled corporations, their subsidiaries and acquired assets all administrative officers, accountants, and internal auditors; the Civil Aeronautics Board and COA Auditors are enjoined to strictly enforce this Circular. The immigration or exit officers at the Manila International Airport shall, in addition to their normal duties, check the air plane tickets and traffic documents of traveling officials and employees to insure that these were secured from PAL. All offices are further enjoined to disseminate this Circular to all their officials and employees.

Memorandum Circular No. 2 dated June 14, 1963, Memorandum Circular No. 36 dated August 7, 1963 and Memorandum Circular No. 1221 dated September 29, 1981, are hereby repealed.

This Circular shall take effect April 1, 1982.

By authority of the President:

(Sgd.) JUAN C. TUVERA Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, March 10, 1982

Source: Presidential Management Staff