Office of the President of the Philippines Malacañang

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 984

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE ORGANIZATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE ASEAN COUNCIL OF JAPAN ALUMNI.

The ASEAN Council of Japan Alumni (AsCoJaAl), representing more than 20,000 graduates and former students of universities and schools in Japan and who hail from Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand., will hold its Organizational Conference on June 8-11, 1977, in Manila which has been designated as the seat of the Permanent Secretariat of the said Council.

Among the main objectives of the Council is to create a unified organ for concerted action towards promoting closer relations among the member countries within the region, as well as with Japan, with whom these Alumni from universities and schools in Japan are linked by a common bond.

Representing the Philippines in this Conference is a delegation from the Philippine Federation of Japan Alumni with the following affiliate alumni organizations: the Philippine-Japan Fellows Association; the Philippine Association of Japanese Ministry of Education Scholars; the Philippine-Japan Club; the Philippine Cultural and Technical Association of Returned Overseas Scholars, and the Omni Ventures, Inc. Many of the members of the above-mentioned alumni associations aggregating about 2,600 members of good standing are government officials and employees.

In view thereof, and considering the importance of the Conference which will provide a significant forum whereby the participants can exchange information and ideas, discuss problems and formulate plans and projects which would redound to the benefit of its members and the peoples of the member nations, the attendance of not more than 100 government officials and employees who are members of the alumni organizations mentioned above and who will be invited by the sponsoring alumni organization is hereby authorized on official time, but no expenditure of whatever nature of government funds in connection therewith shall be authorized.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a report on their attendance in the Conference within thirty (30) days after the termination thereof.

(Sgd.) ACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, May 24, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff