TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (Office of the President of the Philippines)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1004

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE SIXTH ANNUAL SEMINAR-WORKSHOP OF THE LEAGUE OF PROVINCIAL AND CITY SECRETARIES OF THE PHILIPPINES

The League of Provincial and City Secretaries of the Philippines will hold its Sixth Annual Seminar-Workshop at Angeles City en October 16-22, 1977, on the theme: “Selfless Services of Secretaries to the New Society”.

The attendance of Secretaries to the City Mayors, Kalihim ng Sangguniang Panglalawigan in the said seminar-workshop who are registered members of the League is hereby authorized on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a registration fee of P200.00 per participant, chargeable against the appropriation of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements, as an exception to Memorandum Circular no. 593 of this Office dated August 8, 1972. If participant avails of the lunches served during the affair, a proportionate amount for one meal allowance will be deducted from the per diem. Participants residing or stationed within the site of the seminar-workshop shall be entitled to reasonable expenses for transportation and registration fees only.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the seminar-workshop as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977. Likewise, within the same period, the President of the League shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the seminar, furnishing a copy thereof to the           Commission. The report shall include a list of participants indicating their respective positions and offices, and a financial statement of income and expenses duly audited by a Certified Public Accountant not connected with the Association.

By authority of the President:

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, September 1, 1977

Source: Presidential Management Staff