TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1069

AUTHORIZING ATTENDANCE IN THE FIRST ASEAN CONFERENCE OF LOGISTICS AND SUPPLY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL.

The Government Supply Officers Association of the Philippines, Inc. will host the, First Asean Conference of Logistics and Supply Management Personnel at the Philippine International Convention Center on November 2030, 1978, which will be attended by participants from various Asian countries.

This conference will focus on the country as an Asean leader in logistics and supply management activities and pave the creation of an Asean Federation of Logistics and Supply Managers in the region.

Heads of departments, bureaus and offices, chartered cities and provinces, first-class municipalities within the Metro Manila Area and government owned or controlled corporations, are hereby authorized to attend one (1) participant each, preferably a member of the Association, who is actually performing the duties of supply officer, to the conference on official time with reasonable expenses for transportation, per diems and a conference fee of P600.00, chargeable against the appropriations of their respective offices, in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 344 dated November 26, 1973, as implemented by COA General Circular No. 127, series of 1973, subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing requirements as an exception to Memorandum Circular No. 593 of this Office dated August 8,1972. Participants residing or stationed within the Metro Manila Area shall be entitled to conference fees only. Meals covered by the conference fee shall be deducted from per diems.

The participants shall submit to their respective office heads a complete report on their attendance or participation in the conference as prescribed under Memorandum Circular No. 987 dated June 10, 1977 furnishing this Office a copy thereof. Likewise, the host organization shall submit to this Office a report and evaluation of the conference, copy furnished the Budget Commission, including a list of participants and observers indicating their respective offices.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, July 13, 1978

Source: Presidential Management Staff