TANGGAPAN NG PANGULO NG PILIPINAS (OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES)

MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1113

AUTHORIZING THE PARTICIPATION OF GOVERNMENT EXECUTIVES IN THE PHILIPPINE EXECUTIVE ACADEMY’S EXECUTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.

The Philippine Executive Academy of the University of the Philippines has been established with a view to implementing a national policy of improving the competence and performance of executives and administrators in the different ministries, bureaus and branches of the Philippine Government through its executive development program and other specialized courses that are geared toward accelerating the economic and social development of the country.

The Academy has formulated a residential senior executive development course that seeks to develop among executives from both the public and private sectors the attributes for managing development to the end that they would acquire the combined competencies of the leader, the entrepreneur and the achiever and that the Academy has scheduled this course twine a year.

All heads of ministries, bureaus and offices of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations are hereby enjoined and authorized to nominate a senior official to attend and participate in the sessions and other courses of the Academy at government expense and that the Academy is also hereby authorized to charge an amount sufficient to cover board, lodging and other expenses of the participant, such amount to be determined by the Academy from time to time, and to collect and disburse the same. This authority shall subsist for as long as the Academy conducts its activities in pursuance of these goals and objectives. The nominee will be screened by the Academy in accordance with its standards, rules and procedures. For this purpose, and in the absence of specific appropriations for executive training, the expenses of those admitted to the Academy are hereby authorized to be taken from the savings of the agencies concerned; provided, that they may provide in their respective budgets such amount as may be necessary to cover the agency’s continuing staff development program for future sessions and courses of the Academy. Furthermore, such ministries, bureaus, agencies and government-owned or controlled corporations are enjoined to grant a daily allowance during the session as authorized by General Circular No. 127 dated November 27, 1973, of the Commission on Audit.

(SGD.) JACOBO C. CLAVE Presidential Executive Assistant

Manila, January 24, 1979

Source: Presidential Management Staff